
                               1 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POLL FINDS AMERICANS DON'T KNOW U.S. POSITIONS ON CENTRAL AMERICA

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1120 words


Despite months of controversy over United States policies on Central America,
most of the American public does not know which side the Reagan Administration
supports in either El Salvador or Nicaragua, according to the latest New York
Times/CBS News Poll.

Only 25 percent of those surveyed knew that the Administration supports the
Government in El Salvador, only 13 percent knew that it sides with the
insurgents in Nicaragua and only 8 percent knew both alignments.

No current United States policy or anticipated proposal, from negotiations to
the sending of American troops, commanded majority support. When asked whether
they would support sending American combat forces if that was necessary to avert
a Communist takeover in El Salvador, 32 percent said they would and 57 percent
said they would not.

Generally, the 8 percent who knew both alignments of Administration policy were
more hostile to United States involvement than the rest of those surveyed. They
were also more supportive of negotiations in El Salvador, even if that could
bring Communists into the Government.

'Sort of a Vietnam Pall'

Commenting on the findings of the poll, taken June 20-26 among 1,365 voting-age
Americans, a Yale University expert in public opinion said they were in marked
contrast to the public's attitudes on foreign affairs before the Vietnam War.

In earlier days, Presidents usually could count on ''uninformed loyalty'' on
foreign affairs, said the expert, Edward R. Tufte, professor of political
science and statistics. But this poll, he said, showed ''uninformed skepticism
and informed hostility'' to the Administration's policies.

Prof. Philip E. Converse of the Center for Political Studies at the University
of Michigan agreed, saying there was ''sort of a Vietnam pall across these
numbers.''

''People have less of a support reflex than they would have, pre-Vietnam,'' he
said.  Mr. Converse, president-elect of the American Political Science
Association, said he thought that as more of the public became more informed,
views would shift toward the opinions expressed by the informed 8 percent.

The biggest difference the poll reflected between the informed group and the
other 92 percent came on this question: ''In order to end the fighting in El
Salvador, should the U.S.  Government arrange negotiations with the rebel
forces, even if that means Communists would get some power in the Government?''

In the informed group, 61 percent said yes, 28 percent said no and the rest had
no answer. Among the less informed group, 33 percent said yes, 43 percent said
no and 24 percent had no answer.

Of Mounting Concern

Even as the respondents as a whole showed little enthusiasm for possible
solutions, they said they regarded Central America as ''very important to the
defense interests of the United States.'' Sixtyeight percent of those surveyed
said it was, as against 61 percent in a poll conducted in April and 57 percent
in March 1982.

But while concern mounted, knowledge decreased.  To the question ''Which side
does the U.S. Government support in El Salvador - the current Government of El
Salvador, the people fighting against the Government, or haven't you been
following this closely enough to say?'' only 25 percent said it was the current
Government, as against 37 percent who chose that answer in March 1982.

For the first time, a similar question was asked about Nicaragua.  In response,
13 percent replied correctly that the United States backs the insurgents. Seven
percent said it backed the current Government and the rest either had no answer
or said it backed neither the rebels nor the Government.

Signs of Increased Polarization

In general, the informed group was surer of its opposition to greater
involvement. In addition, the more people knew, the more likely they were to
follow their ideological inclinations. People who called themselves liberals
were more likely to oppose United States involvement if they knew more about the
region; conservatives were more likely to support greater involvement if they
were informed.

Twenty-three percent said they supported efforts to overthrow the regime in
Nicaragua, but 53 percent said they did not, and 23 percent had no opinion. In
another diagreement with the Reagan Administration, 44 percent said they
believed that economic and social conditions were primarily responsible for
political unrest in Central America, while 29 percent put most of the blame on
the Soviet Union and Cuba. Others blamed both equally, or had no opinion.

Throughout the survey, women were less inclined than men to support
intervention. But they were also more likely to have no opinion, or to be
uninformed. For example, 15 percent of the women, as against 37 percent of the
men, knew that the United States supports the Government of El Salvador.

How Poll Was Conducted

The latest New York Times/ CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews
conducted June 20 through June 26 with 1,365 adults around the United States,
excluding Alaska and Hawaii.

The numbers called were selected by computer from a list of all telephone
exchanges in the country and were chosen to insure that each region of the
country was represented in proportion to its population. For each exchange, the
telephone numbers were formed by random digits, thus permitting access to both
listed and unlisted residential numbers.

The results have been weighted to take account of household size and to adjust
for variations in the sample relating to region, race, sex, age and education.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results based on the entire sample will
differ by no more than 3 percentage points in either direction from what would
have been obtained by interviewing all adult Americans. The error for smaller
subgroups is larger. For example, the margin of sampling error for those who
know that the United States supports the Government of El Salvador is plus or
minus 6 percentage points.

In addition, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of public
opinion may have resulted in other errors in the poll.  Helmut Norpoth,
associate professor of political science at the State University of New York at
Stony Brook, assisted The Times with this survey.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: graph showing results of poll

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Australian Visits Hanoi On the Cambodia Issue

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 119 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, June 30


Foreign Minister William Hayden of Australia met with Vietnam's Prime Minister,
Pham Van Dong, today for talks aimed at bringing peace to neighboring Cambodia.

Mr. Hayden, on a three-day visit, is expected to be an intermediary over the
issue of Cambodia, which Vietnamese forces still occupy after ousting the
Chinese-backed Pol Pot faction in 1978.

He told reporters the talks covered the Cambodian-Thai border issue, but he did
not rate his chances of an immediate peace breakthough very highly. ''We might
run into a brick wall,'' he said. ''To even be in Hanoi and accepted in this way
is quite an advance, but only a modest one.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

A.M.A. DISAVOWS JAB AT DIOXIN REPORTS

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 30


A representative of the American Medical Association said today that he
regretted ''imprudent'' language in a resolution the organization approved last
week condemning the press for conducting a ''witch hunt'' and engaging in
''hysterical malreporting'' on dioxin contamination.

That part of the resolution, he declared under insistent questioning before an
incredulous House subcommitee, did not represent the official policy of the
A.M.A. but only the personal views of the delegation from Missouri, which
introduced the resolution at the organization's annual House of Delegates
meeting in Chicago.

The association's resolution was widely interpreted, by President Reagan, among
others, as meaning that there was little cause for alarm because few human
consequences had yet been documented. The wording of some of the introductory
''whereas'' clauses was played down by the A.M.A. today as just oratory.

'Regret' Over Some Language

''We regret some of the imprudent language of some of our Missouri colleagues,''
said the representative, Dr. John R. Beljan, adding later, ''Let me put the
matter to rest: The A.M.A. does not pooh-pooh dioxin.''

Although apparently retreating on the resolution's language, the A.M.A. gave no
indication that it had changed its original position on dioxin, embodied in a
1981 report compiled by a technical panel headed by Dr. Beljan. That report said
that while dioxin ''may well be one of the most toxic substances known to man,''
there is ''still very little substantive evidence for many of the alleged
claims'' made against the compound. The new resolution called for an update of
the 1981 report, which Dr. Beljan said would begin in August.

Dr. Beljan's remarks were made at a hearing of the Subcommittee on Natural
Resources, Agricultural Research and Environment of the House Committee on
Science and Technology called to air recent suggestions that concern over the
human health hazards of dioxin have been exaggerated.

Health Officials Testify

The panel also heard from various Federal health officials, who disagreed on
detail but generally agreed that too little was yet known about the human
effects of dioxin, considered to be one of the most potent poisons known on the
basis of animal tests, to make definitive statements to help people living near
known dioxin sites in Missouri, New Jersey, Michigan and other states.

The two ''resolved'' clauses approved by the A.M.A. called for the updated
report and for the association to begin a campaign to get ''accurate
information'' on dioxin to the public ''to prevent irrational overreaction'' and
''dissemination of possible erroneous information.''

The subcommittee's chairman, Representative James H. Scheuer, an upstate New
York Democrat, expressed outrage over the wording. ''If one of my 14-year-old
kids wrote such an editorial in a high school newspaper, I would be embarrassed
by it and I would whack their fannies,'' he said.

Clauses Called 'Background'

Dr. Beljan, who is provost and senior vice president of Wright State University
in Dayton, Ohio, as well as a member of the Council on Scientific Affairs,
asserted that the ''whereas'' clauses, even though adopted by the delegates,
were ''not adopted by the house as policy.'' Rather, he said, they were just
''part of the background record,'' similar to a Congressman's comments on a bill
he is sponsoring. The only operative part of the resolution, he said, were the
two ''resolved'' clauses.

''You could qualify as a Philadelphia lawyer,'' Mr. Scheuer responded, adding
that he was astonished that such ''demagogic'' language could have passed
through the A.M.A.'s review process.

Dr. Beljan replied, ''Even Congress uses imprudent language.'' Dr. Vernon N.
Houk, director of the Center for Environmental Health at the Centers for Disease
Control, which is performing a variety of dioxin studies for the Veterans
Administration and the Environmental Protection Agency, also testified before
the subcommittee. In an interview later, he said he ''agreed completely'' with
the two ''resolved'' clauses but that he would not have used the language about
hysteria incorporated in the ''whereas'' clauses. He said he had closely
monitored both the Missouri and national newspaper reporting on the dioxin issue
and found very little of it hysterical, but felt that some of the television
reporting, given a lack of time, was not as good.

Small Amounts Harm Animals

Dioxin usually refers to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, or TCDD, the most
potent of a group of waste products of herbicide manufacturing and other
industrial processes. In animals it causes liver, kidney, nerve damage and death
from such small quantities that Federal and other health officials have
expressed acute concern.

Last February the Federal Government offered to buy all the homes and businesses
in Times Beach, Mo., one of the contaminated towns.  But lack of definitive
proof of long-term damage has stirred doubts among some experts about dioxin's
potency in humans and about whether contamination through the soil is much of a
threat. Dioxin was also a contaminant in Agent Orange, the defoliant used during
the Vietnam War, and many veterans have linked it to various maladies they
suffer, including soft-tissue sarcoma, a rare form of cancer.

Differences of Opinion Aired

Dr. Beljan and other A.M.A. representatives continued to assert there was still
not enough evidence to prove that dioxin has any long-term effects on humans
apart from chloracne, a severe skin rash similar to adolescent acne.

The Federal health officials who testified today differed over the dioxin
threat.  Dr. Alvin Young, a herbicide expert for the Veterans Administration,
reported that studies of human exposed to dioxin in an industrial accident in
Seveso, Italy, in 1976, had showed little permanent damage beyond chloracne.

Dr. Houk of the C.D.C. said the Italian experience was not very instructive
because the residents were all evacuated within two weeks of the accident and
therefore were not exposed chronically for a decade or more, the way people in
Times Beach and other towns were.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 2, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a House subcommittee
hearing on dioxin incorrectly described the Congressional district of
Representative James H. Scheuer, Democrat of New York. It includes parts of the
Bronx, Queens and Nassau County.

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV WEEKEND;
WIMBLEDON, HEROES AND IRELAND

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 903 words


THE official title of the event is the All-England Lawn Tennis Championships.
Just about everybody, though, knows it as Wimbledon.  The 106th playing of the
matches reaches the final rounds this weekend and will be broadcast on Channel 4
by NBC Sports live from London tomorrow and Sunday, beginning at 9 A.M.

Tomorrow will feature the final of the women's singles, from which Chris Evert
Lloyd was eliminated in one of the more prominent upsets. The men's finals are
scheduled for Sunday, without the top-seeded Jimmy Connors, who was also upset
earlier this week.
The 'Heroes' Who Win

The Medal of Honor

At 1 P.M. on Sunday, the day before Independence Day, Channel 11 is offering a
half-hour program titled ''Heroes.'' The subtitle is ''The Official Story of the
Congressional Medal of Honor.'' This essay was produced by A.B. Productions and
is being distributed by 20th Century-Fox Television in cooperation with the
Congressional Medal of Honor Society. Presumably, that's where the ''official''
designation comes in.

With Orson Welles his usual bombastic self as the narrator, the film begins with
a ringing tribute to those war heroes ''whose ultimate sacrifice made it
possible for our nation to remain free.'' They were men ''capable of
extraordinary courage in defense of our freedom.'' What follows is,
unfortunately, an odd collection of interviews and film clips.

While Mr. Welles wends his way sonorously through Rick Sublett's cliched script
(''America shall remain the land of the free only so long as we remain tha home
of the brave''), several winners of the Medal of Honor around the country are
interviewed. The first and oldest is Dr. Harold Furlong, a World War I Army
lieutenant who destroyed a line of German machine guns. The film then proceeds
chronologically through World War II, Korea and Vietnam. There are about 235
living recipients of the distinguished medal.

The problem with the production is its eagerness to find suitable ''visuals'' to
accompany the interviews. When Dr. Furlong, for instance, recalls being
decorated by Gen. John J. Pershing, we are shown archival footage of the General
of the Armies pinning medals on some soldiers. It is not clear if these are
Medals of Honor, and it certainly is not clear if Dr. Furlong is in the group.
If somebody talks about taking over the controls of a damaged B-17, we are given
a shot of a plane that seems to be in trouble, but it is probably not the plane
being discussed. At one point, in referring to the Civil War, there is what
looks like a clip from the film version of ''The Red Badge of Courage,'' which
just happens to be an antiwar classic.

If the production gimmicks are questionable, the intentions are good, and the
recipients of the medal are an attractively modest group of heroes. It is
pointed out that ''not one claims to have any special monopoly on courage.''
They talk quietly of their heroism being only ''a matter of survival'' and how
there are so many others deserving of equal recognition for heroic expoits that
went unnoticed. A film clip has President Reagan quoting a question of
admiration from a James Michener novel: ''Where did we get such men?''
Return of 'Ireland'

With an Epilogue

On the rerun circuit, an exceptional series is returning to Channel 13, starting
Sunday at 6:30 P.M. in the form of ''Ireland.'' This 13-part history of the
long-troubled island was written and narrated for the BBC by Robert Kee, a
British television newsman with a longtime interest in the Irish. Mr. Kee has
tried to provide a balanced picture and has succeeded, for the most part, where
so many others have failed.

Nevertheless, there have been criticisms from both sides. Some Britons found the
history too sympathetic to the Irish. Some of the Irish have charged Mr. Kee
with distorting certain events and developments with a decidedly British bias.
This rerun takes on additional significance because there now exists what is
being called a ''14th chapter'' in the series. James Gaffney, one of the
producers, explains that ''The Last Hunger Strike, 1981?'' was first proposed to
PBS as an update and ''something of a rebuttal'' to the Kee series. It has
already been shown on more than 30 publictelevision stations, but not on Channel
13.

The epilogue is not geared to please the British. It is openly partisan,
supporting the cause of Roman Catholic nationalists in their opposition to
Protestant loyalists in Northern Ireland. The heroes are people like Bernadette
Devlin McAliskey, the former Member of Parliament, and the hunger strikers at
Long Kesh prison, one of whom, Michael James Devine, who died in prison, serves
as the political and emotional focus for much of the film. Covering the period
from 1968, when a fledgling civil-rights movement enlisted both the Catholic and
Protestant poor, until 1981, when Northern Ireland had moved to an embittered
polarization, the film clearly outlines what happened in each depressing step
along the way. Running with or alongside Mr. Kee's series, it adds an extra
dimension to the return of ''Ireland.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Robert Kee

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DECADE OF UNCERTAINTY ENDS IN 'FINALITY' FOR 2 VIETNAM WIDOWS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM G. BLAIR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 876 words


Beside each of the 57,939 names of the American dead and missing inscribed on
the gleaming black granite walls of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington
there is a symbol: a diamond for the confirmed dead and an asterisk for the
missing in action.

Soon a diamond will be superimposed over the asterisk next to the names of James
T. Ruffin and Donald F. Lindland. But the asterisks will not be totally
obliterated. This will serve as a reminder that the two men were once among the
most painful of the protracted legacies of America's longest war: the missing in
action. Such a reminder is not likely ever to be needed by Wanda Ruffin and
Barbara Lindland.

When they learned from the Pentagon a few days ago that their husbands, both
Navy pilots missing in action for more than a decade, had been formally
identified as among the American dead of the Vietnam War, one widow used the
word ''finality'' and the other ''closure'' to describe her feelings.

Long Ordeals End

If the words were different their meaning was the same: a long ordeal had ended
for both Mrs. Ruffin, a counselor to the bereaved in Montgomery, Ala., and Mrs.
Lindland, a freelance photojournalist in Virginia Beach, Va.

Lieutenant Commander Ruffin's F-4 fighter bomber was shot down over North
Vietnam on Feb. 18, 1966, and Commander Lindland's A-6 attack bomber was brought
down Sept. 9, 1972.

They were among five Air Force and three Navy casualties whose remains were
officially identified after being turned over to an American delegation to Hanoi
early in June. The Pentagon announced their identities Tuesday.

As Mrs. Lindland and Mrs. Ruffin talked the other day with a telephone caller
about the confirmation of the deaths of their husbands, they did so in the level
quiet voices of those who have learned to cope with grief without ever entirely
escaping its pain.

Years of Uncertainty

''It is a finality because I have my remains now,'' said Mrs.  Lindland, a
45-year-old native Californian who grew up in a Navy family. She was 34 when her
husband was shot down at the age of 36.  ''Now, at least I know for certain that
I am a widow,'' she said.

''I lived with that man for 11 years and I have lived without him for 11
years,'' she said.  ''So you don't fall apart,'' she said of the long-expected
confirmation of her widowhood. ''You just pass into another phase of grief.''

Some questions about how her husband died remain unanswered for Mrs. Lindland.
He was last seen by fellow pilots moving through a rice paddy after he
parachuted from his plane. ''I thought the questions would be answered,'' Mrs.
Lindland said, ''but the questions remain because the Vietnamese will not tell
us what happened.''

Now 'Concrete Evidence'

For Mrs. Ruffin, who recently turned 40, the news from Washington ''brings about
closure because now we have the concrete evidence.'' The ''we'' included her
17-year-old daughter, Gwendelyn Hope, who was born three months after her father
was shot down at the age of 25.  The Ruffins had been married 18 months.

''Even though we had reconciled ourselves to his being gone long ago,'' Mrs.
Ruffin said, ''when someone would say 'you really don't know,' we would still
feel a twinge of hope that he might somehow still be alive.''

It was in the course of her graduate studies as an educational specialist in the
late 1970's at the Troy State University System in Alabama that Mrs. Ruffin
became involved in bereavement counseling.  After graduation she was a founder
of the Montgomery chapter of the Hospice movement, a national organization that
works with the families of people who are terminally ill.

Recalling how difficult it had been for her to deal with grief at the time of
her husband's disappearance, when she was in her early 20's, Mrs. Ruffin said
her later immersion in bereavement counseling ''helped me as much as I hope it
is helping others.''

''It feels funny that it's all being brought back now,'' Gwendelyn said. ''When
you live all your life without a father, it is a big deal, and I never had a
father.''

The high school senior's middle name of Hope was given to her ''specifically
after the hope that my father would come home,'' Gwendelyn said. Now, with the
confirmation of his death, ''I'll never ever see him,'' she said. ''It doesn't
seem fair because everybody told me he was such a good man.''

Others Are Identified

The six other officers whose identifications were announced by the Pentagon
earlier this week were Col. Larry W. Biediger of La Coste, Tex; Col. John F.
Dudash of Manville, N.J.; Col. Farrell Sullivan Jr. of Caddo Mills, Tex.; Lieut.
Col. Merwin L. Morrill of San Carlos, Calif.; Capt. Lynn K. Powell of Provo,
Utah, and Lieut. Comdr.  Charles R. Lee of Costa Mesa, Calif.

The families of a number of them had dispersed around the country and could not
be reached. In some cases the immediate survivors declined to be interviewed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of coffin carrying body of an American pilot

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE JULIUS J. HOFFMAN, 87, DIES; PRESIDENT AT TRIAL OF THE CHICAGO 7

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1042 words


Federal District Judge Julius J. Hoffman, who presided over the tumultuous
Chicago Seven conspiracy trial that became a symbol of domestic turmoil in the
Vietnam War, died yesterday at his home in Chicago. He was 87 years old.

Judge Hoffman, a small but combative man, repeatedly tangled with defense
lawyers and defendants in late 1969 and early 1970 in the trial of the Chicago
Seven, who were charged with conspiring to cross state lines to incite riots at
the 1968 Democratic Convention.

Five of the defendants were found guilty at the trial, but none ever went to
jail. A Federal appeals court overturned the convictions, in part because of
what it called the Judge Hoffman's ''deprecatory and often antagonistic attitude
toward the defense.''

The case produced one of the more celebrated trials of the era and some of the
more bizarre American courtroom scenes ever. At various points the defendants
munched jellybeans, wore judicial robes and attempted to hold a birthday party
in court. After Bobby G. Seale, the Black Panther leader, referred to Judge
Hoffman as a ''pig'' and a ''fascist,'' the judge ordered him bound and gagged
in the courtroom.

Seale's Case Separated

Mr. Seale was one of the original eight defendants in the trial, but after that
incident his case was separated from that of the other seven, and he was never
tried.

To the end, Judge Hoffman remained unapologetic for his conduct in the case and
maintained that its overall impact on the legal system was positive.

''I did nothing in the trial that I'm not proud of,'' he declared in an
interview last year. ''I presided with dignity. When I felt I had to be firm, I
was firm.''

''The case was important,'' he said, ''because we let certain kinds of lawyers
know there are certain kinds of things you don't do when you're trying a lawsuit
in the highest trial court in the land.''

Judge Hoffman became a senior judge in 1972, restricting himself to less
complicated civil cases. But in recent years Chicago lawyers charged that he was
erratic, abusive and drowsy on the bench, and he came under pressure to retire.
This he refused to do, though he had been assigned no new cases since last July.


Worked Through Thursday

In the meantime, he continued to work daily in his chambers a few floors below
the Federal Building courtroom where the Chicago Seven trial was held. On
Thursday he presided over naturalization ceremonies for 150 new citizens, and he
was apparently stricken as he prepared to go to work yesterday.

Ralph J. McGarr, Chief Judge of the Federal District Court for the Northern
District of Illinois, praised Judge Hoffman yesterday for his diligence and
industry, calling him ''one of the most distinguished members of our our
court.''

William M. Kunstler, the defense lawyer whom Judge Hoffman cited for contempt
for his conduct, called him ''a sad figure'' who had been ill-used by the
Federal law-enforcement officials intent upon convictions.

Target of Defendants

Judge Hoffman was fond of telling his friends he was ''always equal to any
emergency.'' But from Sept. 24, 1969, when the the Chicago Seven trial began,
the judge, impeccably groomed and precise, became a target for the defendants.
Abbie Hoffman once derided him in Yiddish as ''a front man for the WASP elite,''
and together, the defendants referred to him as ''Mr. Magoo.''

After four days of deliberations, a jury in February 1970 found five of the
seven defendants - Rennie Davis, David Dellinger, Tom Hayden, Jerry Rubin and
Mr. Hoffman - guilty of crossing state lines with intent of inciting a riot. Two
others, John Froines and Lee Weiner, were acquitted.

At the same time, Judge Hoffman cited each of the defendants, along with Mr.
Kunstler and his co-counsel, Leonard I. Weinglass, for contempt of court for
their conduct at the trial. Mr. Kunstler was sentenced to four years in jail,
Mr. Weinglass to 20 months. Only 13 of the original 181 contempt citations were
upheld on appeal, and none of the defendants or their lawyers served any time.

Nine months later the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
overturned the convictions. Judge Hoffman, it ruled, had committed numerous
procedural errors at the trial: by failing to question potential jurors
adequately about their prejudices; by refusing to permit key defense witnesses,
including former Attorney General Ramsey Clark, to testify; by sending notes to
the jury during its deliberations without informing the defense.

Judge's Attitude Rebuked

Overarching these errors, the court said, was the judge's evident antipathy
toward the defense. Repeatedly, the court ruled, Judge Hoffman uttered sarcastic
comments that implied ''the defense counsel was inept, bumptious or
untrustworthy, or that his case lacked merit.''

''The demeanor of the judge,'' the court ruled, ''would require reversal even if
errors did not.'' Julius Jennings Hoffman was born in Chicago on July 7, 1895.
He attended Lewis Institute and Northwestern University Law School, and was
admitted to the Illinois Bar in 1915. He practiced general law until 1936, when
he became vice president and general counsel for the Brunswick-Balke-Collender
Company, which became the Brunswick Corporation. He later returned to his law
firm, where he remained until he was elected to the Cook County Superior Court
in 1947.

Six years later President Eisenhower named him to the Federal District Court.
One of his cases, involving the purported cancer cure Krebiozen, was at the time
the longest-running trial ever held in a Federal District Court. In another, he
became the first Northern Federal judge to hand down a school desegregation
order.

Judge Hoffman was a past president of Northwestern University Alumni Association
and taught at its law school. His wife, Eleanor, whom he married in 1928, died
three years ago. He is survived by a stepson, William E. Gardner of Chicago, and
two step-grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Julius Hoffman

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AIR FORCE REPORTS NO HIGH DEATH RATES AMONG DEFOLIANT SPRAYERS

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 748 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 1


The men who flew the planes that sprayed the defoliant Agent Orange on the
jungles of Vietnam are not dying in unusual numbers or from unusual causes, the
Air Force said today after surveying more than 1,200 pilots and crew members who
had been exposed to the herbicide.

Many medical authorities, veterans' groups and members of Congress have
expressed concern about possible adverse effects from exposure to Agent Orange,
which contains highly toxic dioxin.

But Air Force officials said those who spent up to 72 hours a week defoliating
Vietnamese jungle hideouts had the same death rate and died from causes no
different from those of men who served elsewhere in Vietnam and were not
involved in defoliation.

The report drew sharp criticism from the National Veterans Law Center, a
Washington group that has been in the forefront of efforts to gain help for
servicemen exposed to Agent Orange.

''You can't draw any meaningful conclusions from a study of only 1,200 men,''
Lewis Milford, a center officials, asserted. ''There are a lot of studies under
way on Agent Orange and the definitive one has not yet come in.''

Lack of Latent Effects Seen

Mr. Milford also said the study had not addressed whether Agent Orange might
cause nonfatal skin diseases and internal ailments, as many veterans have said
it has, or whether it might cause fatal or nonfatal ailments that do not
manifest themselves until two decades or more after exposure.

''The fact that adverse effects have not yet been detected does not imply that
an effect may not become manifest in the future,'' the Air Force's summary
statement explained. ''For this reason, further analyses are intended and
mortality in the study population will be ascertained annually up to the next 20
years.''

The officials said the pilots and crew members of Operation Ranch Hand, the code
name of the defoliation effort, have a lower death rate than other men their age
in the general United States population. The Air Force said this was because men
inducted into the armed services tend to be in better health than men in the
general population.

'Not Dying in Increased Numbers'

''At this time,'' according to an official summary of the Ranch Hand survey,
''there is no indication that Operation Ranch hand personnel have experienced
any increased mortality or any unusual patterns of death in time or by cause.
They are not dying in increased numbers, at earlier ages or by unexpected
causes.''

Some medical authorities say exposure to Agent Orange may cause cancer, skin
disease, nerve impairment and damage to internal organs. Many Vietnam veterans
who have had such ailments have demanded compensation from the Federal
Government. Thus far, the Government has resisted paying, arguing that there is
no proof.

From 1962 to 1971, more than 12 million gallons of Agent Orange were sprayed on
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos. The spraying was often repeated. Sometimes the spray
hit American troops. The dioxin in Agent Orange is an impurity, not a component
of the defoliant; it is a by-product of the manufacturing process.

Backed by Head Doctor

In releasing the report, the Air Force said it regarded the Ranch Hand crews as
''the most heavily herbicide-exposed group'' of those who served in Southeast
Asia. Maj. Gen. Murphy A. Chesney, the service's deputy surgeon general, said
the crews ''lived in it and came home wet from the missions.''

''Do I worry as a physician because we use it?'' he said. ''The answer is, 'No.'
I say war is hell. You've got to win it.'' General Chesney said the Agent Orange
survey had found a decrease in cancer deaths but an increase in deaths from
liver disorders among Ranch Hand crews. The former finding deaths would seem to
contradict the asserttions of those who say Agent Orange can cause malignancies
but confirm assertions that it also damages internal organs. The general added,
however, that the numbers involved were so small that they were ''statistically
nonsignificant.''

He also said the study indicated that Ranch Hand officers lived longer than
enlisted men, who had the most contact with the herbicide. He said that was of
''mild concern'' and would be studied further, even though Ranch Hand officers
and enlisted men, overall, were experiencing ''favorable mortality'' rates.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 509 words


On the Honduran coast, a world apart 2
Reagan considering panel to seek a consensus on Latin policy 2
Bombings in Corsica blamed on separatists 3
Around the World 4
The P.L.O. leadership calls for a cease-fire in Lebanon 4

Washington Talk
Potent bloc from Rockies in Sen- ate 7
Briefing 7

Government/Politics
Air Force finds no high death rate among defoliant sprayers 9
Ex-prosecutor wins libel award against Philadelphia Inquirer 9
Investigation of Schumer by Miss Holtzman is permitted by court 25
Insurgent candidate and city Democratic leaders settle suit 40

Obituaries
Mary Livingstone, radio actress 8
Len B. Jordan, ex-Governor and U.S. Senator from Idaho 8

HOLIDAY WEEKEND
Monday is Independence Day.Fol- lowing are holiday schedules: Parking - Sunday
rules in effect.  Sanitation - No collections; no street cleaning.  Federal,
state and municipal offices - Closed.  Post offices - Closed; special delivery
and express-mail delivery only.  Banks - Closed.  Stock and commodity markets
-Closed.  Transportation - Subways and buses on Sunday schedules; Long Island
Rail Road and Metro-North on holiday schedules.  Libraries - Closed.

Arts/Entertainment
New York City Opera orchestra would strike opening night 10
Modern Jazz Quartet at Carnegie Hall 10
A Getz-Brubeck-Mulligan night at jazz festival 10
Andrew Cyrille quartet at Sound- scape is reviewed 10
Makato Ozone, a young pianist, at Carnegie Recital Hall 10
The American Ballet Theater's 'Giselle' is reviewed 12
''The Fashion System'' by Ro- land Barthes reviewed 13
'Made in Cuba,' a television docu- mentary about Cuban emigres 41

General
Around the Nation 5
Issue of merit pay troubles some teachers and elates others 5
Ordeal ends for widows of two pilots missing in Vietnam 5
Connecticut bridge inspectors talk about their jobs 25
Greenwich bridge collapse dis- rupting Port Chester 25
Training nearly done for police dogs intended for Central Park 25
Detective shot and gunman slain in midtown holdup 40

Style
Consumer Saturday 22
De Gustibus 22
A summer guide to adventure on water, land and in the air 22

Sports Pages
Yankees squander 7-0 lead but beat Red Sox, 12-8 27
Guidry to skip All-Star Game 27
Phils down Mets and Seaver, 5-1 27
Tampered-gloves incident brings revocation of Lewis's licenses 27
Players: A pitcher remakes him- self 28
Cruz drives in 6 in Baltimore debut as Orioles win, 9-5 28
Scouting: Gaylord Perry has no regrets 28
George Vecsey on Round 12 to McEnroe 29

Features/Notes
Saturday News Quiz 13
Going Out Guide 13
New York Day by Day 25

News Analysis
Thomas L. Friedman on the rift between Arafat and Assad 4

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials 20

Cattle car justice Italy reshuffles an old deck Karl E. Meyer: Sandinismo
Letters 20
Sydney H. Schanberg: A wonder- ful pretend 21
Russell Baker: Unhand that set!  21
Lloyd J. Dumas: Real nuclear war for less than $1 21
Eugene Stein: T.E.A.'s need T.L.C.  21
Lucy Komisar: U.S. duty to Uru- guay 21

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: contents

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Punishes 13 After Subversion Trial

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 125 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 2


Thirteen people accused of plotting to overthrow the Vietnamese Government have
been punished by the People's Court in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, the
Vietnamese press agency reported today.

The agency, monitored here, said Nguyen Van Hien was the leader of the group and
was an agent of the Central Intelligence Agency. He was sentenced to life in
prison.

His accomplices received sentences ranging from warnings to 15 years in prison
for ''a dangerous organized action of subversion,'' the agency said.

It said the 13 defendants, who were tried in public, had misused religion for
their activities by meeting in the Dac Lo Monastery in Ho Chi Minh City to carry
out counterrevolutionary programs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 65 words


The New York Times/Paul Hosefros RALLY OPPOSES U.S. ROLE IN CARIBBEAN:
Demonstrators gathering in Washington to express opposition to the
Administration's policies in Central America. They met near the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial, prompting criticism from Government supporters, who held a rally
nearby. No violence was reported.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of demonstrators

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Miss Powel Plans October Wedding

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 33, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 285 words


Mr. and Mrs. Thomas I. H. Powel of Southport, Conn., and Naples, Fla., have
announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Hyde Powel, to Justin David
Parks, son of Mr& and Mrs. Charles H. Parks of Southport and Woodstock, Vt.

The wedding is planned for O 7/8t. 1. The future bride is a travel consutlant
with Pequot Travel in Southport. She graduated from the Greens Farms (Conn.)
Academy and attended Denison University and the Chinese University o? Hong Kong
and is an alumna of George Washington University. Her father is president of
Product Planning Techniques, an engineering design company in Southport.

Mr. Parks, an associate product manager with the Heublein Corporation in
Farmington, Conn., graduated from the Fairfield (Conn.) Country Day School, the
Sterling School in Craftsbury Common, Vt., and Hampshire College in Amherst,
Mass., and received a master's degree in business administration from Columbia
University. He served as a lieutenant with the Army Medical Service Corps in
Vietnam and was awarded a Bronze Star for meritorious service and the Purple
Heart. His previous marriage ended in divorce.

His father, who is retired, was manager of industrial engineering with the
Bullard Company in Bridgeport, Conn., and past chairman of the Greater
Bridgeport Regional Plan- ning Agency. His mother, Lucia Parks, is former
president of the Planned Parenthood League of Connecticut in New Haven and a
former member of the national board of Planned Parenthood World Population in
New York.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLIC TV-STILL POOR BUT NEWLY HOPEFUL

BYLINE: By SALLY BEDELL SMITH

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2332 words


Late last month, more than 800 representatives from public television's
hierarchy gathered in a hotel ballroom outside Washington, D.C., to thank the
U.S. Congress for its financial support. The occasion was a festive one attended
by nearly 100 Congressmen who heard testimonials to the virtues of public
television's programs from an eclectic group including LeVar Burton, star of
''Roots,'' Roone Arledge, president of ABC News and Sports, and Roberta Peters
of the Metropolitan Opera.

Only a year ago, the toast of the town was facing impoverishment and
obsolescence. Public television suffered financial cutbacks from Federal and
state governments, corporations and foundations. Even worse, fancy new cultural
cable services threatened to supplant public stations entirely by offering
high-toned programming to paying customers. ''We were fighting not only the
funding cuts but the perception that we were on our way out,'' says Lawrence K.
Grossman, president of the Public Broadcasting Service.

Today, the mood within public television is decidedly more upbeat; its position
as a significant force in American life seems more secure. In addition to
general belt-tightening, member stations have realized they need to be even more
ingenious in finding new sources of revenue. Several developments contributed to
this shift in attitude: retrenchment within the cable industry, a new advocacy
in Congress for increased Federal funds, mounting interest from the corporate
sector in terms both of underwriting and on-air advertising, plus healthy
support from viewers. ''Last year we were poor and scared. Now we are poor and
optimistic,'' says Frederick Breitenfeld Jr., executive director of the Maryland
Center for Public Broadcasting.

Indeed, the past year had been rough. Among the system's nearly 300 stations,
almost 30 had been considered close to ceasing operations.  (As it developed,
only one, WCAE-TV in St. John, Ind., went under.) Two-thirds of those stations
recently surveyed by the National Association of Public Television Stations
reported either hiring freezes or staff reductions. Sixty percent had cut local
programming. At two of the system's major production centers, KCET-TV in Los
Angeles and WNET-TV in New York City, much of the past year has been spent
coping with paralyzing deficits caused by lavish spending on not only programs
but such ill-calculated ventures as The Dial magazine. Both stations have been
scaled down in size and have instituted new procedures to control financial
excesses.

The most dramatic turnabout during the past year, however, was the failure of
two seemingly formidable competitors: CBS Cable, the cultural channel conceived
by CBS founder William S. Paley, and The Entertainment Channel, the cable
service backed by RCA and Rockefeller money. As a result, policy-makers have
concluded that public television may be the most logical outlet for quality
entertainment and educational fare. Indeed, public-television officials maintain
that this fall's program schedule - ranging from the first hour-long nightly
network newscast, to be anchored by Robert MacNeil and Jim Lehrer, and a major
series on the Vietnam war to works by Sam Shepard, Philip Roth, Eugene O'Neill
and Mark Twain - is stronger than ever.

Nevertheless, station managers are beginning to feel the long-term effects of
living in straitened circumstances. This year's financial crisis brought basic
changes in the way stations such as WNET develop programs. In the past, funds
would be sought in stages, using bank loans to tide over projects until the
hoped-for underwriting materialized. But at both WNET and KCET, these calculated
risks backfired. KCET ran up huge deficits from its ''Cosmos'' series, and at
WNET, ''The Brain,'' a science series, and ''Heritage: Civilization and the
Jews,'' a historical series, were temporarily sidetracked when funding ran short
amid the past year's financial squeeze.

Now the approach at both stations is to hold up projects until funding is
secure. ''We don't have a choice. That is the way economic realities force us to
operate,'' says Willam H. Kobin, president of KCET.

But some programmers worry that development of programs could be curtailed as a
result. ''It is harder to piece ideas together and test them,'' says William
Lamb, senior vice president of national program development at WNET. ''It does
bring into question whether our 1985 and '86 series will be planned and budgeted
with the quality everyone expects.''

Some relief may come from PBS itself, which during the past year has begun
operating a $2 million program-development fund. Using this money, contributed
by member stations, Suzanne Weil, senior vice president of programming for PBS,
has supplied ''seed money'' to develop a variety of new programs, including
''The Africans,'' a nine-part historical series to be produced with the BBC, a
five-part series on architecture, and a half-dozen ''hip pocket'' musicals to be
written by a young Hollywood writer, David Misch.

Longer term, the most persistent question is how to obtain enough money - at
least $1 billion a year by the end of the decade - to ensure not only that
high-caliber programs are produced but that aging facilities and equipment are
modernized.

Federal funds for public television are the equivalent of 64 cents a person
compared to $11.29 in Britain and $18.94 in Canada. Prompted by the Reagan
Administration's effort to reduce Federal budget deficits, the allocation for
public broadcasting dropped from $172 million two years ago to $130 million for
the fiscal year beginning on Oct. 1. Public-television officials see some
potential for increased funds from Congress, but there is widespread skepticism
that the increases will be enough. Last April, Representative Timothy Wirth,
Democrat of Colorado, introduced new legislation increasing funding for public
broadcasting to $145 million next year, $153 million the following year, and
$162 million in 1986. The measure, which has received bipartisan support, is
considered likely to pass.

Yet, to some station managers such efforts fall short of their needs. ''We are
grateful,'' says KCET's Mr. Kobin, ''but the system needs $300 million to $400
million a year from the Federal government.'' Public-television lobbyists plan
to request amounts of that magnitude next year, as well as increases in money
for new facilities from $12 million to $100 million a year.

''The problem,'' says William J. McCarter, president of WTTW-TV in Chicago, ''is
that Congress says, 'We want public television. We need it. But how do we solve
it when we have such huge national deficits?' Congress isn't going to build a
BBC. So, we are dependent to a fault on the private sector.'' Indeed, many
station managers believe that in fairness Congress and the Federal
Communications Commission should allow them to develop new sources of income.

Some additional revenue for public television is already being generated by
various commercial ventures, such as leasing idle studio space to program
producers and teleconferencing - linking business conferences by satellite. So
far, reports Bruce L.  Christensen, president of the National Association of
Public TV Stations, ''entrepreneurial activity is less than 1 percent of the
total revenue for public television.'' Many of these enterprises, says Mr.
Christensen, ''are holding actions to keep facilities open and cover part of the
costs of the station's overhead.''

Yet, members stations are exploring other money-making avenues that could prove
more lucrative. By transmitting courses for college credit to nearly 75,000
students, PBS will earn $1.5 million this year through its Aduilt Learning
Service. Mr. Grossman hopes to build on that service and generate additional
income from a National Narrowcast Service that would employ unused broadcast
frequencies to send professional, educational and vocational training courses to
specially equipped television sets. Several stations, including the South
Carolina Educational Network, are attempting similar projects on their own.

PBS is also conducting an experiment to distribute financial information on its
satellite to various offices of Merrill Lynch & Co. Farther down the line is a
proposal to launch a subscription television service. Mr. Grossman sees such a
service as a logical extension of PBS that could bring in fresh revenue to
finance programming. ''The satellite system for nation-wide delivery is in
place. We have 3.25 million families who support public television and would
most likely subscribe to such a service. And we have access to 300 stations,''
he points out.

The greatest potential for new revenue, however, may lie in the sponsorship from
the business community, which accounts for 11.6 percent of public television's
income. Over the past year, corporations cut back on underwriting programs amid
the recession.  But some recent commitments - $10 million from American
Telephone and Telegraph for ''The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour'' and $1 million from
the Kellogg Company for a children's summer series, ''Reading Rainbow'' - have
encouraged public television's management to think that other companies may
follow.

The clearest sign of business interest came late last month, when
representatives of 50 major corporations came to Washington for an all-day
seminar about the benefits of backing public-television programs. The seminar
was organized by a new group of 14 major underwriters called Corporations in
Support of Public Television.

Underlying this heightened interest is the prospect of running full-fledged
commercials on public television. According to one study conducted two years ago
by the Denver consulting firm of Browne, Bortz & Coddington, as much as $164
million a year could be generated by such advertising.

For the past 18 months, an experiment authorized by Congress has tested
advertisements on nine public-television stations. They have ranged from
conventional product pitches on such stations as WTTW in Chicago to ''enhanced
underwriting'' - soft-sell image ads displaying Gucci storefronts or carrying
warnings against drunken driving from Volvo dealers -on WNET/Channel 13. These
messages have appeared in clusters lasting no longer than 2 minutes and they
have not been permitted to interrupt programs.

More than $3 million was raised by the participating stations - about 10 to 15
percent of their gross revenue. WNET in New York made a profit of $480,000. WTTW
had net advertsiing income of $1.5 million from 2,500 ads. ''The best
reaction,'' says WTTW's Mr. McCarter, ''came from Swift and Company. They said,
'We have been waiting 30 years to identify our company next to programming like
yours.' ''

The experiment ended on June 30 and in the fall a report on its results will be
submitted to Congress, which may then introduce legislation opening public
television to commercial pitches permanently. Some public-television officials
have already termed the experiment a success, although they view commercials as
a way to augment rather than supplant Federal funds. ''The experiment proved
advertising could raise money,'' says Mr. Christensen of the National
Association of Public TV Stations. ''There was no outcry from the public, it
didn't affect other sources of income, and it didn't seem to have any impact on
programming.'' Adds Mr. Grossman: ''It will never make big money, but obviously
for some stations it can be helpful.''

Nevertheless, considerable obstacles to all-out advertising remain within and
outside public broadcasting. Edward J. Pfister and Sharon Percy Rockefeller, the
president and the chairman of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, which
disburses Federal funds to the system, have publicly criticized the experiment.
Their underlying fear is that full-scale advertising would drive the level of
programming into the lowest common denominator syndrome of the commercial
networks.

Of course, the audience for public television seeks something considerably
different. And in increasingly greater numbers.  Publictelevision viewership in
prime time is up 5 percent over last year. In an average week, 53 percent of the
total television audience of 83.7 million homes watches some public-television
programming. And while some competing cable services have flopped, cable
technology has bolstered public stations. Viewing of public television in homes
with cable is 18 percent higher than in those without. One reason is that
two-thirds of public stations are on the UHF band, which is often difficult to
tune in. In homes wired by cable, the public channels come in clearly.

In addition, viewers have responded to public television in the past year with
their pocketbooks, giving 3 percent more money than in the previous year.
Subscriber revenues now account for 17.4 percent of public television's total
budget of $676 million -compared to 22.3 percent from the Federal government. In
New York City, a special plea for additional membership support yielded $2.75
million for the financially beleaguered WNET - more than double the amount
anticipated. ''We rediscovered that the people who watch us care about us,
believe in us and find us a precious resource,'' says John Jay Iselin, president
of WNET.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of John Jay Iselin, Lawrence K. Grossman

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION;
'Imprudent' Words on Dioxin

BYLINE: By Michael Wright, Carlyle C. Douglas and Caroline Rand Herron

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 328 words


The American Medical Association tried a little fast footwork before Congress
last week, but still seemed a bit out of step on the issue of dioxin
contamination. ''We regret some of the imprudent language of our Missouri
colleagues,'' an A.M.A. representative told a House subcommittee, referring to a
recent resolution that accused the news outlets of ''hysterical malreporting''
and conducting a ''witch hunt'' on dioxin.

''If one of my 14-year-old kids wrote such an intemperate, irresponsible and
demagogic editorial in a high school newspaper, I would whack their fannies,''
said Representative James H. Scheuer, a New York Democrat. Dr. John R. Beljan
said that the offending parts of the resolution, interpreted by President Reagan
and many others as minimizing concern over dioxin, did not represent official
A.M.A.  policy. Even though adopted by the association's 351-member House of
Delegates after being proposed by the Missouri delegation, they were merely
''part of the background record,'' he said.

Beyond the Capitol Hill arena, several Government groups issued their own views
on dioxin-related subjects. The Environmental Protection Agency drafted a plan
suggesting the agency devote more money and personnel to finding contaminated
sites and health effects in a ''high-profile'' approach. A group of scientists
meeting at the Centers for Disease Control concurred with the C.D.C.'s
assessment that dioxin concentrations above one part per billion in soil were
unsafe, though this threshold was still uncertain. And the Air Force announced
that its first study of pilots and crews exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam
showed no abnormal death rates. But the report said this was inconclusive
because the ''small, young and relatively healthy cohort may not have yet
reached the latency period wherein attributable fatal disease might be
expected.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LEGISLATIVE VETO CASE LEAVES MUCH UNSETTLED

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1296 words


The framers of the Constitution not only expected but desired conflict among the
branches of the government they created in 1787.  ''Ambition must be made to
counter ambition,'' James Madison wrote in The Federalist. That way the people
would be protected from power concentrated in one place, from autocracy.

What Madison and the others did not foresee was the extent to which the Supreme
Court would referee conflicts between Congress and the executive. The Court has
acted again and again to restrain one or the other's exercise of claimed power.
Inevitably, its decisions have reflected not only the language of the
Constitution but the perceptions of the day on the balance of power in
Washington.

The latest turn in the long drama was the legislative veto decision of June 23.
At a stroke, the Supreme Court put in doubt the validity of perhaps 200 acts of
Congress and seemingly shifted power in a fundamental way toward the White
House. But the causes and consequences of the decision are not really so clear
or so simple.  Analysts are still savoring its rich ambiguities.

When the Court expounds the Constitution's allocation of power, things do not
always turn out as the Justices expect. In 1926 Chief Justice William H. Taft, a
former President, struck what he saw as a decisive blow against encroachment on
the Presidency. Congress had provided that postmasters appointed by the
President and confirmed by the Senate could not be removed except with the
Senate's consent. A massive Taft opinion held that restriction unconstitutional.
But nine years later the Court said Congress could restrict the President's
right to remove a Federal trade commissioner; other officials have since been
put in the protected category.

A determined and resourceful Congress now could well find ways to achieve a main
object of the legislative veto - to supervise the exercise of power delegated by
Congress - without offending the Constitution. After all, the Supreme Court's
objection was not to the end of Congressional oversight but the means,
legislating outside the process specified by the Constitution, of passage by
both houses and presentation to the President.

The House of Representatives last week moved quickly to try one way around the
decision, imposing a severe restriction on the Consumer Product Safety
Commission. The provision says that no rule adopted by the commission will
become law unless and until both houses of Congress adopt it in a joint
resolution signed by the President.

The problem immediately seen in that approach was not legal but practical.
Congress cannot possibly review all the detailed rulemaking done by the
agencies. But there is an alternative approach that could meet the Supreme
Court's constitutional strictures and still give Congress the oversight it
wants. The House and Senate would simply have to change their rules to provide a
special ''legislative scrutiny procedure.'' The rules would specify that
regulations proposed by certain agencies, or under certain delegating statutes,
would automatically be introduced as Congressional resolutions. They would come
up for a floor vote in a fixed time, say 30 or 60 days, and if approved go to
the President.  The process could not be stopped except by a majority.

That approach is suggested by one legal authority. It relies on the power of
each house to make its own rules. No doubt there are other possibilities. The
point is that the Supreme Court has not ordained an irreversible shift in power.
In knocking out one device it may really have insured intensified conflict
through others.

Profound questions about the meaning of the decision, and about the whole power
relationship between President and Congress, lie in the field of foreign
affairs. Here history gives special urgency to the quest for some effective
means of Congressional oversight. In recent decades Presidents have come to
exercise great power in the world.  They have carried out lengthy wars without a
formal Congressional declaration; they control the nuclear weapons. It is a far
more dangerous world than William Howard Taft knew, and many in Congress and the
public have thought it dangerous to let Presidents wield American power without
restraint.
A Logic Reluctantly Followed

The Supreme Court's role in this area has been fitful. In 1952 in the great
Steel Case, it rejected President Truman's argument that in the emergency
conditions of the Korean War he could seize the country's steel mills to
forestall a strike. He needed Congressional authority for that, the Court said,
and he did not have it. The case was seen as a historic brake on Presidential
power. The Court has seemed reluctant to follow its own logic.

When the outcry against the Imperial Presidency was at its peak, during the
Vietnam War, the Court refused to entertain lawsuits challenging the legality of
the conflict. Those suits, it indicated, were too political.

More recently, the Court gave the executive power to impose draconian penalties
on two former Central Intelligence Agency agents, Frank Snepp and Philip Agee,
although there was no real legislative basis for the remedies. It was as if the
teaching of the Steel Case did not apply when the executive branch spoke of the
needs of intelligence and national security.

The Supreme Court's reluctance to hold the President to constitutional standards
in his national security role contrasts startlingly with its attitude toward
Congress in the legislative veto case. Chief Justice Warren E. Burger's opinion
was unbending.  The fact that the legislative veto may have been worked out as a
practical solution to modern problems of government did not matter, he said; the
Constitution's explicit rules for lawmaking had to be observed.

The tone of the Burger opinion struck many legal scholars as reminiscent of the
days before 1937, when a majority struck down a number of New Deal statutes. Not
that the substance of the issues was at all the same, of course. But here, as
there, the opinion brushed aside jurisdictional objections and suggestions that
the Court should exercise self-restraint and leave the issue to be worked out
politically. Associate Justice Byron R. White, in his passionate dissent,
sounded a lot like Professor, later Justice, Felix Frankfurter, warning against
the too-ready exercise of judicial power.

The legislative veto case proves one thing for certain: that the present Supreme
Court is not embarrassed in the use of its own power. Alexander Hamilton, in The
Federalist, said the judiciary would be ''beyond comparison the weakest of the
three departments'' in the new Federal Government. The prediction has been
confounded many times. This latest example shows once more that the use of
judicial power does not depend on whether judges are called ''liberal'' or
''conservative.''

But unless and until the Supreme Court is ready to scrutinize the enormous power
exercised by modern Presidents in foreign affairs as meticulously as it has just
looked at Congress, many authorities will worry about an imbalance. That is why
Congress adopted the War Powers Act, one of the main pieces of legislation put
in question by the legislative veto decision. Intelligent accommodation of the
needs for power and restraint in foreign affairs will test the wisdom of Court,
Congress and executive.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE KISSINGER ANTIMEMOIRS

BYLINE: By Stanley Hoffmann; Stanley Hoffmann is Douglas Dillon Professor of the
Civilization of France at Harvard University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 4475 words


THE PRICE OF POWER Kissinger in the Nixon White House.  By Seymour M. Hersh.
698 pp. New York: Summit Books. $19.95.

SEYMOUR M. HERSH'S book could be called the Kissinger antimemoirs.  ''The Price
of Power'' is a colossal effort to show that the image of mastery and public
service conveyed by Henry Kissinger's own volumes is just one more skillful
deception and that the unseemly aspects of policy making or the occasional
miscalculations and mistakes acknowledged by the former National Security
Adviser and Secretary of State actually constitute the essence of the
Nixon-Kissinger era.

Mr. Hersh, an award-winning former reporter for The New York Times, has spent
years stalking his prey. He has, he tells us, held more than 1,000 interviews.
Many former officials have shown or given him their notes or hitherto
unpublished documents; he has also read and compared the innumerable memoirs
written about one of the most controversial and savage periods of modern
American history.

Everything here is deeply disturbing: both the story Mr. Hersh tells and the way
he tells it. What risks getting lost in the battle over this book is the answer
to these questions: How much of what he has written is new, and what really
matters in this tale full of sound and fury?

''The Price of Power'' can be discussed on three different levels.  The first is
that of personality, personal politics and personal motivations - the dark
underside of the Nixon Administration; this is what seems to fascinate Mr. Hersh
most and where the main thrust of his book lies. The second level is that of
foreign policy, the assessment of the Nixon-Kissinger strategy and its results.
The third level consists of fundamental issues of American constitutional
government and political ethics; questions about these issues are raised in the
reader's mind but not directly addressed or fully discussed in the book.The
three levels are obviously linked, yet the second ultimately matters more than
the first and the third more than the second. Most of what is new in ''The Price
of Power,'' however, concerns only the first.

Much of the book deals with the intrigues of some of the principal actors in the
Nixon Administration and the games they played at each other's expense. The
central character is Mr. Kissinger. Mr. Hersh accuses him, in the words of one
of his informants, of having been ''a both sides of the street kind of guy''
during the Presidential campaign of 1968 - offering Nelson Rockefeller's files
on Richard Nixon to the Hubert Humphrey people and offering information about
the Paris negotiations between the Johnson Administration and the North
Vietnamese to the Nixon people. Mr. Hersh emphasizes Mr. Kissinger's relentless
drive for total control of the national security and foreign policy apparatus of
the Government -something Mr. Nixon wanted for himself because of his distrust
of the bureaucracy and Mr. Kissinger wanted because of his own character. Mr.
Hersh tells of Mr. Kissinger's frequently contemptuous treatment of subordinates
and his brutal treatment of bureaucrats (particularly, it seems, ambassadors)
when they resisted his policies. Obsessed by leaks, he was himself a virtuoso in
the art of giving ''confidential'' brriefoings to the press and carefully
selected information to privileged columnists or biographers.

MR. HERSH'S story goes much beyond Mr. Kissinger. He gives us a picture of an
Administration whose mode of operation was somewhere between the Borgias and the
Mafia. Everyone sought to cut everyone else out of thme action: Mr. Nixon asked
Paul Nitze, a member of the SALT negotiating team, to report directly to him,
not to his immediate superior or the Secretary of State. The State Department
was left out of crucial decisions and operations concerning Biafra, China, the
Berlin negotiations and SALT. Melvin Laird, the Secretary of Defense, was kept
in the dark about bombings of North Vietnaom at the time of the Cambodian
invasion. The so-called 40 Committee, the interagency group in charge of the
Administration's secret strategy against Salvador Allende in Chile, was
frequently ignored by the principal actors in the Administration.

Everyone was always setting up someone else as a fall guy in case of failure.
Mr. Nixon set up Mr. Kissinger at the time of the Cambodian invasion. Edward
Korry, the Ambassador to Chile, believes Mr. Nixon set him up in case the
plotting against Allende turned sour. Mr. Laird was the fall guy at the time of
the failed incursion into Laos in 1971. Alexander Haig played tricks on Mr.
Kissinger during the crucial phase of Vietnam negotiations just before the 1972
Presidential election.

Mutual blackmail was a common sport. J. Edgar Hoover was suspected of having
removed some wiretapping evidence about other people to use for his own purposes
, in case anyone wanted to fire him. His aide, William Sullivan, in turn, gave
Mr.  Hersh copies of White House wiretap authorizations after Attorney General
Elliot Richardson refused to appoint Mr. Sullivan head of the F.B.I. Yeoman
Charles Radford, an aide on the N.S.C. staff, was discovered to have copied
mountains of secret N.S.C. documents to pass on to the head of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff (after having leaked the contents of some of them to the columnist Jack
Anderson, partly because he had not received an expected promotion). But unlike
Daniel Ellsberg, who released the Pentagon Papers, Yeoman Radford was not
prosecuted, because the story of his spying on Mr. Kissinger would have revealed
how a direct link had been established between the N.S.C. and the Joint Chiefs
of Staff to bypass the Secretary of Defense. Admiral Thomas Moorer, the chief of
the Joint Chiefs, thus compromised, was reappointed for a second term having now
been caught out and ''preshrunk,'' in John Ehrlichman's term.

OF course, we hear in detail about the wiretaps put on various members of Mr.
Kissinger's staff and on a number of journalists because of leaks about military
operations or secret negotiations - a story about which Mr. Kissinger himself
wrote with considerable embarrassment in both volumes of his memoirs..

Nowhere does the paranoid style of American politics, as Richard Hofstadter
called it, appear more clearly than in the Kissinger-Nixon relationship as
described by Mr. Hersh. Each time Mr. Kissinger's role threatened to eclipse
his, Mr. Nixon made life unpleasant for his National Security Adviser; this was
particularly true after Mr.  Kissinger's return from his first trip to China in
the summer of 1971, after the Bangladesh crisis six months later and during the
final phase of the Vietnam negotiations, when the two men operated with very
different timetables and priorities. Whenever a policy proved particularly
unpopular, either Mr. Nixon wanted Mr. Kissinger to appear responsible - as
after the Bangladesh crisis - or else Mr.  Kissinger wanted Mr. Nixon to take
full responsibility - as for the Christmas bombing of Hanoi in 1972. Mr.
Kissinger defended himself by telling his side of the story to the press. But
given the insecurity of his position, he could often protect himself only by
trying to prove his loyalty to his boss at the expense of some of his associates
or by taking even tougher positions than Mr. Nixon.  Therefore Mr. Nixon never
trusted Mr. Kissinger or his staff.

The White House wiretapping system was partly aimed at Mr.  Kissinger, and the
plumbers' investigation set up after Daniel Ellsberg gave the Pentagon Papers to
The New York Times for publication was also seen by Mr. Kissinger as a threat.
This endless display of distrust and duplicity does not make for pleasant
reading. Indeed, it is nauseating. Every bureaucracy has its share of rivalries,
jealousies, dirty tricks and frustrations. But this one's seems to have reached
a ''pathological degree,'' a term used by Mr.  Kissinger himself. Nevertheless,
we must evaluate the massive data provided by Mr. Hersh. And here questions and
objections are in order.

Mr. Hersh tends to place everything on the same level: decisions that had
important human and political costs, like Mr. Nixon's support of the Greek junta
or the intervention in Chile, and petty bureaucratic affairs. Much of what he
tells us has been told before in the flood of studies and reports following
Watergate. Mr. Hersh's witnesses provide more detail and color but little that
changes the main outlines of the picture. The most sensational new charge -that
Mr. Kissinger offered his services to both sides in the 1968 election - will
come as no surprise to those who knew, for instance, that in the spring of that
year Mr. Kissinger, while a Rockefeller man, also had shown great sympathy for
Robert Kennedy. The file on Mr. Nixon he is said to have offered the Humphrey
people seems, on the basis of subsequent reporting, to have consisted not of
dirt but of data, and it was never delivered. Mr. Hersh does not prove that it
was Mr. Kissinger who gave the secrets of the Paris negotiations to the Nixon
camp: Mr. Nixon, while acknowledging that Mr. Kissinger provided information,
said that the most important insider's report came from ''someone in Johnson's
innermost circle.''

THE fundamental problem of ''The Price of Power'' is that of Mr.  Hersh's
informants. While many of them chose to remain anonymonus (particularly, Mr.
Hersh says, those involved in Middle Eastern affairs), a large number are named.
They are, on the whole, losers of bureaucratic battles or men who resigned from
the N.S.C. staff because of political or moral differences with Government
policy or Mr. Kissinger's long-time opponents, like Nguyen Co Thach, the former
Deputy Foreign Minister of North Vietnam, and Gen. Nguyen Van Thieu's brash
adviser Hoang Duc Nha. Many of these informants are honorable men, but it would
be surprising if what emerged from their anecdotes and complaints amounted to
the whole story. Mr. Kissinger and many of his former associates refused to talk
to Mr. Hersh, so it is not entirely Mr. Hersh's fault if his book is primarily
an assault on Mr. Kissinger. Indeed, since memoirs are inevitably advertisements
for oneself, countermemoirs by the disappointed and the disgruntled help restore
a sense of balance. Such accounts have already been published by two of Mr.
Hersh's sources: in ''Doubletalk'' (1980) by Gerard Smith, former head of the
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and the Salt I negotiating delegation, and
''Uncertain Greatness'' (1977) by Roger Morris, an N.S.C. aide.  But the
onslaught is even more relentless than the target's selfdefense. It is a bit
difficult to use such men as Charles Colson, even though he may be born again,
and Mr. Ehrlichman as entirely trustworthy witnesses. In other words, the
credibility of the witnesses varies greatly, and the reader has no way of
seeparrating what is undoubtedly true from what is dubious, exaggerated or
false.

When Mr. Hersh goes beyond reporting what his informants told him and presents
his own interpretation, he is not always convincing.  Nobody would doubt that
ambition played an important role in Mr.  Kissinger's career. But it is hard to
believe that ambition and vanity were his only drives, that even such decisions
as the opening to China and such policies as detente were motivated exclusively
by domestic concerns and Mr. Nixon's need to be re-elected in 1972. Mr.
Kissinger's behavior in '72 - his insistence on going to Moscow in April to try
to get Soviet help in ending the Vietnam War, his treatment of President Thieu
during the negotiations with Hanoi in the summer and fall, his determination to
reach an agreement with Hanoi before the American election - is explained here
primariy by his personal insecurity, his desire to succeed William Rogers as
Secretary of State and his fear for his own position.

When writing about statesmen with powerful egos, is it ever sensible to try to
separate personal considerations from wider concerns? Is it wise to write as if
only the former or the latter existed? In Mr. Kissinger's case, I suspect, the
relation between the two is particularly complicated and hard to penetrate. Mr.
Hersh accuses Mr. Kissinger again and again of deception. But, for example, when
Mr. Kissinger asked critics of the Vietnam War to give him six months, was it
deliberate deception, as Mr. Hersch maintains, or might it have been
self-deception? Throughout this dreadful war there was a pattern of
self-delusion, about coming breakthroughs with Hanoi and Mr. Kissinger's ability
to persuade President Thieu that the deal he had obtained was the best possible
one for Saigon.

I'M not suggesting that one can dismiss Mr. Hersh's indictment as trivial.
Clearly the style of operation of the Nixon Administration mattered, not only
because of the crash to which it inevitably led but also because style and
substance were intimately linked. However, it is on the level of substance not
of office politics and personal antagonisms that the more serious debate ought
to take place. And Mr. Hersh does indeed provide a trenchant critique of Mr.
Kissinger's foreign policy. He discusses the huge costs of destabilizing
Cambodia, first by the secret bombings, later by the events following Prince
Norodom Sihanouk's overthrow.

Mr. Hersh's account of relations with Hanoi emphasizes Mr. Nixon's and Mr.
Kissinger's fondness for threats that were sometimes carried out and sometimes
not (this was the so-called ''madman theory'' aimed at provoking enemy fear of
the President's unpredictability). He also dwells on the missed opportunity of
using the South Vietnamese Presidential election in October 1971 as a way of
replacing Thieu with a leader better able to end the war. Mr. Hersh is sharply
critical of Mr. Nixon's and Mr. Kissinger's tendency to analyze local crises -
between Egypt and Israel, in Jordan in September 1970, between India and
Pakistan in 1971 - almost exclusively in terms of the Soviet-American rivalry
and to exaggerate greatly both the role and the pugnacity of the Soviet Union.
He cites America's ugly involvement in Chilean affairs and Mr. Kissinger's
opposition to Secretary of State Rogers's attempts to find solutions for the
Egyptian-Israeli conflict. He points to mistakes made in SALT I: the decision
not to try to reach a ban on MIRV's (the long-term consequences, now regretted
by Mr. Kissinger, include the growing threat posed by Soviet heavy missiles to
America's land-based missile force) and several concessions made too the Soviets
in the final phases of the negotiations.

Many of these charges are, in my opinion, valid. The concentration on triangular
diplomacy - Washington, Moscow and Peking - and the obsession with real or
imaginary Soviet challenges frequently led to misreadings of local
circumstances. It led to a paralysis in the Middle East that inevitably resulted
in war in October 1973 and to dreadfully wrongheaded policies in the Bangladesh
affair. The attempt to square the circle in Vietnam, by ending direct American
involvement yet ''winning'' by keeping the Saigon regime in power, could not but
prolong the war. It produced an agreement that was signed only after both of the
Vietnamese parties felt betrayed and brutalized by the United States and that
neither side observed.

Most of these criticisms have been presented before, and Mr. Hersh here relies
on the detailed studies of others: William Shawcross on Cambodia in ''Sideshow''
(1979), William Quandt on the Middle East in ''Decade of Decisions'' (1977),
Gerard Smith on SALT. Only rarely is any credit given to the Nixon
Administration for its initiatives.  Both detente with the Soviet Union and the
opening to China are presented as rather sordid or clumsy deals. Mr. Hersh may
be right when he says that some of the last-minute deals with the Soviets in
SALT I fueled later opposition to arms control and the mistaken belief that the
Soviets were cheating. But the military significance of this is far less than
that of the decision to allow a MIRV'ed world.

ON several points Mr. Hersh's evidence is far from perfect: When he tries to
prove that the White House ordered the assassination of Allende in 1970; when he
says that Mr. Laird ''must have'' let Mr.  Nixon or Mr. Kissinger know that the
American war prisoners whom the raid on Son Tay was intended to liberate were no
longer in that camp; or when nhe infers from statements of Zhou Enlai that the
United States must have secretly informed Peking in 1970 of its willingness to
withdraw totally from Taiwan. On other points Mr. Hersh's evidence is hard to
believe. Could there really have been a 29-day top nuclear alert ((known in the
jargon as Def Con 1) in the fall of 1969 that nobody in the United States
discovered or noticed? Mr. Hersh's informant appears to have been an Air Force
sergeant. A less serious nuclear alert during the 1973 Arab-Israeli war was
discovered and reported within a few hours. As for Mr. Hersh's assertion that
Morarji Desai, India's Prime Minister in 1977-1979, was the man who informed or
misinformed the United States Government about Indira Gandhi's plans to move
against West Pakistan during the Bangladesh crisis in 1971: He had been removed
from the Indian Government, not only from the position of Deputy Prime Minister,
in 1969 and was in no position to provide such an inside view.

Mr. Kissinger executed his ambitious strategy of foreign policy with such
diplomatic virtuosity and presented it with such dialectical skill that many
peooplle in the Establishment and the public at large never saw the errors and
the price. But ultimately what matters even more than the political and human
costs of specific failures of his foreign policy is a series of fundamental
questions raised by the Nixon years. Mr. Hersh's relentless indictment invites
us to think about these questions and also to ask ourselves whether the Nixon
Administration was different from other Administrations in essence or merely in
degree.

Some of these questions concern the ability of the American Government to
maintain a long-range foreign policy. While Congressional vigilance against
disastrous or dishonest policies is indispensable, the fragmentation of opinion
and frequently partisan concerns of Congress make cooperation with the executive
branch difficult. The system of checks and balances aimed at protecting citizens
from the victories of any one faction and from the threat of centralized power
interferes with the executive's ability to act with authority, effectiveness and
continuity on the world stage. Mr.  Nixon, with his profound distrust of anyone
not under his control, his preference for the oblique and the secret and his
fascination for the world stage, chose to disregard those checks and balances.
He did so even if it meant, for example, falsifying records (as over the secret
bombings in Cambodia) or ignoring clear signals from Congress about the
unpopularity of the war in Southeast Asia. Mr. Nixon's drive for control and his
limitless insecurity later led to his political destruction and to a widespread
public repudiation of the imperial Presidency. We seem doomed to oscillate
between the excesses of an imperial Presidency and the ambushes and delays of
divided power.

Maybe Congress could be more of a partner and less of an adversary for the
President if the executive spoke with a single and clear voice. But the lesson
of the Nixon years is that the attempt to centralize foreign policy in the White
House and to dismiss or silence dissenters within the bureaucracy - including
the Secretaries of State and Defense - only provoked what the executive most
wanted to avoid: sniping in the form of leaks. (Mr. Hersh says that several
members of Mr. Kissinger's staff, unhappy with his policies, did indeed leak
abundantly before resigning.) Since there can be no continuity without
institutional memory and support, isolating and humiliating the bureaucracy is a
perfect recipe for fleeting foreign policy spectaculars and Lone Ranger
performances, not for lasting achievements.

OTHER questions concern what could be called the domestic moral integrity of
American foreign policy. The increasing importance of the Federal Government as
well as the role of the United States as a world power has made the President
the world's central figure. The relation between the president and his closest
advisers in every presidential system is like the relation of a king to his
courtiers.  But there is a great difference between the American system and,
say, the French one. The American courtier is what Richard Neustadt has called
an ''in and outer,'' not a career bureaucrat. His authority and his glamour are
on loan from the President. When the National Security Adviser is the chief
foreign policy maker, the nature of his relation to the President becomes
all-important. Mr. Nixon's Presidential style was peculiarly difficult, and
those who came late into his service could never be sure of their standing; they
had to prove themselves endlessly or be subject to periods of ''slowly, slowly
twisting in the wind.'' The tone set by the President infected the whole
decision making apparatus and obliged the National Security Adviser to choose
between resigning from his job or resigning himself to the constraints,
compromises and petty humiliations it entailed.  There is something unhealthy
about the degree to which American foreign policy is at the mercy of the style
of the relations between two men, one of whom is always torn between external
and domestic priorities and the other between a very demanding job and the need
to keep the President's ear and trust.

While the top of the American Government is quasi-monarchic, the system as a
whole is more democratic than many other constitutional governments insofar as
the public, directly or through its pressure groups and representatives, weighs
more on foreign policy. Hence the importance of the media as a liaison between
the public and the Government. The need for public support explains why every
Administration is so careful to cultivate the press. Both the complexity of the
Nixon-Kissinger foreign policy and their personal urge to monopolize power
explain why in those years the press was simultaneously coaxed and distrusted,
why several journalists were simultaneously fed information and vigilantly
wiretapped. This too is an unhealthy relationship, not only because the
executive's own leaks incite losers and dissenters to leak in turn but also
because it creates in the executive a perfectly excessive sensitivity to the
words of key columnists. The media in turn are all too eager to be allowed a
glimpse of the Government's carefully guarded secrets but are often in no
condition to provide a critical perspective on the information that is fed to
them. A distinguished journalist once complained that it took him three days
after every conversation with Henry Kissinger to recover his critical sense;
unfortunately, in the meantime he had written his column.

The most important domestic moral question raised in ''The Price of Power,'' and
in other studies of the Vietnam era, concerns the ability of the executive to
wage a war it deems in the national interest but whose full implications and
difficulties it tries to hide from Congress and the public, a war whose growing
unpopularity it tries to ignore and whose ultimate importance it feels obliged
to exaggerate. Both the Johnson and Nixon Administrations in their different
ways forgot two fundamental precepts. A war that can only be ''won'' at a moral
and political cost that would be unacceptable at home and on balance damaging to
our interests abroad should not be waged at all. A war that can only be pursued
by ignoring or violently confronting rising opposition at home should be
terminated as quickly as possible. In Central America we may stumble into a
similar quagmire, and the same arguments about credibility and commitment are
being heard again. Nobody will be able to say he has not been warned. If Mr.
Nixon's fall teaches one lesson, it is that the attempt to wage such a war or
settle it only on terms that spell victory will lead to the treatment of
domestic opponents as actual enemies and to fatal infringements of the
Constitution and the law.

THE kind of foreign policy carried out in the years covered by Mr.  Hersh
resulted ineviitably in an erosion of domestic safeguards. Mr.  Nixon
instinctively and Mr. Kissinger intellectually were Machiavellians - men who
believed that the preservation of the state (inseparable in Machiavelli from
that of the Prince) requires both ruthlessness and deceit at the expense of
foreign and internal adversaries. Many of their predecessors had been modified
Machiavellians, restrained abroad by an occasional dose of idealism and at home
by constitutional inhibitions. The problem with Machiavellianism is, first, that
sooner or later it invites a formidable reaction at home. Second, it is neither
morally nor politically tenable abroad. The kind of intervention in the domestic
affairs of others represented by American policy in Chile - which was based
primarily on a fear of contagion rather than direct threats to American security
- may lead to short-term gain, but it only builds up deep anti-American
resentments that will be increasingly difficult to control. And in its methods
as well as its principles, it violates some of the key values for which the
United States claims to speak in world affairs. Moreover, as shown by Mr.
Hersh's stories about Cambodia just before and after the overthow of Prince
Sihanouk and about Chile at the time of Allende's election, even an
Administration determined to control everything cannot prevent low-level
intelligence officials or adventurers from moving on their own, believing that
their intrigues will be covered up or even appreciated by their superiors. The
effects can be as disastrous as the endless destruction of Cambodia or as
distressing as the assassination of Gen. Rene Schneider, commander in chief of
the Chilean Army.

De Gaulle once wrote about Napoleon, ''Before such a prodigious career judgment
is torn between blame and admiration.'' Henry Kissinger was not Napoleon, but
his policy provokes a similar judgment. Those who believe that the world of
politics, at home and abroad, is a world in which force and cunning are the only
currencies and that the best order one can achieve is a stable world in which
power balances power, spheres of influence coexist and the great powers control
the small will forgive Mr. Kissinger for the dark side of his actions. Those who
believe that the rule of law must always prevail at home and that a concern for
justice and human rights must temper the realities of power and transcend the
struggle for power abroad will always have mixed feelings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW JERSEY JOURNAL

BYLINE: By Robert Hanley

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 3, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1576 words


THE students at Mount Pleasant Elementary School in West Orange know more than
most children about wind direction and air currents, thanks to a balloon
experiment launched on May 26.

About 300 helium-filled balloons were sent aloft that day as part of an outdoor
environmental education program organized by three sixth-grade teachers, Elayne
Paskow, Patrick Galante and Jano Groves. An attached postcard dangled from the
nozzle of each balloon, and each card bore the name of one of the students.

No one knew where the balloons would wind up as they drifted skyward. But the
postcards asked those who might find a balloon to note the date, time and place
of discovery, and then drop the card into the mail.

To chart the direction that the balloons had taken, the children set up a large
map of New Jersey, New York and New England in a showcase in a school hallway.
Pins were readied to denote each discovery site.

By the time school closed late last month, 19 of the postcards had been mailed
back. The percentage of return was small, but there was plenty of information to
evaluate pevailing air currents in late May.

''The balloons floated northwesterly first, and then, as they got higher and
higher, changed direction and went northeasterly,'' said George Baird, the
school principal. ''My wife's third-grade class in Florham Park launched some
balloons about two weeks ago and found they went in the same general direction
as ours.''

The balloon found closest to the Mount Pleasant school had fallen out of a tree
just across the street on May 30, four days after the launch. Others had drifted
well beyond the state. The only other ones known to have fallen in New Jersey
came down in Franklin Lakes and Ramsey.

In New York, the balloons were found in Stony Point, Carmel, Hopewell Junction,
Wingdale, the Camp Smith Military Reservation, Putnam Valley and Amenia. Still
another one came down at the juncture of Interstate 84 and the Taconic State
Parkway, near Newburgh.

Another balloon came down in Van Cortlandt Cemetery in Cortlandt, N.Y.; it was
found by a class of fourth-graders from George Washington School in Lake
Mohegan, N.Y., while on a field trip. These children wrote back that they had
spotted the balloon while examining Revolutionary War tombstones.

The one found farthest from West Orange had gone over the Green Mountains in
Vermont and settled down in Chester, Vt., a small town about 40 miles north of
the Massachusetts border, 10 miles west of the New Hampshire border and about
300 air miles from West Orange. It came down at 7 A.M. on May 27.

Anticipation and enthusiasm were high as the postcards came back and pins went
up on the big map, Mr. Baird said.  ''The mailman always made sure that he had
the cards on top of the mail stack when he brought it in each day,'' he said.
''It was adorable to watch the younger children,'' Mrs. Paskow said,
''especially those in kindergarten and first grade when they got cards back with
their names on them and we posted the information.''

The taxpayer-financed project to restore the state's eagle population took a big
step forward on June 24. Four eight-week-old eaglets, taken from nests in Nova
Scotia a day earlier, were flown to New Jersey and taken to new homes in deep
woodlands in Cumberland County.

Each eaglet was placed in man-made, 6-by-6-foot wooden chambers erected atop
40-foot-high telephone poles in Bear Swamp, specifically about 2.5 miles from a
tall tree where the state's only known pair of nesting bald eagles have lived
since the early 1970's.

Each chamber is equipped with a small closed-circuit camera to allow wildlife
specialists to monitor the eaglets' daily activities and growth. Two attendants,
living in a trailer near the chambers, will feed them fish that is donated each
day by a local angler.

''We'll keep them in there until late July and then open the chambers and let
them fly,'' said Pete McLain, deputy director of the state's Division of Fish,
Game and Wildlife and supervisor of the division's non-game and endangered
species program.

Before they leave, each eaglet will be banded. A small transmitter also will be
attached to the leg of each bird so that their wanderings can be monitored until
the batteries on the transmitters wear out.

Mr. McLain said that the four eaglets might migrate south for the winter, but
will return to the area of the chambers next spring to build their own nests.

''Eagles, and most birds for that matter, have an ancestral instinct to return
to the area where they made their first flight,'' Mr. McLain said. ''This is
known as imprinting.''

Two days before the newcomers arrived, two other eaglets, both born of Bear
Swamp's nesting eagles, flew off on their own from their nest. Both had come
from eggs that had been laid in late February and that were later taken from the
nest by Mr. McLain's staff and moved to a special incubator at a Federal
wildlife preserve in Patuxent, Md.

They hatched there in early April and were returned to the nest - and their
natural parents -about three weeks later.  Mr. McLain's staff went to these
lengths to insure the births because the adult eagles have never been able to
hatch their own offspring in Bear Swamp. The shells of the eggs have always been
too thin to withstand the heat and body weight of the parents during natural
incubation.

''The two eaglets were fully grown - about 15 pounds each - when they flew
off,'' Mr. McLain said. ''They'll stay in the area and hunt on their own now,
and then come back to the nest in the evening. They might migrate this fall, but
they'll come back to the swamp in the spring to build their own nests.''

The two young eagles have been named ''Stars'' and ''Stripes.'' Those names were
the most popular of hundreds sent to officials by schoolchildren around the
state. About 10,000 entries were submitted, Mr. McLain said. Seventeen requested
''Stars'' and ''Stripes.''

The funds for the eagle program come from a special tax checkoff on all state
income-tax returns.  ''The people of New Jersey are really bringing the eagles
back,'' Mr. McLain said. ''If it wasn't for the tax checkoff, not one penny
would have been spent on eagles.''

A new program offering psychological counselling for veterans of the Vietnam War
has been created at Fairleigh Dickinson University's division of psychological
services in Hackensack.

The services are free and available for eligible veterans from Bergen, Passaic
and Sussex Counties.  According to Dr. Michael Petronko, director of the
division, those qualified must have served in the Vietnam War from Aug. 5, 1964,
to May 7, 1975, must have received discharges other than dishonorable and must
have had difficulties in readjusting to civilian life because of their war
service.

The program, which is federally financed, is the second to be established in the
state because of an overflow of veterans needing counseling at regular Veterans
Administration centers in Trenton, Jersey City, Newark and East Orange. The
other is at Morristown Memorial Hospital.

Dr. Petronko said that some of the difficulties encountered by veterans included
nightmares, flashbacks, depression, rage and guilt. ''Some of these symptoms of
stress do not manifest themselves immediately, but take years to surface,'' he
said.

His division, Dr. Petronko said, has 14 licensed clinical psychologists and
offers a full range of clinical services. Veterans may call the division at
(201) 692-2645 or be referred by the Veterans Administration Outreach Center in
Newark, Dr. Petronko said.

Four farms that have been owned by the same families for more than 100 years
were honored recently by the New Jersey Agricultural Society.

The accolades went to the Van Riper Farm, in Woodcliff Lake, Bergen County; the
Tice Farm, also in Woodcliff Lake; the Couse Farm in Newton, in Sussex County,
and Suydam Farm in Somerset, in Somerset County.

The owners of the Van Riper and Tice farms are cousins, and their farms are
within a mile of each other on Chestnut Ridge Road in Woodcliff Lake. Fruits and
vegetables from the farms are sold at roadside stands that draw steady streams
of customers.

The Van Riper Farm has been in the family for 11 generations, and dates back to
Garret Van Riper's purchase of 160 acres in 1791. The Tice farm, owned by
Richard F. Tice, began in 1808.

The Couse Farm originated in 1798 and eventually grew into a 417-acre beef and
dairy operation. Martin and Margaret Couse, the fifth generation of the family
to live on and work the farm, are co-authors, with several other farming
couples, of the Sussex County Agricultural Society's book, ''Living on the
Farm.''

Eleven generations of Suydams have worked their farm since the family bought it
in 1826. Operations there now are limited to the production of hay, but some 20
years ago the farm was famous for the milk output of its big herd of Brown Swiss
cattle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Richard Tice

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 4, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MANY THAI COMMUNISTS GIVE UP THEIR LONG WARFARE IN THE JUNGLE

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1864 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 30


Since December, groups of up to 1,000 Communist insurgents and their supporters
have been marching out of the jungles waving red flags, to be greeted by
speeches, television cameras, meals and the Thai Army's senior generals.

The defections, most of which have taken place in the northeast, have been
spurred by Government offers of amnesty and aid. But the rebels' emergence from
the wilds of Thailand is also graphic evidence that an insurgency that has
severely harassed, though not threatened, the rulers of the country for nearly
20 years is breaking up.

While rurally based revolutionary movements have been thriving in other parts of
the world, the outlawed Communist Party of Thailand has been losing guerrilla
supporters, weapons and prestige.

Abandoned by Peking

The movement here, linked for many years with China but then abandoned by
Peking, appeared to be growing until recently. China apparently attaches greater
importance now to its relations with the Thai Government of Gen. Prem
Tinsulanonda.

As China has focused its wrath on Vietnam, and as Vietnam's control of Indochina
has led to widespread fear among its neighbors, Thai peasants have turned
hostile to the insurgency, and many Communists have grown confused.

One of the Thai Army's leading counterinsurgency strategists, Lieut. Gen.
Chaovalit Yongchiyuth, said a few weeks ago that the Communists' armed struggle,
which has been carried on in the northeast, the far north and the south near the
Malaysian border, was headed for collapse.

Persuasion Over Combat

He said the Government, which has recently been relying more on persuasion than
combat, would next send its troops to strike at guerrilla holdouts in both north
and south. Later, he said, the Government would turn on the Communist Party
itself.

Many Thai and Western officials have said they believe the army's plan has a
fair chance of succeeding. Many recent Communist defectors have said in
interviews that they agree. At its height five years ago, the insurgency
commanded more than 12,000 guerrillas nationwide and influenced the daily lives
of a million people in the northeast alone. Its military activities required the
attention of tens of thousands of Government troops and caused the deaths each
year of more than 500 soldiers and officials.

The Thai Army now estimates that the number of insurgents in the northeast has
dropped from 4,000 to 400 in a year. One prominent Communist defector, Vithit
Chandawong, said recently in Bangkok that the party might still rally 800
northeastern sympathizers, but only a few dozen fighters.

Insurgents in the far north may, in fact, still number as many as 2,000, and
there may be 3,000 others in the far south, both figures significantly lower
than last year. Their popular support is said to be limited in the north, where
the insurgency appears to be a kind of tribal rebellion.

The insurgents' popularity in the southern peninsula has been slipping. The
region has been booming economically, a popular army commander has been
successfully attacking bases of both the Communist Party of Thailand and the
remnants of the Communist Party of Malaya, and many southerners find it hard to
distinguish Communist insurgents from the area's many bandits, Moslem
separatists and criminal syndicates.

More Than 2,500 Give Up

Since late last year some 2,500 armed Communist insurgents, and thousands more
of their supporters, have surrendered to the Government.

The impoverished northeast, where most defections have taken place, was the Thai
Communists' most important area of recruitment. It was there that their
''people's war'' was launched in 1965, with an attack on an army jeep. The
insurgency began at a time when China, under Mao Zedong, was militantly
encouraging rebel movements along its borders.

The Communist Party of Thailand was founded in Bangkok in 1942, mainly by ethnic
Chinese, and it evolved only slowly into a rural movement consisting mostly of
Thais. Many of the party's top leaders, however, are still ethnic Chinese.

''The leaders were dictators,'' said 54-year-old Prasit Nuanchantuk, known in
the insurgency as Comrade Long. He spoke in a recent interview on his cabin
porch in the northeast Thai village of Ngon.

Rolling a cigarette as he explained why he and many others defected, he said the
leaders listened only to Peking and had lost touch with students, workers and
other Thais. He said they discounted the Thai Army's growing military successes
against the rebels and its increasingly friendly offers of amnesty.

Comrade Udon: 'It's Finished'

Last December, having risen to the rank of provincial secretary general after
two decades as a Communist, Comrade Long accepted the Government's offer and
surrendered.

''It's finished,'' a 73-year-old defector known as Comrade Udon said of the
insurgency.  ''Hopeless,'' his friend, 74-year-old Comrade Ubon, agreed.  The
two men were squatting under a grove of fruit trees one recent morning in the
village of Lao Yai, in an area of the northeast's Sakhon Nakhon Province that
the insurgents once controlled.

About four years ago, they said, villagers stopped giving them food and
information. The change of mood coincided with Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia.
Students who had joined them began drifting back to the cities; they were
disillusioned by the party's leadership, which seemed less interested than the
rural rank and file in the students' ideas.

Detailed interviews since January with more than a dozen Communist defectors,
and brief talks with dozens of others, have elicited similar tales from young
and old, fighters and intellectuals. They said their war had no chance.

As recently as 1981, however, Western specialists in Thai politics were still
describing the insurgency as growing. In fact, it had stopped growing, and
defectors are now describing how badly things went wrong.

Shrewder and More Democratic

For one thing, many said, the Government in the 1970's turned more shrewd, more
democratic and less provocative. Communist recruitment suffered as a result.

Phim Utaphan, who is 55, said he joined the insurgency 17 years ago after a
policeman arrested him for robbery. ''I was trying to buy a pig,'' Mr. Phim
recalled.

After two years in jail he won his release and joined the Communists.
Experiences such as Mr. Phim's are less common now, defectors have said.

Others described joining the insurgency when Government troops, searching for
Communists, burned their houses or killed their relatives, reportedly a common
practice until a few years ago.

''We don't do this anymore,'' said an intelligence officer in the northeastern
provincial capital, also called Sakhon Nakhon. He said the arrogance of
officials, ''corrupt police and greedy landlords'' had always helped the
Communists more than poverty had.

In 1977 the Government began offering amnesty to insurgents, and students began
trickling out of the jungle. In 1980, the year General Prem became Prime
Minister, and again in 1982, the Government committed itself to a policy of
using political means before military action.

Amnesty, Aid, Land and Cash

Since late last year the army has negotiated with local Communist leaders,
offering defectors not only amnesty but aid, land, housing and cash for their
weapons - $87, for example, for an American-made M-16 rifle. A few key army
officers have become known even to Communists as ''democratic soldiers'' and
''men of the people.''

''They dropped leaflets from airplanes,'' said a 60-year-old defector named Huen
Thongsom about the army's appeals. ''They said the Government had changed. So we
sent a delegation.''

Mr. Huen was a Communist organizer for 20 years before his defection a few
months ago and was known as Comrade Pichit. Sitting on a grassy road near his
old village in Sakhon Nakhon Province, he said he had been lucky. His wife had
never joined the insurgents, and she and a few acres were waiting when he got
home.

The insurgents have not been helped by Thailand's economic growth, averaging 7
percent a year for the last decade, even though the growth has been harshly
uneven.

The northeast remains an unirrigated plateau of tumbledown huts, scrawny cattle
and hundreds of thousands of landless and nearlandless farmers who flee to
Bangkok to look for work whenever the rains fail. But some notable advances have
also been made there, among them the construction of roads and the spread of
power lines to villages, where television sets and motorcycles can now be seen.

'It Was Confusing'

China's relations with the West, Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia and China's
subsequent war with Vietnam eventually caused still graver problems for the
insurgents, whose leaders remained firmly on China's side.

''It was confusing,'' said the former Comrade Isan, a 30-year-old farmer whose
real name is Thawin Bornthaisong. After the Vietnamese attacked Cambodia in
1978, he and other Thai Communists were assigned to ''train'' there with the
troops of the deposed Cambodian leader Pol Pot, then as now battling the
Vietnamese.

Refugees, meanwhile, kept pouring into Thailand from Laos and Cambodia, and the
sight soured Thais toward Communists everywhere.  The insurgents lost access to
redoubts in both Cambodia and Laos.  Their former Chinese benefactors shut down
their radio station, the Voice of the People of Thailand, which had been
transmitting from China for years.

''They didn't let us grow up and they didn't let us die,'' said Comrade Pichit
of his former Chinese allies.  Defectors say they were demanding discussion of
all these issues by the time the party's fourth congress, its first since 1961,
met last year in Thailand and China. But the Politburo, they say, refused to
hear them.

Soap Operas and Rock Music

Rebellious local leaders were soon meeting with army intelligence officers and
asking what would happen if they surrendered. One leader, Vithit Chandawong,
said his own followers were by then listening to Thai soap operas and Western
rock music on their radios in the jungle.

Some defectors, however, are now complaining bitterly that the Government has
not kept its promises of land and housing. In private they speak disparagingly
of Thai justice and economic development.

Mr. Vithit, who surrendered late in March and immediately ran for Parliament,
has charged that his victorious opponent spent hundreds of thousands of dollars
buying votes.

''Thai democracy is for the rich,'' he said the other night. He said he was
trying to raise money to help defectors and start a foundation to advise the
army.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Prasit Nuanchantik map of Thailand, showing
Sakhon Nakhon province

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 4, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A.M.A.'S DIOXIN STANCE;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 992 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 3


Over the last several months, as the tale of widespread dioxin contamination
across Missouri unfolded in the news media, many physicians there became more
and more incensed about what they saw as exaggerations and distortions of the
presumed health dangers of the toxic compound, particularly as the subject was
covered on television.

One of them, Dr. Barry Ivy, a retired ophthalmologist from Springfield, Mo.,
penned a resolution and took it to his local Greene County Medical Society. In a
series of introductory ''whereas'' paragraphs, Dr. Ivy said that a 1981 review
of scientific literature on dioxin by a panel of the American Medical
Association ''has not found any documented human deaths directly attributable to
dioxin poisoning'' and he charged that the news media had created a ''wave of
hysteria'' by disseminating ''rumors, hearsay and unconfirmed, unscientific
reports.''

With that, he proposed that the physicians embark on a publicity campaign to
bring ''accurate'' information to the public. That resolution, slightly modified
by the Missouri delegation, worked its way up to the national meeting of the
medical association recently.  It generated some debate in committee but was
passed by the full House of Delegates under a parliamentary rule that precluded
debate.

Reaction Prompts Surprise

The leadership of the A.M.A. professed surprise that all the ''whereases''
denouncing the news media attracted such attention, since such clauses carry no
weight as policy under the organization's parliamentary rules. All the
association's House of Delegates did, they said, was call for an informational
campaign and for an updating of the 1981 report, which nobody disagreed with.

That did not persuade members of Congress, and by last Thursday the A.M.A. was
retreating, with a spokesman telling a Congressional subcommittee the Missouri
language was ''imprudent.''

In a sense, the episode says as much about the politics of medicine as about the
putative hazards of dioxin. It also brings into sharp relief the tension that
frequently marks the relationship between the news media and medical doctors.

The A.M.A. represents about half the 485,000 physicians in the United States,
and it tends to reflect mainly the views of the more conservative doctors in
private practice. Its leadership boasts that it functions as a democracy and
this sometimes produces resolutions with which it is uncomfortable. The dioxin
measure was one of them.

Language Had Drawn Objections

There were objections to the language when it came up before the spring meeting
of the Missouri State Medical Association. But since the ''whereas'' clauses
were thought to have no official weight, they were passed. ''When groups such as
this write resolutions the whereases are regularly used as group therapy to
allow people to vent,'' said an academic physician in St. Louis. ''Doctors are
naive when it comes to media.''

Dr. George Bohigian, an ophthalmologist in private practice in St.  Louis who
was to carry the resolution to the national meeting in Chicago, said he
expressed some unhappiness at the Missouri meeting with the stridency of the
language, ''but the doctors felt that's what they wanted to say.''

''I agree it was strong language,'' he said. ''But, looking back at the whole
thing, if it were not there this would not have gotten national attention.
Perhaps in the long run it will be beneficial to people.''

Dr. Bohigian said the doctors' chief complaint was with hasty television
reporting, which they felt tended to stress emotional interviews and lacked
scientific facts. He said they felt newspaper accounts of the situation were
more balanced. He also said physicians should make themselves more available to
the news media but have shied away from the press for lack of time or fear of
being misquoted.

Doctor's Role Questioned

Questions about Dr. Bohigian's role have been raised, most recently in Congress
last Thursday, because he teaches part time at the medical school at Washington
University, which is the recipient of a $24 million research grant from
Monsanto, a chemical maker that is politically powerful in Missouri. Dr.
Bohigian said he received no income from the university and benefited in no way
from the Monsanto grant.

Royal O. Cooper, executive secretary of the Missouri State Medical Association,
said many members felt that news reports on the dioxin contamination in the
state had been ''orchestrated'' by environmental groups and by Vietnam veterans
trying to use the issue to promote their argument that dioxin in Agent Orange, a
herbicide used to defoliate jungles in the Vietnam War, had injured them.

Many Missouri physicians say they feel that undue attention and money are being
devoted to dioxin, in contrast to other health hazards. Saying he knew of no
conclusive evidence that dioxin caused any human health problems apart from
chloracne, a severe pitting of the skin, Dr. Kenneth Smith Jr., president of the
St. Louis Metropolitan Medical Society, asserted that the public authorities
were remiss in not paying enough attention to such known medical hazards as
cigarette smoking and drunken driving. He called dioxin a ''tiny'' problem that
deserved a ''tiny'' amount of public money.

Although the A.M.A. leadership has retreated somewhat on the language of the
resolution, the organization's basic position, embodied in the 1981 report,
remains unchanged.

While the scientific evidence on dioxin remains ambiguous, medical experts at
the Federal Centers for Disease Control and the Environmental Protection Agency
are more concerned about the potential risk from the poison than are the
Missouri physicians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

'BOAT PEOPLE' IN BRITAIN: A VOYAGE OF HARD LUCK

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1004 words

DATELINE: LONDON, July 1


Three years have passed since the Golden Dolphin, a British ship, plucked Van
Thinh and other Vietnamese refugees from a wave-tossed boat in the South China
Sea.

Last month Van Thinh and another young Vietnamese refugee were sentenced to life
imprisonment here for the murder of seven Chinese employees of an illegal
gambling club in the Soho district of London.

His journey from salvation to a British prison cell has thrust the saga of the
''boat people'' back into public view long after about 16,000 were welcomed to
these shores and then nearly forgotten.

Unlike the United States and France, which are the hosts to the largest numbers
of refugees from Southeast Asia, Britain had no direct hand in the events that
led to the exodus from Vietnam. It was the humanity of British sea captains who
rescued the boat people at sea, and the decision by the Government in London to
relieve Hong Kong of the tide of refugees that swept into the port of the
British colony, that opened the doors for settlement here.

Gesture Now Seen as a Failure

Now, by most accounts, the humanitarian gesture by the British is seen as a
tragic failure.  The boat people reached Britain in the teeth of an economic
storm.  Two out of three were ethnic Chinese peasants and fishermen from
northern Vietnam who were forced to flee because of repercussions that grew out
of border conflicts with China. With little knowledge of English and few useful
skills in an industrialized society, more than 80 percent of those who want work
have been unable to find jobs in a country where the unemployment rate is more
than 13 percent.

''The married men sit in their council flats all day depressed because there is
no work for them,'' said Dang Phuoc Tri, a 33-yearold fieldworker with the
British Refugee Council, one of three organizations trying to help the
Vietnamese cope with life in Britain.

''They lose face with their families because they cannot provide,'' he said.
''They risk everything to get here, and now there is nothing for them to do.''

Marital discord and alcohol abuse are problems growing at an alarming rate among
the Vietnamese, researchers say.

Loneliness and Anxiety

For single men like Van Thinh, 21, the frustrations of life in Britain can be
even more pronounced. Many left Vietnam without families, and now they are
housed with other single Vietnamese men in bleak rooms in public housing or
hostels for the homeless in London and other British cities without prospects
for a job or marriage.

A generous social welfare system provides the Vietnamese with the same benefits
available to all British subjects. But loneliness and anxiety lead many of the
young men into illegal gambling parlors as an exciting outlet to an otherwise
drab existence.

Mah-jongg is a gambling tradition among the Vietnamese, and many in London
organize betting parlors in their homes. The small Chinatown in London offers
illegal clubs run by rings called triads linked with Hong Kong crime families,
according to the police.

Van Thinh, who worked as a baker's assistant, and Nguyen Vu Linh, now 24, were
among a group of Vietnamese ejected from a club one night last summer. Hours
later the club was set ablaze with gasoline, and seven staff members died in the
fire.

More Outbursts Are Feared

Refugee council fieldworkers worry that more violent outbursts are likely if
conditions do not improve for the Vietnamese men.  ''The resettlement of
Vietnamese in Britain was a noble humanitarian gesture but totally crazy in a
practical sense,'' Colin Hodgetts, the council's settlement services director,
said.

Unlike other modern immigrants to Britain from Commonwealth countries in Asia,
Africa and the West Indies, Mr. Hodgetts pointed out, the Vietnamese had no
natural base of support established here to help with housing or menial jobs in
family-run stores. Private agencies financed with Government money approached
the resettlement task with the notion that a few English lessons was all that
was required to integrate the Vietnamese into British society, he said.

A fear of ''ghettoization'' also shaped a Government policy to scatter the boat
people around Britain. A result of this, Mr.  Hodgetts said, was that Vietnamese
placed in Scotland and Northern Ireland suffered even stronger feelings of
isolation, removed from contact with anyone who spoke their language or
understood their culture.

'An Appalling Problem'

''Our minds in 1979 weren't moving as fast as our hearts,'' he added. ''It may
be the island mentality of the British that all you have to do is give some
stranger a few lessons in English and he'll fit right in. As an exercise in
social engineering, getting them slotted into British life actually turned into
an appalling problem.''

Many of the Vietnamese have been allowed to migrate to three urban centers where
fieldworkers from the agencies who speak Vietnamese or Chinese are available to
help move them through some of the thornier or confusing aspects of British
life. Financing for the agencies, however, is on a yearly basis, and Parliament
has been debating whether it should be continued.

There is just so much a social caseworker can do when the biggest need of the
Vietnamese is jobs. ''It puts a great strain on our workers,'' Mr. Hodgetts
said. ''They know what will help keep these families from being destroyed, but
they can't provide it.''

Mr. Dang, the caseworker, said he was worried that some of the Vietnamese would
be driven by despair to suicide. ''That has not happened yet, but a lot of the
men feel at the end of their rope.  They leave behind families to come to
Britain with hope to be better than what they were before. Now even hope is gone
from them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NETWORK OF 'ALTERNATIVE' PHILANTHROPIES IS FORMING

BYLINE: By KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 951 words


When George Pillsbury and Sarah Pillsbury, who are brother and sister, inherited
a share of the family flour fortune, they were interested in helping members of
minority groups, low-income families and disarmament activists by creating new
community foundations. So were other young heirs to great American fortunes.

That was more than a decade ago, and their movement now encompasses 14
philanthropies in 18 states.  At first some of the young organizers were
ridiculed as ''fat kittens'' who would soon grow bored. Skepticism has faded,
according to June Makela, executive director of the Funding Exchange, which
loosely links the groups.

''Several of our member groups now have 10-year track records and we've proved
we're a solid organization,'' she says. The newest member, a Chicago group
called Crossroads, was welcomed to the network recently.

Members of the network frequently describe the component groups as
''alternative'' foundations because they support groups once considered too
controversial or too new to get money from established philanthropies.

It Started in Philadelphia

Mr. Pillsbury, 34 years old, said: ''The movement started at Philadelphia in
1971 with the Bread and Roses Community Fund. The organizing grew directly out
of opposition to the Vietnam War and concern about civil rights. There was a
wish to fund social activism.''

Bread and Roses developed the concept that the choices on awarding grants should
be left to a board, which should represent community groups, and should be
headed by leaders from the inner city. Soon after, a group of young people of
inherited wealth began pulling together a similiar community-run philanthropy in
San Francisco, the Vanguard Public Foundation.

The Pillsbury heirs have begun to campaign publicly for funds, relinquishing
their earlier anonymity. ''Be spontaneously generous - double what you planned
to give,'' Mr. Pillsbury said, opening a drive in Greenwich Village one evening
to collect money for one of New York's alternative philanthropies, the North
Star Fund.

She Doubles Her Gift

Minutes later, listening to Margarita Lopez tell of the struggle to preserve
cheap housing on the Lower East Side, one guest impulsively announced a $600
contribution, twice what she planned to give, she said. The event brought in
$25,000 and many more pledges.

North Star, created four years ago, recently moved into a town house at 135 East
15th Street, convenient to many of the downtown groups it serves: Housing
orgnizations on the Lower East Side, union organizers in Chinatown and black and
Puerto Rican coalitions.

''At North Star we have arrived at the end of the beginning,'' said Toby
D'Oench, 29, a founder, who invested a share of his inheritance in the group and
believes it is ready to campaign more aggressively for outside money.

North Star made 85 grants totaling $130,000 last year. The two largest, $4,000
each, went to local disarmament rallies and to the New York Committee for
Occupational Safety and Health, which works with unions, environmental
organizations and health technicians to improve workplace conditions.

While North Star was planning its public appeal in Manhattan, on the West Coast
the Liberty Hill Foundation of Santa Monica was holding its Upton Sinclair Award
Dinner, honoring the television performer Mike Farrell for his support of such
issues as prison reform, women's equality and homosexual rights.

Liberty Hill was created in 1976 by a few wealthy donors, including Miss
Pillsbury. ''We definitely have felt a need to reach out and broaden our base of
support,'' Miss Pillsbury said, ''and people who came to the dinner were from
many progressive constituencies.''

Liberty Hill has not been conspicuous, she said, even though it was an early
supporter of groups that have won national attention. She cited a successful
campaign for legislation against discrimination in housing against families with
children, saying it ''began with a few angry women.''

All Run by Community Activists

The philanthropies, North Star, Liberty Hill, Vanguard and, in Boston, the
Haymarket Peoples Fund, were all started as grass-roots organizations run by
local activists. Miss Pillsbury said, ''We did not see the point to outsiders'
coming in with advice and money and telling a community what to do.''

Speaking of North Star's goals, Mr. D'Oench said, ''I don't like cliches, but I
would say we want to help people fighting oppression, injustice and wanting more
control over their own lives.''

Their goals are reflected in the groups' publications. A handbook by the
Vanguard group is called ''Robin Hood Was Right.'' A smaller booklet, written
largely by Mr. Pillsbury, is aimed at young people who inherit wealth.

''Inherited money presents problems of all kinds,'' the booklet says, inviting
its readers to join a group that meets regularly to talk about the anxieties of
those who get rich ''via the lottery of birth.'' Potential contributors are
urged not to be put off by critics who say support for social change amounts to
''class suicide.'' It also asks for tough decisions on husbanding wealth for the
next generation.

Mr. Pillsbury acknowledges that this question is no longer academic, showing a
photograph of his 10-month-old son. The fourthgeneration Pillsbury scion wears a
red T-shirt that reads: ''Question authority.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Marsha Bonner, Toby D'Oench, Lynn Campbell and
June Makela

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE ROLE OF 'BARNACLES' IN FOREIGN AID

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1348 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 4


Congress doesn't want the Palestine Liberation Organization ''or any other
guerrilla type organization that has engaged in acts of terrorism'' to receive
foreign aid funds.

Nor does Congress want to grant funds to Communist nations or to Afghanistan,
Argentina, Chile, Angola or Turkey except in special circumstances. Nor does it
want foreign aid to be used for family planning, abortions, gifts to officials
of foreign governments or nations that are more than six months in arrears on
repaying loans to the United States.

These are among more than 100 restrictions, called ''barnacles'' attached to the
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and amendments to it.  It is the current law
governing the disbursement of foreign aid. The restrictions, which have
accelerated in the wake of Vietnam and Watergate, are defended by Congressional
supporters as the only way Congress can assert its influence over foreign
policy.

''These things come about, in part, because of frustration with the executive
branch,'' said Representative Lee H. Hamilton, Democrat of Indiana. ''It's a
result of the activist stance of the Congress on foreign policy questions. Years
ago there were few barnacles, because Congress was very passive, very compliant
with the executive branch.''

Opponents argue, however, that the restrictions tie the hands of the President,
who has the primary responsibility for formulating foreign policy. ''Everybody's
a Secretary of State around here,'' said Representative Henry J. Hyde,
Republican of Illinois. ''It's an exercise in power. You get a kick out of
meddling in foreign policy.  It's an aphrodisiac.''

Restrictions on El Salvador

Most Congressional experts do not believe that these restrictions were affected
by the recent Supreme Court decision invalidating the legislative veto. This is
because they are part of the legislation signed by the President and do not
enable Congress to halt Presidential actions after the fact.

The most recent barnacles involved restrictions on military aid to El Salvador,
which were adopted by both the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the House
Foreign Affairs Committee. Both panels recommended that the military sales be
conditioned upon the President's certification of improvements in the areas of
human rights and criminal justice, as well as upon efforts by the Salvadoran
Government to enter into negotiations with opposition forces in an effort to
achieve a political solution.

''It's a troubling thing,'' said Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, the Kansas
Republican who wrote the El Salvadoran restrictions adopted by the Foreign
Relations Committee. ''It seems to me that both the House and Senate are looking
at these restrictions as ways of keeping our hand in shaping foreign policy.''

''There's a real danger that we can get so involved in dotting the i's and
crossing the t's that it's a little like the Lilliputians tying up Gulliver,''
she added. ''If Congress was involved earlier and more deeply, we might not have
to resort to the restrictions.''

Presidents, quite naturally, resent Congressional restrictions. ''I don't think
there's any secret of how anyone in the Administration feels about it,'' said L.
Craig Johnstone, director of the State Department's Office of Central American
Affairs. ''It isn't that we don't agree with what the conditions are, but they
end up being unrealistic.''

Leverage Sometimes Welcomed

''The general trend is not healthy for the conduct of foreign policy,'' he
continued. ''It decentralizes the decision-making process and makes it difficult
for the President to to represent the country in the conduct of foreign
affairs.''

But Presidents occasionally find that the restrictions give them welcome
leverage in negotiating with other nations. The Administration itself proposed
last March that foreign aid to Greece be conditioned upon a Presidential
certification that the United States had achieved ''a satisfactory agreement
with Greece in the current negotiations with respect to access to and use of
military facilities in that country by U.S. forces.'' This restriction, adopted
by Congress, was proposed in a letter from Powell A. Moore, Assistant Secretary
of State for Congressional Relations.

Some restrictions are cosmetic. When Congress previously asked President Reagan
to certify that the Salvadoran Government had made progress in human rights, for
example, Mr. Reagan complied, although many in Congress and in the
Administration doubted the accuracy of the certification.

''In the El Salvador situation, we were asking the President to certify the
uncertifiable,'' Mr. Hamilton said, ''knowing that the President would do so. It
distorted the whole debate.''

The barnacles have a way of remaining on the law books long after their
usefulness has ended. In 1981, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee tried to
get rid of redundant, outdated restrictions, such as a Turkish arms embargo that
had been suspended. But the symbolism of these restrictions proved potent, and
the lawmakers were ''unwilling to take on the controversial ones,'' according to
Larry Nowels, an analyst in foreign affairs at the Congressional Research
Service of the Library of Congress.

Role of Congress Is Key

The proliferation of such restrictions nonetheless causes considerable concern
on both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue. Senator John Tower, Republican of Texas,
said: ''We may well be in a situation today which is analogous to that of the
late 1930's, when America's inability to play a more active role in world
affairs helped permit the Axis to realize its objectives without serious
challenge. During this period, Congress tied the President's hands, with
disastrous consequences.''

At the core of the debate is the question of the role of Congress in foreign
affairs. Mr. Tower argues that 535 members of Congress, with different
philosophies, regional interests and objectives, cannot forge a unified foreign
policy that reflects the interests of the United States as a whole. Nor can they
negotiate with foreign powers, meet the requirement for diplomatic
confidentiality nor respond decisively to swift changes on the international
scene.

But others argue that the Constitution grants Congress certain powers that
bespeak considerable involvement in foreign affairs.  These include the right to
declare war, raise an army and advise and consent to appointments. In addition,
of course, Congress has the power of the purse.

Consultation Recommended

In their view, ''the barnacles are a legitimate and necessary exercise of our
Constitutional responsibility,'' in the words of Representative Stephen J.
Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn. ''We learned in Vietnam that the President is not
necessarily the fount of all wisdom. Congress has no monopoly on wisdom either.
Prospects are enhanced when both Congress and the President play a role.''

Mr. Hamilton said that instead of the barnacles, ''the best thing would be
consultation between the President and the Congress, but the executive branch
usually has other things on its mind. The only way to get their attention is a
restriction.''

Jerel A. Rosati, a professor of government at the University of South Carolina
who previously studied the issue at the Congressional Research Service,
concludes that despite widespread misgivings, the involvement of Congress will
deepen.

''The days of constant Presidential supremacy in most areas of foreign policy
appear to have come to an end,'' he said.  ''Congressional involvement and
influence will continue unless a global calamity occurs which creates a chronic
and constant state of national emergency for the U.S.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Chinks in the Armor

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 915 words


Procurement, Soviet-Style

''It's eating us up,'' the high official complains. It's worst with electronic
equipment, 60 to 70 percent of which is of such poor quality it has to be remade
or scrapped. ... The waste on military uniforms is enormous, but missiles are
bad, too. ... Managers seem to have no interest in assuring quality, workers are
poorly trained, production controls are inadequate and design seems impervious
to manufacturing requirements.

This can only happen, of course, in an economy where market forces and
competition have ceased to discipline quality, where a monolithic bureaucracy
would rather its suppliers comply with its whims than the law of supply and
demand. But these complaints are not from the Soviet Union. They're from the
Pentagon, as uttered by Rear Adm.  Frank C. Collins, the director for quality
assurance at the Defense Logistics Agency.

Admiral Collins was enlarging on the prior complaints of the Deputy Secretary of
Defense, Paul Thayer. A former chairman of the LTV Corporation,

Mr. Thayer told a meeting of military contractors that their costs could be
reduced by 10 to 30 percent if they made equipment right the first time.

The United States Government is planning to buy $94 billion of arms this year.
If 20 percent of that cost, the midrange of Mr. Thayer's estimate, is
attributable to careless production, the taxpayers are wasting almost $20
billion.

There is a cure for at least some of the problems Mr. Thayer and Admiral Collins
describe: competition. The Pentagon has almost succeeded in abolishing real
competition among its suppliers.  Predictably, the manufacturers have responded
with excessive prices and inferior quality. According to a review by the Defense
Science Board, the awarding of contracts to competing manufacturers of the same
products could result in savings up to 20 percent on the average contract.

The Pentagon's senior officials have had the courage to diagnose a debilitating
illness. Let them not flinch from applying a proven corrective.
Duds and Lemons, American-Style

An unreliable auto is bad enough; how much worse if it's your tank or fighter
plane that's a lemon, prone to breakdown or seize-up in the midst of battle.

Weapons should meet the highest reliability standards, but the Defense
Department hates to find flaws that might delay procurement.  According to
Senator William Roth, the Delaware Republican, more than $33 billion worth of
weapons now in production have not been properly tested for safety, reliability
or combat readiness.

These include complex systems like the Aegis, a cruiser that costs $1 billion a
copy, and the Phoenix missile, which costs $1 million.  The Aegis is intended to
protect the fleet against such threats as surface-skimming cruise missiles. But
the Navy has failed to develop a suitable practice target, and so, says a
General Accounting Office report, the cruisers are being deployed with no proof
that they can perform as intended. The Phoenix, with which F-14 fighters have to
defend the fleet's perimeter, has been inadequately tested for the same reason.

Mr. Thayer says Pentagon tests are realistic, but production sometimes has to
begin during testing because a weapon might become obsolete. But recalling
weapons for retrofits adds heavily to cost.  Even when tests reveal problems in
time, they're often ignored.  According to a RAND Corporation review of
acquisition during the 1970's, production was begun with weapons that achieved
only 20 to 75 percent of their performance goals.

''Proper testing and institutional attention to its results are unlikely,''
notes a defense consultant, George Kuhn, in a recent Heritage Foundation
re-port, ''as long as testing remains under the auspices of the research and
development community that spawns new equipment.''

This conflict of interest lives both in the services and in the Pentagon's
research directorate. An ''independent'' testing office created in the last
testing-reform campaign actually reports to the Director of Defense Research and
Engineering, Richard DeLauer - the same official who is responsible for
developing new weapons.

The remedy that Mr. Roth and 16 other senators propose would be a truly
independent testing office in the Defense Department. Its director would be
subject to Senate confirmation and have the authority to manage all weapons
testing.

Another needed reform is test by competition -pitting rival systems against each
other under realistic battlefield conditions, and buying the winner. This was
tried with notable success in the 1970's but was ''dropped because of
institutional resistance,'' says Mr.  Kuhn.

For the first 18 months of World War II, the Navy had to fight with dud
torpedoes that ran too deep or failed to explode. Fighter aircraft in the early
stages of the Vietnam War were lost because their designers, gung-ho on
missiles, had removed the guns. In its unprecedented military spending spree,
the Administration shows signs of repeating these mistakes.

What reputable argument can be made against testing weapons thoroughly and
realistically? The Pentagon needs a lemon law more than Detroit ever did, and an
independent judge to compel rejection of armor-plated turkeys.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 6, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FILES SHOW DIOXIN MAKERS KNEW OF HAZARDS

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 3160 words


The Dow Chemical Company knew as early as the middle 1960's about evidence that
exposure to dioxin might cause people to become seriously ill and even die, but
the company withheld its concern from the Government and continued to sell
herbicides contaminated by dioxin to the Army and the public, according to
documents opened to public inspection yesterday.

The documents were released by a Federal district judge on Long Island who is
hearing a multibillion-dollar lawsuit by 20,000 Vietnam era veterans against
several chemical companies.

The records provide the fullest account to date of what chemical companies knew
about the dangers of dioxin and when they knew it.  Second-hand accounts of
Dow's knowledge of the dangers of dioxin contamination have been published, but
the documents opened to inspection yesterday provide for the first time a
detailed look into the company's own records on dioxin.

The documents suggest that Dow and other chemical companies shielded from the
Government their information that one of the herbicides, Agent Orange, contained
dangerous levels of dioxin. Agent Orange was used in huge quantities by the
Government as a defoliant in the Vietnam war.

Dow, whose research on herbicides has long been relied on by the Government, has
maintained that, aside from a skin disease known as chloracne, the company did
not know of any harm to humans from dioxin.

Yet one of the documents shows that in 1965, at a time when the Government was
purchasing millions of pounds of Agent Orange, Dow's toxicology director wrote
in an internal report that dioxin could be ''exceptionally toxic'' to humans,
and the company's medical director warned, ''Fatalities have been reported in
the literature.''

Phillip Schneider, Dow's manager of media relations, said yesterday that''we are
not aware of any human fatalities related to 2,3,7,8-TCDD,'' the most potent
form of dioxin. He said that the references to fatalities in the documents must
have been to other substances and that Dow's experiences with its own workers
had shown no long-term health effects from chloracne.

He and other chemical company representatives also said they had given
information to appropriate Government officials and that, in addition, the
Government knew at least as much as the companies did about dioxin.

'Conspiracy' Is Charged

But Victor John Yannacone Jr. and David Dean, lawyers representing Vietnam
veterans suing the companies, charged the companies in court briefs with
''outright conspiracy'' to mislead the Government on the dangers of dioxin.

Mr. Dean said the original order from the Army specified that the herbicide
supplied had to be nontoxic to humans and animals.  The documents are among
several hundred thousand company memorandums, letters and files turned over by
Dow and other corporate defendants in the lawsuit by the Vietnam veterans, who
claim injuries to themselves or their children as a result of exposure to Agent
Orange and other herbicides. The four-year-old nationwide lawsuit has been
consolidated in Federal District Court in Uniondale, L.I., before Judge George
C. Pratt Jr. The jury trial is not expected before next year.

At the request of the companies last year, the briefs and attached exhibits were
allowed to be submitted under seal, closed to public examination, unlike other
court papers. Last week, Judge Pratt accepted the recommendation of Sol
Schreiber, a special master named to oversee the preliminary litigation, and
ordered unsealed the papers that had been submitted in connection a motion by
the companies to dismiss the suit, a motion the judge had denied.  Documents
unrelated to the dismissal motion remain under seal.

The defendant companies, in addition to Dow, which has its headquarters at
Midland, Mich., are the Monsanto Company of St.  Louis; the Diamond Shamrock
Corporation of Dallas; Uniroyal Inc. of Middlebury, Conn., and T.H. Agriculture
and Nutrition Company Inc. of Kansas City, Mo. Five other chemical companies
were dropped as defendants, but some of their documents remain part of the case.


Growing Debate on Dangers

The release of the new data comes at a time of growing public debate over the
dangers of dioxin. There is general agreement that dioxin, an impurity formed in
some chemical manufacturing processes, can cause death and serious injuries in
laboratory animals. It is also agreed that exposure can cause chloracne in
humans and that dioxin is highly toxic if swallowed. But, beyond that, there
remains great dispute over its effects on people, and the documents released
yesterday do not resolve the issue.

However, the unsealed records provide extensive details about the chemical
companies' concern about dioxin, including this new information:

- As far back as the 1930's, Dow workers contracted skin disorders from exposure
to what now appears to have been dioxin, and company scientists had some
evidence that exposure could lead to serious illness and death.

- Over the years, a pattern of chloracne outbreaks related to dioxin appeared
among workers in widely scattered chemical plants.

- Dow and other companies shared with one another anxiety over these illnesses
and other findings about dioxin, but the companies withheld their concern and
some of their scientific information from the Government. When Dow in 1970
warned the Defense Department about the dangers of Agent Orange, military
officials declared that they were then hearing about the problem for the first
time.

Dioxin and Health Data

Dioxin, the substance at the core of the controversy, denotes a family of 75
compounds called dibenzo-para-dioxins, composed of benzene molecules and oxygen
atoms. The most potent of these is known, from its chemical structure, as
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-pdioxin, or TCDD. According to accounts in Dow
documents, TCDD is an impurity that was commonly formed under conditions of high
temperature in the production of trichlorophenol.

Trichlorophenol is used to make 2,4,5-trichlorophenol, which is used to make
2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxycetic acid, or 2,4,5-T, a herbicide that kills plants by
artificially overstimulating the growth hormone. Agent Orange is a 50-50 mixture
of the esters, or inorganic salts, of 2,4,5-T and another herbicide,
2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, or 2,4-D.

Particularly in the early 1960's, the documents show, dioxin produced in making
the trichlorophenol ended up in the 2,4,5-T and at concentrations of up to 140
parts per million in one company's product. Later Dow, which had been producing
some of the cleanest 2,4,5-T, recommended that the military not use any product
with more than 1 part per million.

Dow Was Biggest Supplier

Dow was not the first company to make Agent Orange for the defoliation and crop
destruction campaign that ran from 1962 to 1970. But, according to a 1975 Air
Force history of herbicide use in Southeast Asia, Dow became the largest of nine
contractors, providing, at a price of $7 a gallon, nearly one-third of the total
12.8 million gallons supplied to the Government.

Because of the way the law is structured, the veterans, in order to win their
case, must prove that Dow and the other defendant contractors knew more than the
Government about the possible dangers of Agent Orange.

The defense of the chemical companies, in turn, is based on their contention
that whether or not they shared all their information with the Government, the
Government knew from its own research and resources at least as as much as the
companies about any dangers from the herbicide.

The released documents contain several references to human deaths from dioxin
exposure. They do not say exactly where the deaths are supposed to have occurred
or how many people died.

'May Be Fatal'

In a Dow company report called ''Chloracne Dow Experience,'' a section headed
''Chloracne in Humans'' states: ''Usually not disabling but may be fatal.'' A
chronology notes that in 1955 ''severe cases including some suspected
fatalities'' occurred in Germany.

Dow's medical director, Dr. B.B. Holder, cited the dangers of dioxin in his
review of a major outbreak of chloracne at Dow's Midland, Mich., plant in 1964.
The outbreak, which afflicted 50 workers, none of them fatally, coincided with a
stepping up of production of trichlorophenol, a precursor of Agent Orange, to
meet growing war needs.

''The clinical picture of the disease is one that primarily affects the skin,''
Dr. Holder wrote. ''In extreme exposures to certain chlorinated compounds, a
general organ toxicity can result. This is primarly demonstrated in the liver,
hematopoietic and nervous systems.'' Hematopoietic refers to the body's
blood-forming system.

The stimulation of certain skin glands produces multiple blackheads along with
bacterial cellulitis, he said. ''Many patients demonstrated continuation of the
skin lesions several years after complete removal from the exposure.''

After the skin manifestations, Dr. Holder went on, may come the onset of
''psychopathological and other systemic findings. Their occurrence is seen only
in extreme exposures and has a direct dose relationship. Fatalities have been
reported in the literature. There is no specific treatment for this disease.''

But the Army, as early as 1959, had also encountered data on deaths connected
with dioxin. According to a document still partly classified, Dr. Friedrich
Hoffman, a chemical warfare specialist and chief of the Agents Research Branch
at Edgewood Arsenal, Md., reported that he learned in Europe ''startling
information'' about the toxicity of a compound he identified as dioxin. He said
it has caused ''several deaths of workers in the plant.''

In court in May, Mr. Yannacone said that Dr. Hoffman's secret report concluded
''that dioxin should not be used for chemical warfare because it is too
deadly.''

Early Problems

In the 1930's, Dow introduced a line of chlorophenol woodpreservatives called
Biocides. According to a 1975 Harvard University doctoral dissertation on dioxin
by Robert William Baughman that is quoted in part as a court exhibit to the
veterans's case, Dow had hardly begun marketing the chemical when reports of
severe chloracne associated with the chlorophenols began reaching the medical
literature. One case in 1936 reportedly involved 300 to 400 Mississippi lumber
workers stricken with ulceration, severe pimpling or thickening of the skin,
urinary disturbances or leg cramps.

The following years brought other outbreaks. In 1949, Mr. Baughman reported, 228
workers at a Monsanto 2,4,5-T plant in Nitro, W.Va., developed chloracne as the
result of an industrial accident. Other symptoms, he said, included ''severe
pains in skeletal muscles, shortness of breath, intolerance to cold, palpable
and tender liver, loss of sensation in the extremities, demyelination of
peripheral nerves, fatigue, nervousness, irritability, insomnia, loss of libido
and vertigo.''

Chloracne problems continued to plague the Nitro plant for the next 20 years. In
1968, the medical director of Monsanto, Dr. R. Emmet Kelly, wrote in a brief
memo on the situation in Nitro: ''I don't want to be cynical, but are there any
employees in the Department who don't have chloracne already?''

'Dreaded Substance X'

In 1955, according to to the Dow chloracne history, a West German company, C.E.
Boehringer Sohn, sought information about chloracne from the Givaudan
Corporation, a maker of hexachloraphene, which later was also found prone to
dioxin contamination.

Givaudan referred the request to Dow, and Dow responded with a letter to
Boehringer ''describing the hazards and precautions for safe handling of
2,4,5-trichlorophenol.''

In 1957, the Dow account continues, Boehringer sent Dow and other known
trichlorophenol manufacturers an account of its research on chloracne. The
Boehringer letter described the ''danger points in the process and the limits
which had to be observed in order to avoid producing acne exciter in
trichlorophenol and in 2,4,5-T acid.''

The ''exciter'' or irritant, the ''dreaded substance X,'' Boehringer reported to
Dow in 1957, was tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin - TCDD.

This ''remarkable letter'' was sent to all makers of trichlorophenol, according
to another Dow document entitled ''Chloracne Dow Experience.'' But, the same Dow
document noted, the ''letter was filed and forgotten.''

Pattern of Illness

The next few years witnessed chloracne outbreaks at various herbicide plants.
In 1963, Dr. Richard W. McBurney visited a plant of the Diamond Alkali Company,
later Diamond Shamrock, in Newark, N.J., a site found in recent weeks to be
heavily contaminated with dioxin.

Dr. McBurney wrote that he saw similarities with a disease known as Porphyria
Cutanea Tarda: ''This disease is a disease of the blood forming elements of the
body in which the hemoglobin of the red blood cells is broken down and
essentially the spleen, liver and kidneys are affected to a greater or lesser
extent, depending upon the ingestion of such a chlorinated benzene.''

A spokesman for Diamond Shamrock in Dallas said that the company had known of
the chloracne problem and contacted the appropriate public officials for help.

Meetings to Develop Strategy

The 1964 outbreak of chloracne at Dow's Midland plant stirred considerable
concern, although the workers seem to have suffered no lasting consequences. But
complaints from Dow customers and word that the Government was asking questions
prompted a series of meetings to develop a strategy for avoiding Government
regulation.

On March 19, 1965, Dow invited representatives of Monsanto, Diamond Alkali, the
Hooker Chemical Company and the Hercules Powder Company to Midland to discuss
''problems of health'' associated with findings of ''highly toxic impurities''
in 2,4,5-trichlorophenol and related materials.

At the March 24 meeting, Dow discussed its recent chloracne outbreak and its 25
years' experience testing its chemicals on rabbits' ears. The meeting, according
to a Diamond Alkali representative, E.L. Chandler, ''was obviously designed to
help us solve this problem before outsiders confuse the issue and cause us no
end of grief.''

Letter Warns of Consequences

Shortly afterward, on June 24, 1965, Dr. Verald K. Rowe, toxicology director for
Dow, wrote to Ross Mulholland, bioproducts manager of Dow Chemical of Canada.
The letter noted the dangers of dioxin and warned of consequences to Dow.

''As you well know,'' he wrote, ''we had a serious situation in our operating
plants because of contamination of 2,4,5-trichlorophenol with impurities, the
most active of which is 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin. The material is
exceptionally toxic; it has a tremendous potential for producing chloracne and
systemic injury.

''One of the things we want to avoid is the occurrence of any acne in consumers.
I am particularly concerned here with consumers who are using the material on a
daily, repeated basis such as custom operators may use it.

''If this should occur, the whole 2,4,5-T industry will be hard hit and I would
expect restrictive legislation, either barring the material or putting very
rigid controls upon it. This is the main reason why we are so concerned that we
clean up our own house from within, rather than having someone from without do
it for us.''

The letter concluded: ''I trust that you will be very judicious in your use of
this information. It could be quite embarrassing if it were misinterpreted or
misused.''

Informing the Government

Some of the released documents suggest that Dow and other companies, while
exchanging with each other information about dangers in the product, withheld
key data from the Government.

On April 22, 1963, a Dow official, C.L. Lynn, director of registration for the
Bioproducts Department, wrote to Brigadier General Fred J. Delmore of the United
States Army Munitions Command, Chemical-Biological-Radiological Agency, at the
Army Chemical Center in Maryland.

He wrote: ''We have been manufacturing 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T for over ten years. To
the best of our knowledge, none of the workmen in these factories have shown any
ill effects as a result of working with these chemicals.''

On another occasion cited in the documents, another chemical company became
aware that the Government's testing of its Agent Orange mixture was less
accurate than its own. But the company, Hercules Inc., which was later dropped
from the lawsuit by Judge Pratt, withheld its method because, a Hercules
researcher noted, ''It is possible that their method may be giving beneficially
higher analysis, particularly on 2,4-D, than our own method.''

'Taken Out of Context'

Robert Hessler, a spokesman for Hercules in Wilmington, Del., said yesterday
that the memo was being ''taken out of context'' and that the employees involved
were no longer there to provide further information.

In 1970, records show, Dow officials met with military officials to share their
concerns over dioxin-contaminated Agent Orange. It followed this up with a
letter to the Secretary of Defense, Melvin R. Laird, that noted that the
Pentagon was considering reinstituting its defoliation program in Vietnam.

The letter said in part: ''There is abundant evidence that
2,3,7,8-tertachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin occuring as an impurity in 2,4,5-T is highly
toxic.'' It urged the Secretary to set specifications to insure that products
with no more than one part per million of dioxin be used.

Dr. Robert Darrow, a military official who had met with Dow executives several
months earlier in the Pentagon to receive the same information, recalled later
in a deposition that he was ''surprised'' to hear Dow's warning.

''In other words,'' he said, ''this represented information that we were
receiving for the first time in this respect on the dioxin situation.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Table of how dioxin is formed (Page B10) Chart of
simplified form by which TCP is made (Page B10) photo of Victor John Yannacone
and David Dean (Page B10) photo of Judge George C. Pratt Jr. (Page B10)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 6, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SUMMARY OF MAJOR ACTIONS BY NEW YORK LEGISLATURE IN '83

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 4966 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, July 5


The 206th session of the Legislature was the first chance for the new Governor,
Mario M. Cuomo, to make his mark on the state government. He won swift approval
for most of his nominees to state posts, and came to a harmonious agreement with
the legislative leaders on a new state budget - including nearly $1 billion in
taxes.

He put forward dozens of proposals, some old and some new, to improve criminal
justice, to increase his control of the government and to fulfill campaign
promises. Some, such as his $1.25 billion ''Rebuild New York'' bond issue,
succeeded. Others, such as public financing of political campaigns and
restructuring of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, were rejected or
left for future years.

After months of sluggish deliberations, the Legislature came to life in the
final weeks of the session and reached agreement on some difficult issues. It
adopted a new pension plan for state workers, a major revision of rent
stabilization laws, a plan to relieve local goverments of much of the burden of
Medicaid, a new privacy code and a law to protect new-car buyers.

By the time the Assembly recessed, at 2:35 A.M. on June 28, the Legislature had
passed and sent to Governor Cuomo 1,137 bills of 15,019 introduced. About 600
bills await Governor Cuomo's signature or veto.

Following are the major actions of the 206th session:

Finance

Contending that the state faced a deficit of $1.8 billion, Governor Cuomo
proposed a state budget calling for nearly $1 billion in new taxes and fees,
sharp cuts in programs and a reduction of 14,000 jobs, including 9,400 layoffs.

For the first time in four years a budget was adopted by the April 1 deadline.
To reach agreement, spending was increased by $180 million, mainly for education
and mental hygiene, while other programs were cut by a total of $115 million.
Most of the layoffs were averted and many of those who were laid off were
quickly rehired.

Mr. Cuomo was forced to give way on some taxes, adopt others and accept a
''sunset'' provision on some, meaning the taxes will expire after a set period.
The Governor said he had made good on a campaign pledge not to increase taxes on
business, personal income or sales.

As part of the budget, state workers were permitted to receive extra retirement
credits for retiring early. The program was expected to attract 4,200 workers,
but more than 8,000 signed up, causing manpower problems in some agencies. The
Legislature voted to give local governments outside New York City the right to
join in the program.

School aid was increased by $122 million above the Governor's proposal, much of
it to be paid out in the state's next fiscal year.  Mr. Cuomo gave way on his
efforts to reduce the disparity between wealthy and poor school districts.

Though Mr. Cuomo expressed some doubts about whether the state could afford it,
the budget as adopted included $359 million for a state takeover of some local
Medicaid costs. He supported an expanded five-year program that would have
provided local governments with a total of $6 billion, but abandoned the
proposal after facing opposition.

Eventually the Senate majority leader, Warren M. Anderson, a Republican of
Binghamton, won agreement on a more modest plan that, if continued for five
years, would provide $3.2 million to local governments.

Mr. Cuomo also called for $10 billion in new investment over the next five years
for jobs, construction, high-technology research and other programs, through a
combination of state, Federal and private money. A key element was a $1.25
billion bond issue for road, bridge, mass-transit and waterway projects.

After agreement on the bond issue was reached last week, the Assembly passed the
bill. The Senate is scheduled to vote on it July 12. If approved, it would go to
the voters in November.

Taxes and Fees

Legislation Signed

Imposes a tax of 10 percent on profits from real-estate transactions of $1
million or more.  Increases the tax on cigarettes by 6 cents, to 21 cents, and
boosts taxes on long-distance telephone calls, alcoholic beverages and
realestate transfers.

Raises tuition by $300, to $1,350 a year, at four-year colleges of the State
University system, and raises dormitory fees by $150.  Raises tuition at the
City University by $150, to $1,200 a year.

Imposes $39 million in fees on hospitals to pay for the state's cost of
regulating them.  Increases auto registration fees and charges for park and
beach admission.  Repeals a 2 percent tax on the gross receipts of 19 large oil
companies. The tax had been passed and signed earlier this year. It was replaced
with a temporary tax increase of 2.5 percent, which will be applied only on oil
products of a larger group of petroleum companies.

Authorizes Nassau County to increase its sales tax by one cent on the dollar,
from seven and one-quarter to eight and one-quarter cents.

Allows disabled homeowners to claim tax exemptions for home alterations related
to their disabilities.

Legislation Killed

Would have imposed sales taxes on theater, concert and movie tickets, dry
cleaning, haircuts and other services.  Would have imposed an additional 20
percent sales tax on cigars, pipe tobacco and related products.

Criminal Justice

Legislation Signed

Gives the State Urban Development Corporation the authority to issue $380
million in bonds to build new state prisons, including a 1,000-cell
maximum-security facility in the South Bronx.

Allows a judge to authorize wire-tapping to investigate securities fraud and
hazardous-waste dumping.  Raises the maximum prison term from 30 years to 50
years for three or more violent felonies committed in a series of related
incidents.  Reduces minimum penalties for possessing more than a pound of
marijuana or selling more than 10 pounds.  Increases the rights of crime victims
by allowing suits by victims to be filed up to a year after an assailant is
convicted, and making it illegal for an employer to penalize a crime victim who
takes time off to testify in court.

Authorizes payment of up to $20,000 for support of families of good Samaritans
killed while attempting to stop a violent crime.  Allows the Crime Victims
Compensation Board to pay for counseling for the families of murder victims.

Requires a judge to consider requests by crime victims for restitution in
sentencing a criminal.  Revokes for one year the driver's license of anyone
convicted of more than one drunken-driving felony within 10 years. Creates the
new crimes of vehicular homicide and vehicular assault for killing or injuring
someone while driving drunk.

Requires that local jails make provisions to allow kosher food to be delivered
to prisoners who are awaiting arraignment.  Raises fines for procuring alcoholic
beverages for minors.

Legislation Passed

Would create a sentencing-guidelines commission to set fixed sentences for
crimes.  Would allow the Government to seize the profits of a crime, with
profits from drug dealing going to a fund to prevent drug abuse.  Would make it
a felony to wear a bulletproof vest while committing a violent crime.  Would
increase the penalties for running red lights to up to $100 and 15 days for a
first conviction and up to $250 and 90 days for three or more convictions.

Would allow state prisoners and some parole violators with less than a year left
in their terms to live in neighborhood halfway houses rather than prison.

Would increase penalties for vandalism against religious institutions.  Would
increase penalties for auto stripping and bail jumping.  Would require blood
tests for drunken drivers following serious accidents.  Would require immediate
suspension of a driver's license when a driver with a previous conviction within
five years is charged with drunken driving or a related felony.

Would establish ''fair-treatment standards'' for crime victims.  Victims would
be kept informed of court proceedings. Would repeal the limits on the amount of
compensation the state can pay for medical expenses for crime victims.

Legislation Vetoed

Would have restored the death penalty for certain crimes.  Would have barred New
York City and other local governments from issuing gun-control rules stricter
than state law.  Would have increased penalties for animal fighting.  Would have
required state agencies to hold public hearings at least 45 days before taking
steps to build a state prison.

Legislation Killed

Would have established a new verdict of guilty but mentally ill.  Would have
allowed judges rather than lawyers to question potential jurors.  Would have
limited immunity offered to witnesses who testify before grand juries.  Would
have prohibited peremptory challenges of jurors based solely on race, religion,
national origin or sex.  Would have allowed limited television coverage of court
proceedings.

Banking and Insurance

Legislation Signed

Broadens the type of investments insurance companies are permitted to make.
Creates a temporary commission to study deregulation of the banking, insurance
and securities industries.

Allows bank customers with day-of-deposit to day-of-withdrawal savings accounts
to close their accounts early without a loss of interest.

Requires the State Banking Board to establish regulations on how long a bank can
take to clear checks.  Allows banks to offer variable interest rates for
personal, highereducation and home-improvement loans, and prohibits banks from
penalizing borrowers who pay back loans early.

Extends for four years a 1980 law allowing banks to charge up to 25 percent
interest for most loans.  Allows state-chartered banks more freedom to open
out-of-state branches and invest money out of state.

Legislation Passed

Would require insurance companies to distribute information to customers about
the state's laws on drunken driving.  Would require group accident and health
insurance policies to cover diagnosis and treatment of alcoholism.

Business and Labor

Legislation Signed

Requires state agencies that use more than $100,000 in steel on construction
projects to use American-made steel unless it is deemed in the public interest
not to do so.

Requires employers of full-time domestic workers to buy disability insurance to
cover on-the-job illness or injury.  Permits police officers to join and
contribute to political organizatons.  Increases the pension benefits of 300,000
public employees, under the Tier 3 plan, while cutting back on other benefits
such as automatic cost-of-living increases and death benefits.

Increases unemployment insurance from the current $125 a week to $175 a week in
September, and $180 a week by next July, as well as increasing benefits for
worker compensation and worker disability.

Legislation Passed

Would extend the requirement that arbitrators consider New York City's ability
to pay when awarding contract settlements with publicemployee unions.

Would extend for two years agency-shop provisions, requiring all government
employees under union jurisdiction to pay fees to the union.

Would authorize written examinations for securities salesmen.  Would increase
the penalties for commercial bribery.  Would reduce the minimum age of newspaper
carriers from 12 to 11.  Would make the theft of telecommunications services a
crime.

Education

Legislation Signed

Extends provisions barring discrimination in admissions policies to private
business and trade schools.  Provides that teachers, architects, nurses and
other professionals who commit serious drug violations may lose their licenses
for professional misconduct.

Legislation Passed

Would exempt some standardized tests from the state's truth-intesting law, which
requires test copies to be filed with the State Education Department every three
years.

Would include New York City teachers' aides and other paraprofessionals in the
Teachers Retirement System.

Consumer Affairs

Legislation Signed

Delays the effective date of the bottle deposit law until Sept. 12.  Bars
new-car dealers from changing the interest rates on automobile loans once the
cars are ordered.  Requires most retailers to bill buyers when goods are shipped
rather than the date they are sold.  Increases protection for consumers sued by
creditors.  Requires that co-signers of loans be informed of their financial
liability.  Increases restaurant, motel and hotel liability for clothing left in
cloakrooms from $75 to $300, and forbids checkrooms from posting notices saying
they are not responsible for checked property.

Legislation Passed

Would increase protection for owners of defective cars, including the right to
sue for a new car or a refund if a car cannot be repaired.

Would limit the liability of owners of garages and parking lots to $25,000 a car
for stolen or damaged property.  Would require inspections of amusement park
rides and issuance of permits to operate them.  Would require that food products
marked with two or more prices be sold at the lower price.

Welfare and the Family

Legislation Signed

Allows blood tests to be used in paternity suits and allows such suits up to
five years after the birth of a child.  Provides state reimbursement for legal
fees, rental deposits and minor repairs associated with setting up new community
residences for the mentally retarded.

Provides increases in monthly Supplemental Security Income payments - $17.70 for
individuals this month and $9.70 in January. Payments to couples will go up
between $26.55 and $35.40 this month and between $15.60 and $19.40 in January.

Legislation Passed

Would require fingerprinting and criminal checks of prospective foster-care
parents, applicants for state child-care jobs and operators of private
child-care agencies.

Would establish a central state registry to record information about adopted
children and their natural parents.  Would make it illegal to park a car in
front of sidewalk curb ramps for disabled people.  Would create a statewide
registry of persons wishing to adopt hardto-place children.
P.U. FIRST ADD

Housing

Legislation Signed

Extends rent regulation for New York City and Nassau, Suffolk and Westchester
Counties and transfers administration of the rent system to the state. Makes
sweeping changes in rent-stabilization laws, including reducing leases to two
years and requiring registration of apartment rents by landlords.

Authorizes $12.5 million this year and a total of $50 million over four years to
build housing for the homeless.  Extends New York City's principal housing
tax-incentive program, J-51, for developers who renovate rundown buildings. But
it limits benefits for luxury housing.

Prohibits the eviction of tenants who live in limited-dividend housing projects
but whose income exceeds eligibility standards for the project. Instead, they
may be required to pay more rent.

Would extend to tenants in Nassau, Westchester and Rockland Counties protection
from eviction from buildings that are in the process of converting to
cooperatives and condominiums.

Legislation Passed

Would prohibit discrimination on the basis of age in the sale, rental or leasing
of any housing accommodation, property or commercial space.

Would allow local governments to prohibit the eviction of elderly and disabled
people from apartments in buildings being converted to cooperatives or
condominiums.

Health and Environment

Legislation Signed

Bars the dumping of raw garbage in landfills on much of Long Island.  Increases
penalties for the taking, possession or sale of endangered wildlife species, and
raises fees for shellfishing permits to provide funds for enforcement efforts
against illegal shellfishing.

Prevents the operation of liquefied natural gas facilities statewide until April
1, 1985.  Permits nursing homes to allow residents to keep one dog or cat as
part of a pet therapy program.  Prohibits door-to-door distribution of most drug
samples unless the sample is handed to an adult.

Legislation Passed

Would provide for the state to assume Medicaid costs of most local governments
for long-term health care. The program, if continued for five years, would save
local governments $3.2 billion.

Would authorize $5.2 million to combat AIDS, acquired immune deficiency
syndrome, through research and public-information and community counseling
programs.

Would provide $1 million to legal-services agencies and other groups to
challenge the Federal Government's decision to deny disability benefits.

Would provide rules under which hospitals in New York City may request diversion
of ambulances to other hospitals.  Would establish a planning system for
handicapped children who turn 21 years old and no longer qualify for state
child-care services.  Would extend through 1988 exemptions from property taxes
for homes near the Love Canal section of Niagara Falls.  Would limit the
authority of a medical examiner to perform an autopsy over the religious
objections of surviving relatives or friends.

Would set standards for disposal of waste oil and prohibit improper disposal.
Would require the State Health Department to certify laboratory tests of waste
water, drinking water, solid waste and air samples.  Would set up a central data
bank for tracking illegal clam digging.  Would provide for some Medicaid
coverage for terminally ill people in hospices.  Would require stores selling
chewing tobacco to post signs stating that the sale of tobacco to persons under
18 years of age is prohibited.

Would increase the training and certification requirements of people who apply
pesticides and provide for the registration of pesticides and companies that
apply them.

Would protect from civil suits trained volunteers who assist in the cleanup of
hazardous wastes.  Would prevent the taking of striped bass shorter than 18
inches either by sport or commercial fishermen.

Transportation

Legislation Signed

Requires that children between the ages of 4 and 10 wear safety belts in cars.
Provides $1.8 million to put photographs on driver's licenses.  Allows Staten
Island residents to buy tokens at reduced rates for the Verrazano-Narrows
Bridge.  Requires bicyclists to come to a full stop before entering a highway
and move into the left lane before making a left turn.

Legislation Passed

Would establish an Inspector General for buses, subway and commuter rail lines
run by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.  Would establish a state
public-transportation safety board to investigate mass-transit accidents.  Would
allow the M.T.A. to buy buses without competitive bidding.  Would prohibit the
use of earphones while operating a motor vehicle.  Would require the Triborough
Bridge and Tunnel Authority to spend $25,000 for air-conditioning toll booths.
Would stiffen penalties for unauthorized taxicab or limousine drivers operating
at New York City airports.  Would give the New York City Taxi and Limousine
Commission administrative authority over owners and operators of unlicensed
cabs.  Would require towing companies to immediately notify the police when they
remove a car that is unlawfully parked on private property.  Would require a
discount toll on bridges to Broad Channel and the Rockaway Peninsula in Queens
for tokens purchased in bulk.  The discounts are already offered under
administrative rules.

Would require driver-education courses to include information on the dangers of
driving while under the influence of drugs or alcohol.  Would establish a system
of registration for off-highway motorcycles when they are used on public
roadways.

Legislation Killed

Would have added members to the board of the M.T.A. and required that the
chairman serve at the pleasure of the Governor.

Energy and Utilities

Legislation Signed

Requires the State Public Service Commission to audit large telephone companies.


Legislation Passed

Would require the collection of sales tax on pay-phone calls over 35 cents.
Would require that the costs to Long Island consumers of the Shoreham nuclear
power plant in Suffolk County be phased in over 10 years, if feasible.

Would give the Public Service Commission the power to set reduced utility rates
for industrial customers in areas of high unemployment and surplus utility
capacity.

Would allow utilities to sue for triple damages people who unlawfully tamper
with or install utility services.

Legislation Killed

Would have reorganized the Public Service Commission to give consumers more say
in the regulatory process.  Would have established a voluntary Citizens Utility
Board to challenge utility rate-increase requests.

The Elderly

Legislation Signed

Requires the State Crime Control Planning Board to issue reports every three
years on programs to protect the elderly from crime.

Legislation Passed

Would prohibit landlords or real-estate brokers from refusing to rent or sell to
the elderly.  Would create a sliding income scale to determine eligibility of
the elderly for tax exemptions.  Would provide immunity to any person, official
or institution reporting abuse of people more than 60 years old.  Would give the
Family Court jurisdiction over requests by grandparents for rights to see
minors.  Would offer reduced-rate hunting, fishing and big-game licenses to the
elderly.

Legislation Killed

Would have eliminated mandatory-retirement rules in government and private
industry.  Would have prohibited eviction of elderly or disabled people.  Would
have required landlords to grant lease renewals to those 65 or older who have
been tenants for at least 10 years, unless they were at least three months in
arrears or faced eviction for violating the lease.

Government

Legislation Signed

Requires the Commission on Judicial Nomination to give the Governor a choice of
seven candidates rather than five for nomination to the State Court of Appeals.

Enacts a previous agreement requiring that state workers must contribute 10
percent of their health-insurance premium on individual plans.

Lowers from 72 to 70 the age at which public retirees may be reemployed without
a reduction in pension benefits.  Requires local zoning appeal boards to open
their meetings to the public.  Requires state agencies to consider whether any
Federal regulations overlap before drawing up state regulations.

Legislation Passed

Would appropriate $6.8 million for a one-year program of emergency aid to areas
of the state with chronic high unemployment.  Would require public authorities'
investment practices to be approved by the State Comptroller and the Public
Authorities Control Board.

Would extend state conflict-of-interest laws to officers of public authorities.
Would create a New York State Conservation Corps to train and employ youths to
maintain and improve the cultural and natural amenities of the state.

Would require the Governor to submit annually a five-year plan for
reconstruction of the state's networks of roads, bridges, masstransit systems,
ports and waterways.

Would require the State Comptroller to issue annual reports to the Legislature
on outside consulting contracts by state agencies.  Would allow judges to award
legal fees to small businesses that challenge government regulations.  Would
require state agencies to conduct an analysis of the possible impact of proposed
rules on small business.  Would require state agencies to review paperwork
requirements and take steps to reduce paperwork.  Would allow former judges to
serve as judicial hearing officers in the state court system.  Would allow the
State Court of Claims to award attorney's fees.

Legislation Vetoed

Would have extended to 45 days the 30-day period for public comment on proposed
state regulations.  Would have given the Legislature power to suspend a state
agency's rule for 60 days.

Legislation Killed

Would have provided for a state income-tax checkoff to finance campaigns of
major-party candidates for statewide office.  Would have moved the date of New
York's Presidential primary to May 22.

Sports

Legislation Signed

Permits wheelchair-bound persons to hunt deer if they have a hunting license.

Legislation Passed

Would require the use of thumbless gloves in most boxing matches and would
require boxers to undergo brain scans annually and after a knockout.

Would extend the franchise of the New York Racing Association to the year 2000
and create a capital-improvement fund for the Aqueduct, Belmont and Saratoga
tracks.

Would provide $545,000 for snow-making equipment for Gore Mountain in the
Adirondacks.

Miscellaneous

Legislation Signed

Outlaws going bottomless in public.  Requires political action committees to
report spending on ballot questions, such as bond issues, to the Board of
Elections.  Requires the Department of Motor Vehicles to issue cards to
nondrivers that can be used as identification.  Protects freelance photographers
from being sued when newspapers or magazines print pictures they have taken
without the subject's consent.

Extends until June 16, 1985, the period in which Vietnam veterans exposed to
Agent Orange may sue manufacturers in state court for related injuries or death.

Extends state benefits to Vietnam veterans who served up to May 7, 1975.

Legislation Passed

Would restrict access to many government records to protect the privacy of
individuals.  Would allow artists to take legal action if their work, after
sale, is defaced, altered or mutilated, damaging their reputations.  Would
require undeclared but active candidates for public office to file
financial-disclosure reports with the Board of Elections.  Would allow the
Legislature to raise prizes awarded in local games of chance. A constitutional
amendment would have to be approved by voters.

Would require cable-television companies to offer subscribers a device enabling
them to limit reception of public-access programs or programs for which an
optional premium charge is imposed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Governor Cuomo

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 7, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ERRONEOUS HEARSAY ABOUT KISSINGER

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 384 words


To the Editor:

With respect to Anthony Lewis's June 26 column (on Seymour Hersh's book ''The
Price of Power: Kissinger in the Nixon White House''), I submit the following
comments.f Anthony Lewis's admiration for Seymour Hersh serves as the guideline
for his own articles, then I can at last understand their content. It has been
my observation over the years that the entire thrust of every word Seymour Hersh
writes is hearsay aimed solely at discrediting, demeaning and even destroying
the reputation of those who have had extremely responsible positions in times of
national crisis. Such an approach can only be taken by those who never have had
any real responsibility and never will. They are not qualified.

As to the specifics of the Lewis column on Henry Kissinger, I was there and this
is not hearsay:

* Kissinger did not ''personally'' pick the targets in Cambodia.  The chairman
of the Joint Chiefs and the Joint Staff did this.

* Kissinger did not communicate secretly with field commanders in Vietnam
without the knowledge of the Secretary of Defense or the chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff. If such communication took place, the immediate reaction of the
field commander would be to pick up the telephone and inquire of the chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, ''What goes on here?''

The facts are that every outgoing message directing combat action in Vietnam was
written by the Joint Staff and initialed by the chairman of the J.C.S. and the
Secretary of Defense. In other words, while the Secretary of Defense may have
been overruled on occasion by the President, he was never bypassed.

* The statement that guards were ordered to exclude Secretary Laird from a
secret communications center is so ludicrous that it is unworthy of comment.
Melvin Laird would not have tolerated that for one second.

I don't consider the article in question to be consistent with your famous
motto, ''All the news that's fit to print.'' THOMAS H. MOORER McLean, Va., June
28, 1983 The writer, a retired admiral, was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff from 1970 to 1974.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING AND HANOI BATTLING WITH BULLET AND BUFFALO

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1845 words

DATELINE: PINGMENG, China, July 3


A sugar-cane farmer pointed out of his front door to the street where he said a
Vietnamese sniper shot his only son as he was spreading turnips out to dry 16
months ago.

The 16-year-old boy died in the hospital of the nearby town of Beidou. Chinese
authorities offered sympathy and $15 for the coffin, the farmer, Huang Tongqi,
said. ''But it wasn't China's fault,'' he said. ''It was Vietnam's fault.''

''Some Vietnamese are always firing at us,'' Mr. Huang said bitterly. ''We ought
to take whatever retaliation we think is needed. Otherwise, we will have no
tranquillity and peace here.''

Once, Vietnamese peasants came to the market in Pingmeng, a village nestled
among fields of ripening corn and rice in a narrow green valley bisecting the
Chinese-Vietnamese border. Ho Chi Minh was hidden here by sympathetic peasants
when he was on the run in 1944.

Potshots From the Mountains

That was before relations soured. Now, as local residents tell it, Vietnamese
soldiers hidden in the lush foliage of the mountains overlooking Pingmeng take
potshots. They killed a water buffalo while farmers ducked for cover in the
latest incident last month.

Pingmeng is also a victim of verbal battles on both sides that have exaggerated
the situation along what is undoubtedly China's tensest frontier. Last April,
amid reports of artillery duels, the New China News Agency reported that
Vietnamese gunners had shelled the Pingmeng area for two days, blowing up the
primary school, hospital, bank and other buildings.

But a group of foreign correspondents permitted to visit the border of China's
Guangxi-Zhuang Autonomous Region found Pengmeng only slightly damaged. Though
the journalists were warned not to stand in the middle of the street, the
village's 660 or so inhabitants, mostly ethnic Zhuangs, kept to their porches to
avoid a scorching sun as much as Vietnamese sharpshooters.

The school headmaster, Li Hong, showed where three mortar rounds landed in the
schoolyard last April after the 140 children went home. Chen Huicai, director of
the hospital, said it was closed 16 months ago because it was only yards from
the border, and he went on to point out where the concrete floor had been
punctured by a dud howitzer shell.

3 Unexploded U.S. Shells

The tension in Pingmeng, like elsewhere on the border, seems more cumulative
than constant. Three unexploded 105-millimeter artillery shells, made in the
United States in 1973 according to their markings, were on display at the
Pingmeng commune office. The shells, apparently captured by the North Vietnamese
in their 1975 victory over the South, had been fired at the Chinese.

There were also 82-millimeter mortar shells and a score of wooden antipersonnel
mines labeled in Russian, of the kind that China let pass through to Vietnam.
The villagers said they had dug up the mines on their side of the border. Soviet
binoculars and a Kalashnikov assault rifle captured from a infiltrator completed
the exhibit.

''The hostile situation along the border is totally created by the Vietnamese
authorities,'' said Wei Youxin, the commune director.  ''The people of Pingmeng
are witnesses to the transformation of relations between China and Vietnam.''

When China backed the Vietnamese against first the French and then the
Americans, the two Communist allies said they were ''as close as lips and
teeth.'' Zhang Guoliang, a senior foreign affairs official in Guangxi, described
the relationship today as one of ''rifle to rifle and cannon to cannon.''

'The Border Is Closed'

Friendship Pass, through which millions of tons of Soviet and Chinese military
hardware was funneled to the Vietnamese, closed in late 1978, leaving 100
Chinese railway wagons stranded in Vietnam.  The pass was only opened again in
February 1979, when Chinese tanks and infantrymen swept down on a 16-day
invasion that the Chinese euphemistically termed ''a counterattack in
self-defense.''

''Some people here now call it Friendship Pass without friendship,'' Zeng Fushen
told journalists visiting the pass as they looked across to a sun-bleached
Vietnamese flag flying above the dense vegetation. Mr. Zeng, an official
responsible for border security in Pingxiang County, said: ''Nothing goes
through now. The border is closed.''

Even the mail has stopped. Tran Hau To, a young ethnic Chinese refugee from
Vietnam, said the only way he could write home to his mother was to forward
letters through his brother in the United States.

Chinese officials contend that the good will began to evaporate before the end
of the Vietnam War, when arguments over some disputed areas of the border were
thrashed out with sticks and rocks. ''These provocations took place while our
military aid was still going by train through Friendship Pass,'' Zhang Guoliang
said.

898 Hanoi 'Provocations'

He told reporters at a briefing that the Vietnamese began to cross the border to
sow crops, plant trees and dig ditches in order ''to claim that the land belongs
to Vietnam.'' Then infiltrators started sneaking across to plant mines or ambush
peasants, he said.

In 1982 regional authorities tallied up 898 Vietnamese ''provocations'' along
Guangxi's rugged border, with 42 Chinese casualties. Through May of this year,
they reported 230 ''provocations'' in which they said 9 Chinese were killed and
32 wounded.

Chinese-Vietnamese relations, which have stopped short of an outright diplomatic
break, worsened when Hanoi started expelling ethnic Chinese from Vietnam in
1978. Some 217,000 refugees poured across the Guangxi frontier.

China was also upset to see Vietnam move closer to the Soviet Union and offer
the former American base at Cam Ranh Bay to Soviet naval vessels, exposing
China's southern flank.

Aside from disagreeing over parts of the Chinese-Vietnamese border defined in
the 1880's between the French colonialists and the imperial Quing dynasty, China
and Vietnam both claim sovereignty over the Paracel and Spratley Islands and
their potentially oil-rich offshore waters in the South China Sea.

Cambodia an Angry Issue

But China has reacted most angrily to Vietnam's military occupation of Cambodia.
It has been suspected of using the border tension to tie down Vietnamese troops
who might otherwise be sent to crush the Peking-backed guerrillas of the ousted
Pol Pot regime.

China has denied this and charged that Vietnam foments border clashes to get
more aid from the Soviet Union. Still, Mr. Zhang pointedly told reporters that
the frontier could only return to normal ''if the Vietnamese authorities stop
the border tensions and withdraw from Cambodia.''

While Mr. Zhang said Vietnam's ''continuous armed provocations make peace and
tranquillity impossible on our border,'' a weeklong journey through southern
Guangxi suggested that life went on normally. Barely a few miles north of the
frontier, peasants in conical straw hats plowed their paddies with water
buffaloes, shooed flocks of ducks or pedaled bicycles laden with produce along
dirt roads lined with eucalyptus trees.

Communications antennae protruded from some of the forested hilltops, but there
were no tanks, artillery or combat troops visibly deployed. Officials explained
that the Chinese forces were well dug in and camouflaged. ''There are positions
on both sides here,'' Mr. Zeng said, with a gesture toward the limestone cliffs
dominating Friendship Pass.

Militia on Defense Duties

A border guard commander at the pass said Vietnamese soldiers had thrown a hand
grenade only that morning. But another soldier said the Vietnamese were using
the grenade to kill fish in a pond along the frontier.

While armed border guards in olive green jackets and blue trousers man road
checkpoints and frontier observation posts, the local militia, which includes
all civilians from 18 to 35 years of age, is entrusted with other routine
defense duties.

Zheng Yukui, the militia commander in Napo County, where Pingmeng is located,
said the 10,000 available militiamen under his control carried the same light
weapons as the regular army but had to ask permission to return fire. ''We don't
shoot back if no one is hurt,'' he said.

The Chinese are less reticent about their war of words with Vietnam. Pingmeng's
otherwise deserted customs post has three big amplifiers facing Vietnam. Ling
Jinglin, the commune's deputy chairman, said these sometimes broadcast details
of Chinese ''policy'' in Vietnamese. He complained that loudspeakers on the
Chinese side ''broadcast anti-Chinese propaganda.''

Mr. Zheng, the militia commander, said the Vietnamese sent water buffalo with
propaganda tied around their necks across the border and that the Chinese sent
them back.

Periodic Prinsoner Exchanges

The Chinese and Vietnamese allegations about mining, spying and kidnapping tend
to be mirror images. In Pingmeng Mr. Wei said that since 1979 two local
inhabitants had been killed and four abducted, of whom one was still missing.
Mr. Wei did not say whether they had been seized while on militia duty.

Prisoners are periodically exchanged at Friendship Pass. Mr. Zeng, Pingxiang
County's border security official, said 14 such exchanges had taken place since
1979, involving more than 1,700 Vietnamese and 300 Chinese. Another one is
planned later this month.

In Pingmeng, the violence remains real enough that one bridge has been bricked
up on the side facing the border so that travelers will not become a target for
snipers. In case of shelling, the village's residents duck into tunnels under
the main street and in a nearby hill. Mr. Ling said they spent a total of three
days and nights in shelters during the shelling last April.

Nong Bingliang, a 58-year-old peasant, hoisted her trouser leg to show
correspondents a gunshot scar on her thigh. She said she was shot by a sniper in
April 1982 while riding on a tractor. Liang Xinghan, the tractor driver, was
also hit in the left leg. ''We didn't disturb them and we didn't cause them
trouble,'' Mr. Liang said. ''I don't know why.''

With no prospect for better relations, about 130 of Pingmeng's residents who
were evacuated before China's 1979 invasion of Vietnam have stayed away.

In Beidou, Mou Xueshen said he commuted 10 miles back to Pingmeng by bus to
plant and harvest his crops. He said he had no idea when he would move back home
with his wife and two children.

But Huang Tongqi, grieving for his son, insisted he would remain in Pingmeng.
''This is my native place; I don't want to leave,'' he said. ''If the Vietnamese
fire one shot, we will fire back five.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of southeast Asia photo of Chinses soldier photo of
Chinese citizens

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

RULE-MAKING POWERS: AN AMERICAN DILEMMA

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 798 words


To the Editor:

The debate over the legislative veto and the Supreme Court's recent decision
concerning it can easily be confused by a misunderstanding of the history of its
origins.

he legislative veto appeared initially in the Overman Act of 1918, prepared
largely by President Woodrow Wilson and designed to give him greater authority
to reorganize the agencies created to cope with the World War I emergency. Its
reappearance in legislation for Hoover in 1932 was again a response to an
emergency, the deepening Depression. Both instances were based on Congress's
concern with efficiency and economy and both Presidents' interest in managing
emergency agencies more effectively.

The provision for a legislative veto in the Executive Reorganization Act of 1939
was designed to give the President greater authority in such reorganizations
while allowing Congress authority to overrule them within 60 days. It was a
simple and very specific device intended to balance the increase in the
President's authority to manage the Presidency with a Congressional power to
reject, but to reject specific proposals within a specific period of time.

Unfortunately, that way of presenting the history obscures another side of the
story, which was part of an entirely different debate.  Ever since 1914, jurists
had been commenting somewhat ruefully on the growth of administrative power in
American government. They were referring specifically to the independent
commissions and the Federal agencies created by Progressive-era reforms. They
saw in the new rule-making powers a possible drift toward the bureaucratic
systems of Europe. They quoted phrases like le droit administratif to describe,
somewhat pejoratively, governmental systems managed by courts and lawyers rather
than by responsible legislators and knowledgeable executives.

Through the 1920's, writers like Felix Frankfurter and A. A. Berle Jr. expressed
an uncertainty about the effects of such a transformation on American
government, but no doubts about the direction. The onset of the Great Depression
and the coming of the New Deal proved them right.

The battle has always been over delegation of growing administrative powers
required by a Federal Government increasingly involved in the detailed
management of national life. Unwilling to give expanded managerial authority to
the President and aware of the difficulties a legislative body faced in
attempting to exercise control, Congress continued the process of allowing what
it could not prevent.

The authority of administrative agencies grew apace, as did court systems for
dealing with the disputes that arose over the decisions and a Washington legal
profession skilled at mediating those disputes. Successive Presidents were
destined to look for ways to control what they politely called ''administrative
management'' but more angrily labeled ''the bureaucrats.''

Unfortunately, however, history played some dirty tricks on them.  Vietnam and
Watergate loomed as public symbols of their problems with executive power.
Monstrous millstones, they dragged everything else down with them. The split
between Presidential power and effective management was so badly obscured that
even the proximity of two recent Supreme Court decisions, the one on the
legislative veto, the other on passive restraints for automobile passengers,
appears to have gone unnoticed.

The first seems to say that Congress can no longer claim control over executive
actions of which it might disapprove. The second seems to say that the President
cannot claim control over actions of administrative agencies if he wants to
change them. Both decisions, taken together, would then suggest that
administrative agencies can still be independent of both the administrative and
the legislative branches of government.

What the Court has done, in fact, is to affirm the authority of the courts as
the only body capable of mediating the relation between the executive and the
legislative branches. I suppose I should be happy that some of my best students
are now going to law school. We're going to need them. At the same time, I have
great difficulty seeing the outcome as one intended by the framers of the
Constitution of 1787.  BARRY D. KARL Professor of History University of Chicago
Chicago, June 30, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ETHICS IN POLITICS;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1166 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 7


As far as Republican and Democratic campaign officials over the last two decades
can recall, the quantity and quality of information coming from the Carter
Administration to the Reagan campaign team in 1980 was not business as usual.

There are no published records or current contentions that White House
documents, some of them possibly classified, were ever previously offered to or
stolen by supporters of Presidential contenders. To these former campaigners,
the passing of documents, solicited or unsolicited, in 1980 was highly unusual.

But the passing of information orally from administrations to contenders and
vice versa, either offered or sought after, is not uncommon. Past campaign
officials report that there are numerous examples of sympathizers and
job-seekers passing on information.

The distinction between documents and talk and the difference between solicited
and unsolicited information seemed to be of some importance to a range or
political practitioners interviewed. But they were far from clear themselves on
what was legal or ethical or acceptable campaign behavior.

Mostly, they said it would be wrong and stupid, given the questionable utility
of most information and the possibility of getting caught, to mount an operation
to penetrate an opponent's camp, let alone the Government.

They Would Use Most Information

They also agreed for the most part that, whatever the moral issues and utility,
they would use almost any information, short of that involving national security
matters, that came their way to elect their candidate.

Precisely because they admitted that their behavior would not have been much
different from that of the Reagan campaign officials, and because of the
difficulty in making hypothetical moral judgments, those interviewed strongly
preferred not to be identified.

This did not appear to trouble Robert Gray, a former top Reagan campaign aide,
when he said in a television interview today that he could not recall receiving
documents from the Carter White House.

''Oh, I think you can debate whether or not it's right for someone to steal it
from the White House, if indeed some Carter employee did so,'' he said. ''But I
don't think you can debate whether or not any campaign has a right to use any
information that comes to its attention. Not at all. That's not only standard in
your profession, the press, it's standard in politics.''

Several top members of the Reagan campaign team have acknowledged receiving and
using hundreds of pages of briefing material prepared in the White House for
President Carter and Vice President Mondale.

David A. Stockman, one of these aides who is now director of the Office of
Management and Budget, said the material had been ''filched'' and that it was
''useful'' to him in preparing Mr. Reagan for the Carter debate.

James A. Baker 3d, another campaign leader, now White House chief of staff, has
said that William J. Casey, then campaign director and now Director of Central
Intelligence, gave him a looseleaf folder with Carter material. It is not clear
whether this is the same or different from the material Mr. Stockman used.

Richard V. Allen, who became President Reagan's national security adviser after
the campaign, has acknowledged receiving National Security Council staff papers
that he described as ''innocuous.'' It is not clear whether this material was
classified.

Concerted Effort Denied

The Reagan Administration has repeatedly said that no effort was made in the
campaign to organize a network of informers to penetrate the Carter
Administration. Thus far, no one has proved that there was an organized effort
to gather information.

Former Carter aides argue that the extent and nature of the material provided,
and the apparent confidence of the Reagan team of its authenticity, suggests
some concerted effort.

Most of the practicioners interviewed drew some distinctions. It is worse, they
said, to get information from the Government than for incumbents to get material
from contenders. Their point was that it is harder to make distinctions in
Government material from what is legitimately official or classified and what is
political.

To most campaigners, it is less ethical to seek the information than to simply
receive it. Passivity seems to count in making moral judgments.

Receiving documents is more questionable than getting the same information
orally, the practitioners said, adding that there is a sense of property about
documents. Besides, as one former aide put it, ''It's harder to prove any
wrongdoing from a conversation.''

The practitioners said they used a different yardstick in assessing campaign
information obtained by the news media. Almost all said the feeling was that the
news media, besides having the responsibility to inform, had special First
Amendment protections that did not validate others' acquiring such information.

''In a campaign,'' a former Democratic aide said, ''it becomes very important to
get some advance hint of what the other guy is going to do so you can prepare
your answers, not slip and say something foolish.''

Thus, the door and telephone are always open to people from opponents' camps -
and by all testimony, they do knock and ring.  In the 1960 campaign, someone
from the United States Information Agency provided a Democratic senator with
overseas polls showing that United States prestige abroad had declined under
President Eisenhower. Campaign aides to John F. Kennedy urged him to pass the
data to the news media, and he did. A Carter campaign aide tipped off a
newspaper in 1976 with a similar poll about President Ford.

In the 1964 Presidential campaign, there were persistent rumors that President
Johnson was wiretapping the headquarters of his Republican challenger, Barry
Goldwater, and vice versa. Nothing was ever proved.

In 1968, Richard M. Nixon was tipped off that Mr. Johnson was about to announce
a halt to the bombing of Vietnam and the beginning of peace negotiations. At the
same time, Hubert H. Humphrey, the Democratic candidate, was informed that a
Nixon supporter had suggested to President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam
that he try to delay the peace talks. Neither Mr. Nixon nor Mr. Humphrey made
use of the information.

The only proven cases of deliberate penetration concerned Mr. Nixon in the early
1970's. His aides were wiretapping people who had knowledge of the campaign
plans of then Senator Edmund S. Muskie, a Democratic Presidential hopeful. They
went much further in the 1972 Watergate break-in.

None of those interviewed felt that any of the information thus derived was at
all critical in the campaigns.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jerry D. Jennings

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PULL ALL ISRAELIS OUT OF LEBANON

BYLINE: By Shimon Peres

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1095 words

DATELINE: TEL AVIV


It is time for Israel to begin withdrawing its troops from all of Lebanon and to
replace them with alternative military arrangements -provided by the
multinational force and the militia of the Lebanese commander Maj. Saad Haddad -
that assure our security.

The Israeli armed forces are stationed in three distinct regions of Lebanon. In
the eastern region, parallel to the Syrian border, the Israeli Army faces the
Syrian Army. Syria is not trying to provoke the Israelis, but it is trying to
improve its political and strategic position - by strengthening its ties with
the Soviet Union, dominating and manipulating Palestine Liberation Organization
leaders, threatening the Lebanese and making life difficult for Israeli
soldiers.

In the central region - in the Chouf mountains and the Beirut area - the Israeli
forces are caught in the inter-ethnic and interparty clashes between Christians,
Moslems and Druze. Demographic changes have heightened tension in this region:
The Christians have lost their demographic ma-jority, and the other communities
are hoping, at least tacitly, that Israeli tanks will settle the discrepancies
between the new demography and the old constitution based on a Christian
majority. But the Israelis can only put out fires; they cannot eliminate the
sources of the conflagaration.

The southern region, from the Awali River to the Israeli border, is inhabited by
a Shiite Moslem majority, some Palestinian refugees and a Christian minority.
Major Haddad's forces have succeeded in establishing relative peace in the
region and in preventing the return of P.L.O. terrorists.

The commonly accepted view is that the Israeli presence in the eastern region -
in one place our troops
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Shimon Peres is leader of the Israeli Labor Party. are only 23 kilometers from
Damascus - exerts pressure on Syria to withdraw from Lebanon. But this very
optimistic assumption has not yet been proved, and I doubt whether it will be.
Even if we agree that Syria is not a Soviet satellite, it is today more than
ever dependent on the Soviet Union. And even if we assume that Russia is not
interested in direct conflict - neither between itself and the United States nor
between Israel and Syria - it is clear that Moscow is not interested in any
peace settlement arranged by the United States without the Soviet Union.
Certainly, Moscow would consider an overall evacuation of Lebanese territory an
undesirable American success. Should the Syrians withdraw, this would also
require the withdrawal of the P.L.O. units under its aegis on Lebanese soil (in
the Bekaa Valley and Tripoli). But as Damascus is pressing for the removal of
Yasir Arafat and for full control of the P.L.O. forces, it is doubtful whether
Syria will agree to withdraw or encourage the subsequent withdrawal of P.L.O.
units. Finally, Syria believes that Israel's present deployment along extended,
temporary lines is burdensome to Israel. Given that Syrian withdrawal is
unlikely, why should Israel pull out of eastern Lebanon? I do not know of a
single responsible Israeli politician who proposes that we remain on Lebanese
soil in the long-term future. In the long run, no one would remember the reasons
that brought Israel to Lebanon, but all would be aware of our presence on
territory that does not belong to us. Lebanon must not become our Vietnam.
Besides, the proximity of the Israeli and Syrian forces (in several places, the
distance between them is no more than several hundred meters) and the presence
of irregular forces could easily bring about a renewed confrontation - a third
round in the war in Lebanon. What would happen in the field should Israel leave?
In my opinion, the Lebanese Army and the multinational force must take the
Israelis' place in this region. According to the understanding reached in the
agreement between Israel and Lebanon, the multinational force (in this case, the
French) is to patrol the Beirut-Damascus highway. The multinational force, the
Lebanese Government and the Israeli Government must make it clear to the Syrian
Government that the present Syrian frontline will be viewed as a red line and
that any Syrian movement westward into Lebanon will be viewed as deliberate
escalation. As for the Chouf mountains and the Beirut area, there only the
Lebanese themselves can work out rules
for their own co-existence. In my opinion, it would be best for Israel to
withdraw from this region as soon as possible, and our American friends should
help establish alternative and effective military arrangements there. In
southern Lebanon, however, Israel is faced with a serious problem. In the last
year, 500 of our best young men have fallen, and about 2,500 have been wounded,
in order to insure that the Galilee will no longer be shelled by Katyusha
rockets. This is a very heavy and painful price. We would naturally not wish to
remove our army from the security belt of southern Lebanon without insuring
peace for Galilee. But here again, we cannot involve ourselves in a situation in
which we attempt to control the lives of another people. Luckily, in this region
as well, there is a a reasonable though imperfect alternative: reinforcing the
forces of Major Haddad. These forces are composed today of regular units (about
1,100 soldiers) and of a rural militia (about 600 men). The addition of several
hundred more soldiers will enable Major Haddad to establish order in the region,
while the Unifil forces already stationed in the area can be concentrated at the
entrance to the Palestinian refugee camps in order that no harm should come to
them.  The Lebanese Army can also help in this region, primarily in the northern
part - an arrangement that is already stipulated by the Israel-Lebanon
agreement. Israel itself would of course continue to keep an eye on what happens
in this area, on our northern border. The defense of the region can thus be
organized within two to three months, allowing Israeli soldiers to come home -
without sacrificing Israel's security. We must pursue de-escalation in Lebanon.
A temporary arrangement that perpetuates unnecessary military dangers without
advancing our political goals serves no one in the long run.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 9, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 636 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.  Answers appear on
page 44.

1. The man who posed for this picture is used to others posing for him. Who is
he and what was the occasion for the face-making?

2. In many parts of the world, rurally based revolutionary movements have been
thriving. But in one nation insurgents emerging from the jungle are defecting
from the outlawed Communist Party, which is losing its supporters, weapons and
prestige. What nation is it?

3. In the continuing disclosures about the use of President Carter's campaign
materials in 1980 by the Reagan organization, Richard V. Allen's name has
recurred. In what way?

4. Norma, the queen, and her colony of 50 to 100 subjects apparently died in
outer space. Identify them.

5. An experiment that was one of the biggest gambles in the history of particle
physics turned out to be a smashing success.  Explain.

6. Music called ''canto neuvo'' is creating discord in a Latin American nation.
Identify the nation and explain.

7. Continuing his offensive on education issues, President Reagan accused the
nation's second largest union of ''frightening and brainwashing American
schoolchildren'' and trying to ''manipulate curriculum for propaganda
purposes.'' What union is it?

8. This was the pride of the Yankees. Explain.

9. Business is picking up at the Whitechapel Bell Foundry in London, which
produced two of the world's most famous bells. Which bells are they?

10. The New York Court of Appeals ruled that testimony based on (hypnosis/lie
detectors/voice detectors) was unreliable and should not be allowed in court.

11. A new director says he is determined to reverse 20 years of neglect at one
of Europe's most venerable art museums, where hundreds of canvases have been
damaged by pollution and hundreds of others cannot be found. What museum is it?

12. ''Fellow fighters for freedom, we are with you!'' Who made this remark and
what were the circumstances?

13. The Supreme Court ruled illegal (disability awards/retirement
plans/unemployment pay/all of the above) that give men and women unequal
benefits.

14. This man could be seen recently hanging out at Battery Park City. Explain.

15. Dozens of lawyers lined up at the Supreme Court on the final day of its
1982-83 term, trying to guarantee that they would be the first to tell their
clients of a ruling that might involve billions of dollars. What was at issue
and what happened?

16. A man who, by hitting a homer, put his own stamp on the first All-Star Game,
was honored with a stamp of his own on the game's 50th anniversary. Who was he?

17. The French Government flew Massoud Rajavi by helicopter from his home in a
Paris suburb to Orly Airport. What were the circumstances and who is Massoud
Rajavi?

18. In the last five years, an activity known to the very young as BMX has
become one of the most popular children's sports since Little League baseball.
What is BMX?

19. Recently unsealed court documents suggested that some chemical companies
shielded from the Government evidence that herbicides containing dioxin might
cause serious illness. One such herbicide was used in the Vietnam War. By what
name is it known?

20. Four miles off of Egypt, divers are exploring what they are convinced is the
wreck of L'Orient. What was L'Orient?

21. Sotheby Park Bernet expected more than $1.5 million for ''Landscape With
Christ Appearing to His Disciples at the Sea of Galilee,'' the earliest signed
and dated painting by a Flemish master. It failed to sell. Who was the artist?

22. A black blood law was repealed in Louisiana. What did the law do?

23. ''I intend to take this salary.'' Who made this remark, what were the
circumstances, and how does the salary to which he referred compare with his
current salary?  Linda Amster

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 9, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CBS HALTS FILM ON NICARAUGA

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 44, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 394 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, July 8


CBS News announced today that it had scrapped a documentary on Nicaragua because
the producer who was preparing it had been suspended in connection with a
controversial documentary on Vietnam.

The documentary on Nicaragua was put on the shelf when George Crile was
suspended on June 15, Ann Morfogen, director of communications for CBS News in
New York, said today.

''What happens is that it goes into the scrap heap, to put it bluntly,'' said
Robert Chandler, vice president in charge of documentaries at CBS News.

''George Crile is so totally intertwined in the thing, we can't very well place
him on suspension and then use the material,'' Mr.  Chandler said.

Retired Gen. William C. Westmoreland filed a $120 million libel suit against Mr.
Crile and CBS News following the 1982 documentary about the Vietnam War.

Telephone Calls Were Taped

Mr. Crile was suspended for surreptitiously tape recording several telephone
conversations with former Defense Secretary Robert S.  McNamara and others in
preparation of the documentary on Vietnam.

''We have a very black and white rule in the CBS guidelines that you can't
record a telephone conversation without the express permission of the president
of CBS News or his designate,'' Miss Morfogen said.

Mr. Crile was scheduled to return to Nicaragua for his third and final trip to
complete the documentary when he was suspended. He had been working on the
project for more than a year.

CBS News planned to broadcast the documentary next month, when it was expected
that Congressional debate over United States aid to Nicaraguan rebels fighting
to overthrow the Sandinista Government there would be at its height.

Mr. Crile could not be reached for comment through the network.  Miss Morfogen
said she did not know how to get in touch with him. In an interview with The Los
Angeles Times on Thursday, Mr. Crile said he was heartbroken by the network's
decision.

''I thought it was a terribly important project, powerful material,'' Mr. Crile
said in the interview with The Los Angeles Times. ''I was trying to give people
an understanding of what the Government is that the Reagan Administration is
opposing and what forces inside Nicaragua the C.I.A. claims to be
representing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

READING AND WRITING;
Books Into Movies

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section 7; Page 39, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 886 words


The best way for an author to deal with Hollywood, Ernest Hemingway once
declared, was to arrange a discreet rendezvous at the state line: "You throw
them your book, they throw you the money, then you jump into your car and drive
like hell back the way you came." Certainly, the alliance between novelists and
film makers has been an uneasy one. In return for money and the promise of
reaching a larger audience, authors have seen their work subjected to all manner
distortion on the screen. Hemingway, himself, was appalled to discover that the
1932 version of "A Farewell to Arms" was shot with two alternate endings -- one
in which Catherine dies, as in the novel, and another in which she revives on
her sickbed and appears to live happily ever after. A version of Nathanael
West's "Miss Lonelyhearts" also featured a happy ending, and an early adaptation
of Melville's "Moby Dick" gave Ahab a "love interest" leading to marriage.

To complicate matters further, the movies have always relied on such traditional
narrative qualities as strong plot lines, boldly delineated characters and
heightened action -- things that the modern novel is less and less likely to
provide. And yet, none of this seemsto have daunted film makers intent on
adapting serious fiction. Movies have been made of "Ulysses" and "Finnegans
Wake" as well as several Alain Robbe-Grillet novels, and Harold Pinter wrote a
screenplay --published but as yet not produced -- of "A la Recherche du Temps
Perdu." In the last few years, movies of "Sophie's Choice," "The Frence
Lieutenant's Woman," "Endless Love," "Ragtime," "The Tin Drum" and "The World
According to Garp" have been made with varying degrees of success, and this
autumn will witness films of several works by prominent authors. E. L.
Doctorow's "Book of Daniel" will open in September, as will Graham Greene's "The
Honorary Consul," and Barbra Streisand's production of the I.B. Singer story
"Yenti" is scheduled for December. Shooting has begun on John Irving's "Hotel
New Hampshire," and Bernard Malamud's "The Natural" will go into production
later this month. There are also plans to film Marilynne Robinson's "Housekping"
and D. M. Thomas's "The White Hotel."

What can be expected of these movies? Even the best of screen adaptations
involve considerable changes. For one thing, a director frequently reshapes a
story to serve his own interpretation. David Lean, for instance, ignored most of
the larger social aspects of Dickens's "Great Expectations" to focus on the
story of Pip's coming of age; and Francis Ford Coppola simply used Joseph
Conrad's "Heart of Darkness" as a frame for his Vietnam movie, "Apocalypse Now."

Because films are far more schematic than novels and demand compression, there
is lots of room for such selective reshaping. In order to build narrative
tension, the screenwriter and director may re-shuffle the sequence of events;
they may eliminate characters -- Caddy's brother, Quentin, for instance,
disappeared entirely in the film version of "The Sound and the Fury" -- and they
may strip away subplots that do not advance the story. Ray Bradbury's script of
"Moby Dick" -- a version that did not give Ahab a love interest -- turned the
novel into a straightforward adventure story, ignoring most of the book's
philosophizing, and Harold Pinter's screenplay of "The French Lieutenant's Woman
similarly dispensed with most of Fowles's meditations on literature and history.

The change of medium also demands other, subtler alterations of language.
Dialogue that seems artless on the page may sound stilted and contrived when
spoken by actors -- Hemingway's naturalistic but stylized talk posed this
problem in many movies made from his books -- and beautifully written passages,
filled with nuance and wordplay, are often impossible to translate to the
screen. In addition, the explicitness of film tends to turn metaphor and symbol
into fact. Gatsby's romantic dream, for example, was reduced to a rich man's
fancy for a pretty girl.

Despite these problems, both films and novels want to tell a story, and in the
end they demonstrate a remarkable reciprocity. Dickens, who died 25 years before
the invention of motion pictures, is often cited for having anticipated numerous
cinematic techniques -- he employed the narrative equivalent of such devices as
the zoom and tracking shot -- and, as the director Sergei Eisenstein pointed
out, film is indebted to Dicken's pioneering use of montage-like effects.

Over the last few decades, such directors as Bergman and Fellini have
demonstrated the cinema's ability to portray interior states of mind and probe
philosophical issues. What's more, as film making has become increasingly
sophisticated, fiction writers have actually begun to appropriate some of its
methods. Novelists who write screenplay on the side observe that their script
work has taught them to write tighter, better-plotted stories, and many have
picked up the habit of "cutting" from scene to scene without exposition. No
doubt even those writers who would never think of setting foot in Hollywood owe
a debt to the movies. Nothing that he has seen about a film a week since the age
of 6, John Fowles once said, "This mode of imagination is far too deep in me to
eradicate -- not only in me, in all my generation."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOLLOW-UP ON THE NEWS;
William Calley Jr.

BYLINE: By Frank Emblen

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 157 words


In 1971, First Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. was convicted of murdering 22
unarmed civilians, including women and children, in the South Vietnamese hamlet
of My Lai. He was sentenced to life at hard labor, but actually served three
years under house arrest at Fort Benning, Ga.

Today, Mr. Calley lives near the Army post in a quiet section of Columbus, Ga.,
and works six days a week at the V.V. Vick jewelry store, which is owned by his
father-in-law. Customers say Mr. Calley, 40 years old, is the store's most
popular salesman. He married Penny Vick in 1976, and the couple have a son,
William Laws Calley 3d, who was 3 last month.

Mr. Calley refuses to talk to the press. He can be seen driving his
Mercedes-Benz or Ford Granada around Columbus or working in the yard of his
three-bedroom brick bungalow on Hilton Avenue where he has lived since 1977.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
Speak Softly About Dioxin

BYLINE: By Margot Slade and Wayne Biddle

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 404 words


A cache of several hundred thousand company documents released by a Federal
district judge last week may turn out to be a mother lode for Vietnam veterans
and a Pandora's box for some chemical manufacturers. The papers, handed to the
court in a class action brought by 20,000 vets who claim injury by exposure to
the dioxin-laden Agent Orange herbicide, suggest the companies have been less
than generous with their knowledge about dioxin hazards.

The defendant companies - Dow Chemical, Monsanto, Diamond Shamrock, Uniroyal,
and T.H. Agriculture and Nutrition (formerly Thompson-Hayward) - are linked by
their experience with producing the ingredients of Agent Orange. In a trial
scheduled to begin next spring in Uniondale, N.Y., the veterans will try to
prove that these contractors knew more than the Government about the dangers of
exposure to Agent Orange. The companies contend that the Government knew from
its own resources at least as much as they did.

The court records outline a history of industry concern over exposure to
chlorinated phenols, a category of chemicals prone to dioxin contamination. As
far back as the 1930's, Dow workers suffered outbreaks of the severe skin
disease known as chloracne.  Evidence accumulated over the years that this
affliction could lead to serious illness and death, though dioxin was not
identified as the specific culprit until 1957.

The documents suggest that while Dow and other companies exchanged information
among themselves, they skirted the subject with the Government. ''We have been
manufacturing 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T (Agent Orange's constituents) for over 10
years,'' a Dow official wrote to the Army in 1963. ''To the best of our
knowledge, none of the workmen in these factories have shown any ill effects.''

In 1965, while the Pentagon was buying huge quantities of Agent Orange for use
in Vietnam, Dow's toxicology director wrote an internal letter warning that
dioxin was ''exceptionally toxic'' with a ''tremendous potential for producing
chloracne and systemic injury.'' He expressed concern about danger to consumers,
because ''the whole 2,4,5-T industry will be hard hit and I would expect
restrictive legislation.'' The letter concluded: ''I trust that you will be very
judicious in your use of this information.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 10, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CELEBRATION IN THE SKIES OVER OSHKOSH

BYLINE: By Diane Ackerman

SECTION: Section 10; Page 9, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2296 words


DIANE ACKERMAN, a writer and poet, recently became a licensed pilot.  Her third
collection of poetry, ''Lady Faustus,'' will be published by William Morrow in
the fall.

For one week in August, in a sleepy, many-siloed city in Wisconsin, the skies
swarm with prehistoric shapes. More than three-quarters of a million people from
as far away as Australia, Singapore and Vietnam pour into motels called Budgetel
and Pioneer, take rooms in modest houses edging the exhibition grounds, or camp
out in sleeping bags under home-built planes with wings that make sundial
shadows on the grass. The pastures, normally full of Wisconsin's economy, are
mobbed by thousands of planes, each one tied down as if it would otherwise
escape.

The air is constantly abuzz, aroar, agrind, awhistle. Odd configurations float
across the sky: flying hex signs, a pair of scissors, bat wings with a lawn
chair underneath, a skewered egg, stalactites between two tongue depressors, a
rigid white swan dive.  For miles along the highways, cars are pulling off the
road, and people are standing beside the cornfields, mouths agape, staring at
the beautiful madness in the skies over Oshkosh.

The annual Experimental Aircraft Association Fly-In Convention and Sport
Aviation Exhibition began as a way to organize and celebrate the forms of flight
outside the F.A.A.'s jurisdiction - aerobatic flying, antique planes, warplane
replicas, ultra-lights, racing planes and home-built planes of varying levels of
sophistication and imagination.

Now it's the largest aviation event in the world, a crossroads for inventors, a
soapbox for the Experimental Aircraft Association (whose concerns are safety,
legislation and education) and a medieval fair for visitors who find brightly
striped tents for exhibition and refreshments, talks by NASA astronauts,
tethered blimps and balloons, nonstop air shows, planes being raffled, award
ceremonies, rides in a hulking green-black antique tri-motor, vendors selling
mugs, T-shirts and full-size executive jets, evening concerts by John Denver and
other performers obsessed with flying, as well as a gorgeous miscellany of
thousands upon thousands of shiny, groomed planes.

There are also 30 forums, with technical papers delivered by researchers from
NASA's Langley, Ames and Lewis Aeronautics Centers and hundreds of educational
workshops and exhibits.

But mainly there is the atmosphere, of mass obsession and undiluted wonder.
There are none of the 12 wars now at full spate around the world. There is no
inflation or crime rate or existential despair.  There is only flight, one of
the oldest puzzles, equally amazing to the Laplander as to the Bantu, the
constantly astounding thralldom of a bird, moth or aphid.

What's extraordinary about the Oshkosh Fly-In is the innocent relish at the
heart of it, a free-floating thrill identical in the children present, who are
being dragged out of cockpits into which they've climbed when no one was
looking, as in seasoned pilots who, despite their thousands of hours aloft,
still make buzz-buzz, puttputt sounds when they talk about some plane's
performance.

It draws couples with folding chairs, carrying plastic tote bags, handed out by
the Air Force, that say ''We Guard America's Skies.'' It draws ponytailed,
bare-chested, heavily jeweled young men in a time warp from the 60's. It draws
voluptuous entrants in the Miss and Mrs. Experimental Aircraft Association
beauty pageant. It draws self-reliant, backyard builders of small planes who
walk around with tool kits, hoping to be rallied to action. It draws film makers
and dentists and owners of used-car lots. And, of course, it draws the inventors
of planes, corporate or out-in-the-garage variety, who fly their sometimes
improbable-looking crafts to the grounds, and who put on displays in the daily
air shows at 4 P.M.

There are no jugglers and clowns but there are wing walkers, formation fliers
and daredevilry. The serious international aerobatic competitions take place in
Fond du Lac (15 miles away) in the week after the Oshkosh Fly-in, and some of
the aerobatic pilots fly (for free) at Oshkosh; most are strolling around,
gawking like everyone else.

''Do you miss your Pitts, dear?'' I heard the wife of Stephen Poleskie, the
aerobatic ace, say to her husband, who was watching a Pitts Special biplane do
snap rolls, hammerhead dives and other maneuvers, while trailing smoke. Mr.
Poleskie shook his head no, without shifting his eyes from the airplane, but his
right hand was moving unconsciously through an eight-point hesitation roll.

There are two classes of spectators: those with or those without a line pass,
which allows the holder to walk right up to the planes and inspect the
workmanship or eye the controls. Anyone involved in aviation, and therefore
alert to caution and courtesy around planes, can get one; even a student pilot's
third-class medical card will do, though, of course, it only states the bearer's
good intention, not accomplishment.

Other visitors must stand back a bit farther to admire the big black glossy
Stinson Reliant, with a bat's face and high hunched wings, or the cheeky little
lemon-yellow Fly Baby, or the row of candy-apple red aerobatic biplanes, The
Royal Jordanian Falcons, or the pink War-Hawk with a toothy grin painted on and
a bright red nose. A bullet-shaped home-built plane with an engine at the rear,
the Vari-Eze is so popular that whole fields are packed with them.  Resting nose
down on the grass, to make boarding easier, they look like rows of elephants
kneeling for their riders.

The Fly-In lasts a week, but many of the planes that leave early still seem
present at week's end: On the muddy, much walked-over ground are the grassy
silhouettes of planes, now winging back home, that stood long enough to protect
a T-shaped piece of pasture from mower, thunderstorm and feet. These grassy
ghost-planes are the softest spots to sit to watch the air show, and it makes an
odd apparition of real passengers on vanished ships.

Planes take off from the 6,700-foot runway at one-minute intervals all day long.
It's a little like Obeah: In a far field, a small jet or a World War II Mustang
or a Wizard-of-Oz tin-man-looking Trojan gets religion, and taxis down to the
access road paralleling the runway, just as a sailplane or Gypsy Moth may be
taking off. It's a bustle of fascinating planes for the onlooker, but a
nightmare for the air traffic controllers, who work in overlapping shifts, at
what for eight days is the world's busiest airport, four times busier than
Chicago's O'Hare Field.

So many private planes pour in that at most times two must land simultaneously,
one at the threshold and one halfway down a strip used just for that purpose.
That, while the air-show planes take off and land on the main runway. All of the
planes must somehow be shepherded clear of one another, which is why there are
special, neon-yellow pages in the guides to airports that pilots use; the pages
contain nothing but elaborate instructions on how to approach Oshkosh by small
plane during the Fly-In week.

Bizarre accidents and fatalities do sometimes occur. Last year, a woman's feet
were amputated by the propeller of a runaway plane, left unattended with its
engine going, which taxied into the tent in which she was sleeping. A light
plane crashed into the rear window of a moving car in a suburban neighborhood.
Two planes locked wings as they strolled side by side in the air, plunging to
the ground and killing both pilots. An ultra-light ditched in someone's backyard
when it lost its bearings in the fog. And various home-builts made emergency
landings in cornfields and along roadways, disoriented by the curd-like clouds
that soaked the exhibition for a day or two, made six-inch mud ruts and prompted
some queasy fliers to pack at the first sign of sunshine.

These accidents caused a stir, but they didn't lower the zest of the
festivities. Controlled danger is part of flying's lure, and the mounting number
of people and planes present was so great that most officials were relieved at
how few incidents there were.

For sheer spectacle, few things in life are as dazzling as the daily afternoon
air show at Oshkosh. It begins with two women, known as ''The Silken Chutes,''
parachuting from on high, spewing red smoke, while three biplanes wrap
ever-widening smoke spirals around them clear down to the ground. An American
flag waves from each chute; the National Anthem is played loudly. Updated, this
is nonetheless echt Americana, the way all barnstormers began their programs in
the Waldo Pepper and Charles Lindbergh era (yes, Lindbergh began as a wing
walker). What follows is a mass attack of World War II Warbirds, as an announcer
recalls each plane's history and construction.

Then the fliers who work the air-show circuit like rodeo cowboys do their cloud
dancing, one by one, mainly in biplanes. A snap roll, a square loop, an infinity
sign. A tail slide, in which the plane climbs straight up, cuts its engine and
falls spinning into its own smoke. Although the thunderstorms have passed, the
skywriters leave their own weather system. Silent flight: The announcer demands
quiet from the audience and waiting planes, then a biplane does gull-like
maneuvers with its engine off; the only sound is a gentle, eerie whinnying of
air through struts and over wings.

Next a trio of Christen Eagles does hair-raising formation stunts, leaving smoke
halos at the top of each parabola or hammerhead dive.  An 18-year-old
engineering student from Stanford wows the crowd with precision moves, like
climbing on edge, in a classic biplane his father designed. A husband and wife
wing-walking act: his T-shirt
says ''The Wing,'' hers ''The Walker.'' People with camera lenses as long as
their forearms, and babies holding inflatable planes too pudgy to fly, all gape
stiff-necked for three hours, though by late afternoon, some get a little blase.
''Not another wing walker,'' one young woman sighs. No one would dream of
leaving before the finale's two dazzlers. First, a one-of-akind NASA swing-wing
jet, which looks like a letter opener, unseals the air, zip, zip, over the
grounds.

Finally, the performance everyone's been waiting for: Bob Hoover, flying a
twin-engine Shrike Commander, a small, heavy airliner designed to take 12 people
to somewhere exotic. Mr. Hoover, the best aerobatic pilot the United States
produced in the 1960's, starts high above the runway and treats the Shrike like
an aerobatic sailplane, cutting one engine, then both, doing rolls and spins and
stalls, and slow beautiful loops, all on nothing but momentum and nerve. Every
movement he turns into a graceful gesture, a geisha's hand, demonstrating the
laws of flight and aerodynamics. Calculating exactly how much momentum he will
need to land, roll down the runway, taxi off the ramp, pivot and stop, he does a
series of breathtaking loops close to the ground, and winds up on the exact spot
beside the runway where he began. The audience exhales in unison. Airliners
aren't supposed to be able to do that.

The last vision one has driving away from the Fly-In, the one that reappears in
dreams, is of a swarm of 40 brightly painted ultralights circling over a field
of corn. It looks as if there should be a buffalo carcass underneath. Instead,
there is a conga line of cars with exhausted passengers craning out of every
window, still amazed, and staring straight into the setting sun for a last
eyeful.

Air show logistics Events The Experimental Aircraft Association Fly-In
Convention and Sport Aviation Exhibition opens July 30 with a variety of acts
including the Eagles Aerobatic Team, a group of three pilots who are considered
among the best close-formation flying groups in the world. Among acts during the
rest of the week's Fly-In: July 31 - Warbirds in Action, a group of 185 World
War II-vintage aircraft that are flown in reenactments of World War II air
battles. Aug. 1 - Cloud Dancers, Bob Hoover, and Bob and Pat Wagner, a
wing-walking barnstorming act. Aug. 2 - Oshkosh 500 Air Race, the Canadian
Snowbirds Precision Aerobatic Team and the Aircraft Recreational Vehicle Design
Contest Fly-Off.  Aug. 4 - Homebuilt Revue, A.R.V.
Design Contest Fly-Off and the Canadian Snowbirds, Aug. 5 - A.R.V.  Design
Contest Fly-Off and the Eagles. Aug. 6 - Wonderful World of Ultralights and the
A.R.V. Design Contest. Accommodations Many of the Oshkosh motels near the
exhibition grounds are booked a year ahead of time, so most people stay in
nearby cities and drive, or fly, in. Green Bay is only an hour north by car,
Milwaukee a little farther to the southeast. Fond du Lac, at the southern tip of
Lake Winnebago, is where the aerobatic pilots like to stay. And there are small
towns along Lake Winnebago and Lake Michigan, a short drive away, in which to
stay. Write to the Experimental Aircraft Association, Post Office Box 229, Hales
Corners, Wisc. 53130, for a list of motels and a calendar of events.D.A.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Wisconsin photos of airplanes

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STORM CLOUD SETTLE OVER INDIA'S ELDER STATESMAN

BYLINE: By SANJOY HAZARIKA, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1080 words

DATELINE: BOMBAY, India


At the age of 87, India's elder statesman, who served as Prime Minister from
1977 to mid-1979, still gets up at 4 A.M. and spins yarn for more than an hour.
He eats two meals a day of nuts, fruits, milk and vegetables, answers letters in
his own handwriting, fasts once every two weeks and maintains a lively interest
in national and international affairs.

The former leader, Morarji R. Desai, who is a veteran of the independence
movement led by Mohandas K. Gandhi, has been living in relative obscurity for
more than three years and rarely leaves his fifth-story apartment overlooking
the Arabian Sea. But now he has become a public figure again.

He has been at the center of a controversy in India brought about by an
assertion by American officials in a recent book, ''The Price of Power'' by
Seymour Hersh, a former reporter for The New York Times, that Mr. Desai worked
for the Central Intelligence Agency under Presidents Johnson and Nixon.

The charge has been dismissed as unbelievable even by many of Mr.  Desai's
critics. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, a foe of Mr. Desai, has said only that
she hopes ''it is not true.''

When he first heard of the assertion in the Hersh book, Mr. Desai called it a
''sheer mad story.'' On June 18 he announced that an Indian lawyer had filed a
$5 million defamation suit on his behalf in a Chicago court against Mr. Hersh.
Mr. Desai said recently that the statement in the Hersh book had been made
''with the connivance and support of this Government.''

He Has Mellowed

Mr. Desai has mellowed somewhat in his responses from the prickly combativeness
that made him a formidable personality at news conferences, in parliamentary and
party debates and in government.  Nevertheless, he remains unsparing in his
criticism of what he regards as wrong, a trait for which his critics have
denounced him as self-righteous and arrogant.

His health is the envy of people half his age. His memory seems as sharp as
ever, although he says he sometimes forgets names.  ''The secret of my health is
a regular life, no worries, no feeling of unhealthiness, even if unhealthiness
is there,'' he said in an interview while seated at his spinning wheel in his
bedroom, which was cluttered with books, letters and photographs.

Elaborating, Mr. Desai said: ''I am not as healthy as I look. But you will never
see me unhealthy in my manner, in my spirit. I never allow it to interfere.''

He said, however, that ''the body also has less resistance,'' and added, ''I
cannot bear dust now.'' Mr. Desai came to power in 1977 on a wave of unrest
against two years of emergency rule by Mrs. Gandhi, when her Government arrested
thousands of her opponents, including Mr. Desai. But the Janata Party, a hastily
formed alliance of five opposition groups to oppose Mrs. Gandhi's Congress Party
in the 1977 elections, collapsed in mid-1979 after internal feuding among its
leaders, and Mr. Desai resigned his post.

In elections in 1980, Mrs. Gandhi swept to a landslide victory over her divided
opponents.

Expects Party to Rebound

Mr. Desai said he thought that Mrs. Gandhi ''will go under'' as a result of the
problems facing the country and that his party, which now has a dozen Members of
Parliament, would return to power and form a coalition government with other
opposition groups when the next general elections are held.

''I will continue to work to strengthen the Janata Party,'' he said, ''because I
believe that, of all the parties, the Janata alone will be able to deliver the
goods.''

Mr. Desai was widely acknowledged as one of the country's most competent
administrators, with long experience in government. He is a centrist in his
politics.

He was a powerful chief minister of Bombay state in the 1950's, where he tried
to impose prohibition, and he was a Cabinet minister in the Government of Prime
Minister Jawaharlal Nehru and a Deputy Prime Minister under Mrs. Gandhi.
Personal and policy differences led to his resignation as Deputy Prime Ministrer
in 1969.

The son of a village teacher in Gujarat state north of Bombay, Mr.  Desai joined
the Civil Service in 1918 after graduating from Bombay University. He resigned
12 years later, when he said he found such service inconsistent with his
principles, and he joined the independence movement of Mahatma Gandhi. He was
imprisoned five times, for a total of seven years, until India became
independent in 1947.

Criticism for Mrs. Gandhi

Criticizing Mrs. Gandhi's performance in domestic affairs, he called her
Government ''incapable of solving any problem,'' particularly those posed by the
recent violence in Punjab and Assam state. He said the Gandhi Government was
''only interested in more power.'' He also criticized her foreign policy, saying
she was ''more tilted toward the Russians.''

He said that in 1978 the Soviet Prime Minister, Aleksei N. Kosygin, tried to
persuade him to recognize the Cambodian Government of Heng Samrin that Vietnam
had installed in Phnom Penh.

''He talked to me for six hours but did not succeed,'' Mr. Desai said. But, he
said, India recognized the Heng Samrin regime soon after Mrs. Gandhi returned to
power ''because the Russians put pressure on her.''

Discussing world affairs, Mr. Desai said that the United States and the Soviet
Union should renounce nuclear weapons and that ''both atomic arsenals should be
completely wiped out.'' He said Israel should withdraw from occupied Arab lands
and help resettle the Palestinians. He also said Yasir Arafat, chairman of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, ''sometimes talks nonsense.''

On most mornings, Mr. Desai said, he spins about 1,500 feet of coarse cotton
yarn on his old spinning wheel, which he lovingly polishes and cleans.

''It gives me some satisfaction that I am doing some manual work,'' he said.
''I have not retired from active life,'' he went on, ''and I have not not
retired from politics. But if I find that I can do nothing useful, then I will
retire from politics. And I am an optimist. The world is not going to end,
whatever people may say.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Morarji Desai

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE PROBLEM NOW AT THE IRANIAN EMBASSY IS GRASS GONE WILD

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 760 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 10


Diplomatic relations between the United States and Iran crumbled in 1980. Now
the abandoned buildings here that once housed Iranian diplomats are threatening
to crumble.

Neighbors have complained to the State Department, which oversees the property,
about overgrown lawns and shrubbery as well as sagging porches.

The department, evidently unaccustomed to dealing with unkempt lawns, has not
quite figured out what to do. It does not want to sell or rent the property
because it is still officially owned by Iran, as part of the assets that were
frozen by the United States in 1979. Neither does it want to spend tax dollars
on maintenance.

The frozen property includes the Iranian Embassy, chancery, an office and five
residences in the Washington area. There are also houses in Houston, Chicago,
New York, San Francisco and Lubbock, Tex., where the Shah's son stayed when he
trained at Lubbock Air Force Base.

The property is caught in a web of legal wrangling between the United States and
Iran that may not be resolved until the countries restore diplomatic relations.
Claims and counterclaims have been filed at The Hague.

The United States refuses to turn the property over to Iran until that country
returns the 18-acre United States Embassy compound and two other buildings in
Teheran it seized on Nov. 4, 1979.

Maintenance Contract Signed

Meanwhile, many of the neighbors here, who complain of declining property
values, are livid.  ''The houses are not maintained very well,'' said Raymond
Greenberg, who lives near an abandoned house in Bethesda, Md.  ''People walk in
and out of the house removing furniture. I have had to call the police on
several occasions.''

The State Department has signed a contract with the BDM Corporation, a
management firm, to maintain the property. But a company official said recently,
''We have not gone out and eyeballed the property yet.''

It was clear that little had been done to maintain one house in northwest
Washington. A branch leaned perilously toward the front door. Vines crept up
from the yard onto the porch and clung to the front door. The porch had rotted
and was sagging badly. A sturdy row of white iris managed to survive along the
walk.

According to Barbara Allen of the State Department's Foreign Missions Bureau,
the property is different from other diplomatic property abandoned in the area.
''There is an Iranian Government that claims them,'' she said, adding that the
buildings ''are stepchildren with no clear lines of responsibility.''

'The Reciprocity Angle'

While the State Department is trying to refurbish and rent the embassies
abandoned by Vietnam and Cambodia in 1975, using the frozen assets of those
countries, she said that dealing with Iran was ''trickier.''

''There is the reciprocity angle. The Iranian situation has the Algiers accords
superimposed over it,'' she said, referring to the 1981 agreements negotiated
through the Algerian Government to free the American hostages in Iran.

The embassy and chancery on Massachussetts Avenue look noticeably run down
compared to the more stylish neighbors along Embassy Row.  Secret Service
stickers adorn the shuttered windows and rusted cars with expired registration
stickers line the driveway. The pool behind the chancery is filled with murky
water and leaves.

Frank McDonough, a Secret Service agent patrolling the area, said that people
periodically attempted to break into the buildings. ''But between the motor
patrols and fixed patrols, they don't know when we're coming around,'' he said.

An Attache Remembered

Neighbors tell stories of demonstrations and other disturbances just before and
during the Iranian revolution.  Richard D. Godown, who lives near what was once
the headquarters of the Iranian military attache, said that when the Shah's
Government fell, the attache attempted ''a little one-man stand.'' According to
Mr. Godown, some insurgents came in and tried to take over the building, shots
were heard and the neighborhood filled with police cars.

Mr. Godown has not heard of the attache since, but he remembered him as a decent
fellow.  ''But for the gunshots,'' he said, ''he would have been a perfect
neighbor.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of house at 2954 Upston Street

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 12, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WEINBERGER PLANNING TO VISIT CHINA IN THE FALL

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 610 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 11


Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger plans to visit China in late September
or early October to expand United States military relations with the country,
Defense Department officials disclosed today.

At the same time, Administration officials said they had prepared a new arms
sale to Taiwan but had decided not to announce it today to avoid a conflict with
the disclosure of Mr. Weinberger's trip.

In another development, a Chinese delegation met with senior United States
officials here seeking American technology to build nuclear power plants.

Pentagon officials said the dates for Mr. Weinberger's trip had not been set.
They said he would also visit Japan to brief leaders there on his talks in China
and to continue to press the Japanese to increase military spending.

President Reagan is scheduled to visit Japan, South Korea and Indonesia in
November and may stop in Thailand and the Philippines.  All but Indonesia have
military ties with the United States. The White House has not announced any
plans for the President to visit China.

Topics in China

Pentagon officials said Mr. Weinberger planned to discuss possible arms sales to
China, whose military has the least modern weapons of any large military force
in the world.

The Chinese have previously shown far more interest in obtaining arms technology
to make their own weapons, and that may be a problem for Mr. Weinberger, the
Administration's foremost advocate of restricting the transfer of military
technology abroad.

Pentagon officials said Mr. Weinberger and the Chinese could also be expected to
discuss other military matters in Asia, particularly the Soviet threat to China
and Soviet help to Vietnam, with which China has repeatedly clashed.

Administration officials said Peking had been told about the arms sale to
Taiwan, which they said involved three packages. Peking has protested all
previous arms sales to Taiwan.

On the contents and value of the arms sale, officials would say only that it
would include kits to improve the firepower and performance of M-48 tanks, which
were developed in the United States in the early 1950's.

Officials said the sale would be in accord with existing policy.  Last August,
the Administration told the Chinese that ''arms sales to Taiwan will not exceed,
either in qualitative or quantitative terms, the level of those supplied in
recent years.'' The level of such sales would also be reduced gradually, the
Administration said then.

Nuclear Power Talks

The Chinese delegation in Washington, which included Foreign Ministry officials,
met today with senior officials of the State Department, including Richard T.
Kennedy, who handles issues involving the spread of nuclear weapons.

China is building a nuclear power plant near Shanghai and has negotiated a
letter of intent with France to build four more reactors. But the Chinese have
reportedly said they would prefer to buy plants and technology from the United
States.

The Reagan Administration has been reluctant to discuss such sales because,
officials said, they suspect China has helped Pakistan and South Africa obtain
nuclear material that could be used to make weapons.

American companies are forbidden to sell nuclear technology to China because it
has exploded nuclear weapons and has not signed the treaty against the spread of
nuclear weapons. It has refused to guarantee that nuclear technology or
materials supplied by the United States would not be used to build weapons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 13, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WAR HERO REGAINS DISABILITY BENEFIT

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 298 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 12


The Social Security Administration said today that it had restored disability
benefits to Roy P. Benavidez, a Vietnam War veteran who was awarded a Medal of
Honor by President Reagan.

James M. Brown, a spokesman for the Social Security Administration, said that an
administrative law judge in Texas had upheld the claim by Mr. Benavidez, who was
severely wounded in action. The effect of the decision is to overrule Social
Security officials who moved to cut off benefits for the retired master sergeant
earlier this year.

The case attracted the interest of some White House officials.  Critics of the
Reagan Administration cited the case as an example of what they saw as the
callousness of officials administering the disability program. At a hearing
before the House Select Committee on Aging last month, Mr. Benavidez denounced
the Administration and said his plight typified the experience of many
Americans.

Mr. Brown said the decision of the administrative law judge, Waldo Ximenes,
''proves that the system works.'' The judges are employed by the Department of
Health and Human Services, but, as independent hearing officers, review the
facts in each case where a claimant pursues an appeal.

Mr. Benavidez was wounded when he ventured into a dense jungle, under heavy
gunfire, to rescue eight comrades in the Army Special Forces near Loc Ninh,
Vietnam, in 1968. He said Social Security officials had concluded that he was
able to work even though he had two pieces of shrapnel in his heart, both arms
and legs were ''severely impaired'' and one lung was punctured.

The Social Security Administration has terminated disability benefits for more
than 350,000 people since March 1981.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 13, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LAWYER SAYS SEX TAPES ARE MISSING

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 956 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, July 12


Robert K. Steinberg, the lawyer who said he had videotapes of top Government
officials and associates of President Reagan in sex parties, said today that the
tapes had been stolen.

(The Associated Press reported Tuesday that Mr. Steinberg told reporters that
''Someone from the press corps went into my library this morning and took those
tapes,'' and added, ''We know which one it was, and it's under investigation.'')

Mr. Steinberg said today that he had telephoned Fred F. Fielding, the
President's lawyer, and that Mr. Fielding advised him that if the tapes were
found, they should be turned over to the Los Angeles district attorney.

Call to District Attorney

James Bascue, the Chief Deputy District Attorney, said Mr.  Steinberg telephoned
a deputy district attorney, Ronald Carroll, sometime after 11 o'clock this
morning and told him ''that the three tapes had been located in a gym bag in his
law library office, and when he went to retrieve them late this morning they had
been stolen.''

Mr. Bascue said that Mr. Carroll and Officer William Welch of the Los Angeles
Police Department telephoned Mr. Steinberg at 8:30 A.M.  and instructed him not
to destroy the tapes, as they could possibly be used as evidence in a murder
trial. They were awaiting word on picking up the tapes when Mr. Steinberg phoned
to report a theft, Mr. Bascue said. The police said they were investigating the
report of a disappearance as a case of petty theft. Later today, they served Mr.
Steinberg with a subpoena demanding that he produce the tapes on July 25, the
day Marvin Pancoast is to be arraigned on charges that he murdered Vicki Morgan.
Mr. Steinberg said Miss Morgan, a model, appeared in the videotapes with Alfred
S. Bloomingdale, the former adviser to President Reagan. Mr. Bloomingdale died
last August.

Mr. Steinberg said Monday that he had 40 minutes of color videotapes showing six
prominent Government officials and businessmen, including Mr. Bloomingdale, in
nude sexual activity with Miss Morgan and two other women. Miss Morgan, 30 years
old, Mr.  Bloomingdale's onetime mistress, was found bludgeoned to death last
Thursday and the police said Mr. Pancoast, 33, confessed to the slaying.

Mr. Steinberg said that in addition to Mr. Bloomingdale, who was a close friend
of Mr. Reagan and his wife, Nancy, the tapes showed a Congressman, two appointed
officials ''not of Cabinet rank'' and executives of the construction and oil and
gas industries.

Today Mr. Steinberg abruptly stopped answering questions about the disappearance
of the tapes and, according to his secretary, was ''kind of hiding out in his
office because people won't leave him alone.''

His partner in the law office, Vincent Bugliosi, who said Monday that he had
discussed the tapes with Mr. Steinberg, was not available for comment today.

No Corroboration Apparent

Mr. Steinberg, a criminal lawyer who is 45 or 46 years old, gained international
attention with his claim about the tapes, calling them a potential
''embarrassment'' to the President and a breach of highlevel national security.
He entertained questions in his office at length from dozens of reporters about
the purported tapes. But when pressed he declined or was unable to bring forward
anyone who could corroborate his assertions that any tapes existed.

Mr. Steinberg had said he planned to destroy the tapes today unless he was asked
not to do so by the White House. A White House spokesman, Larry Speakes, said
Mr. Fielding advised Mr. Steinberg that if the tapes reappeared not to destroy
them and to give them to the district attorney, who would review them to
determine if any criminal conduct had occurred.

Miss Morgan's death came a year after a Los Angeles Superior Court judge threw
out most of her $10 million lawsuit against Mr.  Bloomingdale. Miss Morgan
contended in the lawsuit that she had been promised lifetime support by Mr.
Bloomigdale, the department store heir and founder of the Diners' Club, in
return for her 12 years as his mistress.

Offered Services to Accused Man

Mr. Pancoast, who was sharing an apartment with Miss Morgan, is being held in
county jail in $250,000 bond. His lawyer is Arthur H.  Barens Jr. of Beverly
Hills, but Mr. Steinberg said he went to the jail to offer his services to Mr.
Pancoast Saturday after speaking with Mr. Pancoast's mother, Christie. Mr.
Barens said Monday that Mr. Steinberg had never represented Mr. Pancoast and
that he doubted the tapes existed.

Mr. Steinberg said Monday that the tapes were brought to him at his office last
Saturday by a woman who said she thought they would help Mr. Pancoast's defense.
He refused to identify her.

Lieut. Dan Cooke, the spokesman for the Los Angeles Police Department, said
today that the police had not questioned Mr.  Pancoast about any tapes and did
not intend to.

Mr. Steinberg said he had shown the tapes to two people, one he described as a
lawyer and the other a friend who worked for the Justice Department in Los
Angeles ''with the crime task force.'' He refused to identify them.

Since Mr. Steinberg also refused to identify the woman he said brought the tapes
to him, he has produced no one who could back up his story.

Mr. Steinberg, when questioned repeatedly about corroboration, at one point said
in front of a group of reporters, presumably as evidence of his trustworthiness,
''I've been in Vietnam for four years, I was a prosecutor eight years, and I
have killed people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 14, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CON ED WALKOUT DISRUPTS LIVES ON BOTH SIDES

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1435 words


Bill Wareham's family wanted to see more of him. So he quit the Merchant Marine
after six years of service and got a job as a supervisor trainee with
Consolidated Edison last June 20 - just two days after the strike started. He
has been home twice in the last 17 days.

The union members are walking the picket line, but Mr. Wareham is a manager, and
so he works 12-hour days at the East 74th Street generating station during the
first Con Edison strike in 15 years.

At home in West Hempstead, L.I., his wife, Maureen, wonders when it will end.
Mr. Wareham thinks his children, Stephen, 3 years old, and Christina, 18 months,
are ''a little confused'' over his whereabouts.

Contemplating Financial Burden

Over in Massapequa, L.I., there is also some confusion in the home of Angie
Grossi, who is a junior accountant at Con Edison and one of the 17,000 strikers.

She was recently contemplating her formidable financial burden, which includes a
$550 monthly mortgage payment, a seasonal fuel-oil bill of $590 and a current
electricity bill of $132. Her son, Joey, who is 6 and who recently completed the
first grade, became apprehensive.

''You mean you won't be coming home with a paycheck?'' he asked her.  ''That's
right,'' said Mrs. Grossi, a single parent.  ''How will we eat?'' he pressed
her.  ''You let Mommy take care of those problems,'' she said.  The men and
women who used to do the front-line work at Con Edison now walk the picket
lines, wondering when the strike will end and how they are going to meet their
expenses. They are isolated from their work routines, paychecks and most of
their co-workers, but they remain convinced that it is going to be worth it.

The 6,000 men and women who used to manage the work at Con Edison are now the
workers, sleeping and eating in power plants, trying to retain their vigor
despite 12-hour days. They are largely isolated from their families, friends,
any sort of nor mal social life, as well as the subordinates both trusted and
fought with. Now they are locked into unfamiliar tasks, jobs they may not have
done in years, or perhaps had never done.

It is the classic labor-management chess game, with the company wondering how
long workers, who receive no cash benefits during the strike, can withstand the
economic pressures, and the workers wondering how long the managers can take the
wretched hours.

''How much punishment can they inflict on their own management?'' asked Patrick
J. Gallagher, business manager of Local 1-2 of the Utility Workers Union of
America.

The morale of idled workers and of overworked managers seems high as the strike
is in its third week, and there is an absence of recriminations among both
groups. They just want the strike to end.

At negotiations yesterday, the utility put a new proposal on the bargaining
table. It was refused by the union leadership.

The Push-Button Society

It is, in some ways, an unusual strike. In most actions, the product disappears
or changes, the goods are not manufactured, or the hospital slows almost to a
halt.

The product Con Edison produces has not changed - the push-button society that
is New York continues to push buttons, residents still switching on their lights
and air-conditioners as they always have.

The 74th Street plant, near the East River, is old but well kept.  It continues
to whir and rumble as always, its furnaces kept at 2,600 degrees so that it can
continue putting out its principal product - steam - and supply the energy needs
of several hundred thousand New Yorkers.

''We are buying the product of the company we are striking against,'' said
Thomas F. Kelly, president of Local 1-2, as he worked, without pay, in his
office at 386 Park Avenue South, near 23d Street, along with other unpaid union
workers and volunteers.

He leaned back in his chair and smiled. ''Sometimes I think I should shut off
the lights and work in the dark,'' he said.

'I Have a Job to Do'

Peter Mongello, who is 64 and who retired last year as a plant operator after 37
years of work at Con Edison, has volunteered to answer telephones at the union
headquarters. His father, Louis Grossi, worked as a steam-boiler operator for 49
years, and his three sons and daughter work for the company - two of them in
management.

''I have a job to do, and they have a job to do,'' Mr. Mongello said of his
children.  Michael Vaccaro, a plant engineer who is part of management and
therefore hard at work at the generating station on East 74th Street, said the
same thing when he thought about the pickets outside the front door: ''I have a
job to do, and they have a job to do.''

The supervisors within show much of the same esprit as the strikers without.

Sleeps Next to Desk

Joe Buckheit, the plant manager, is one of those doing the cooking for the
plant's force of 78 people, down nearly 100 from the normal complement. He won
praise the other day for his stuffed peppers Italian style, made in the plant's
strike kitchen, called ''the East 74th Street Cafe.''

He has seen his wife, Anne, twice since the strike started, and he sleeps on a
cot next to his desk. His concerns are not just personal. He is proud of his
plant and unhappy that only operational repairs can be made - nothing resembling
significant maintenance. ''I just wish it was all over,'' Mr. Buckheit said in
the familiar refrain.

Mr. Buckheit has one of the more creative jobs in the plant. Hassan Abouela, who
has two bachelors of science and an M.B.A., is now working as a laborer. ''And I
don't like laboring,'' he said.

In an effort to blunt the effects of long hours, the 74th Street plant is
providing its executive-workers with a temporary 21-foot circular above-ground
swimming pool on the roof and a recreation area on the 10th floor, where table
tennis, paddle ball, horseshoes, volleyball and basketball may be played. There
is also a video- cassette recorder, and films are frequently rented for viewing.
Mr.  Vaccaro said the amenities would be retired when the strike ends.

Concern About Doctors' Bills

The pressures on the union members are different, and considerable. The union
says it cannot pay strike benefits, but it has advised its members it is picking
up health and hospital insurance ''for the duration of the strike, or until the
union dues money runs out.''

A bulletin issued by the union said it could pay the costs ''for a considerable
period of time if instructions are followed to the letter, and no one abuses the
system we have set up.''

Edith Harris, who is normally a mail clerk at Con Edison's headquarters at 4
Irving Place, near 14th Street, and who has spent 25 years with the company, has
volunteered to answer telephones at union headquarters, which has been receiving
calls from workers concerned about doctor and hospital bills.

She is thankful she feels well, but acknowledges the strike is having a much
greater impact than the one she went through in 1968.  Her husband, Andre, was
alive then, and his earnings as a decorater blunted the impact of the strike.
But he is gone, and so are most of her savings, she said. She said much the same
thing Joe Buckheit did: ''I just hope the strike ends soon.''

Economic and Other Pains

Clearly, managers and workers miss the old routines.  For Antonio Bonanini, who
carried a placard as he walked around 4 Irving Place, the pain was economic as
well as intellectual.  He likes his job as a senior engineering technician. He
recently played an important role in planning a substation. A bachelor, he has
moved in with his parents and is trying to stretch his savings so he can meet
the payments on his new car.

For James Victorine, an artist who does graphics for the company but who is not
in the union, the pain is muscular. The company has turned him into a ditch
digger, and last week, he was seen in the company of Richard Giglio and Jon
Fields, two Con Edison lawyers, digging holes in Manhattan streets so repairs
could be made to gas pipes. Mr. Victorine said he assumed he got the job because
of his previous work experience. He used to dig foxholes in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of striking Con Ed workers photo of Lee Budd photo
of Michael Vaccaro and Joe Buckheit

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POLL FINDS TRUST IN GOVERNMENT EDGING BACK UP

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 949 words


For the first time in nearly two decades, Americans are expressing increased
confidence in their Government, according to national polling by the Institute
for Social Research at the University of Michigan.

Even so, only 33 percent of those polled say they believe the Government in
Washington can be trusted to do what is right all or most of the time. That was
an increase from 25 percent two years earlier.

The change was reflected in answers to a series of questions that the institute
has asked every two years since 1958. The series has become the most widely
accepted measure in survey research of trust and alienation about government.

From 1964 through 1980 this sequence produced answers reflecting a contining
decline in confidence. Last fall the trend was reversed.

Decline to 25% in 1980

In 1964 a total of 76 percent of the public said the Government in Washington
could be trusted to do what was right ''just about always'' or ''most of the
time.'' That percentage declined steadily after the turmoil over racial
integration, the Vietnam War and the Watergate scandals, and by 1980 only 25
percent gave those answers.

But in 1982, 33 percent did so, and other questions in the series produced
similar shifts.  Arthur H. Miller, an associate professor of political science
at the university, said of the results: ''The American public remains
predominantly negative toward government and public officials, but the shift
toward a more positive attitude is historically and politically important.''

He reported the findings in the current issue of Public Opinion, a magazine
published in Washington by the conservative-oriented American Enterprise
Institute, and said the ''rise in confidence signals an improved political
climate.''

Crucial in Carter Period

The issue of declining confidence in government attained its greatest political
significance in the Carter Administration, when President Carter contended in a
televised address that the nation was suffering a crisis of confidence.

Political critics, including Republicans and Senator Edward M.  Kennedy,
Democrat of Massachusetts, responded then that he was wrong to discern a
national ''malaise.'' They said the problem was simply that the public lacked
confidence in Mr. Carter's leadership, and the debate became highly partisan.

However, the changes measured from 1980 to 1982 did not represent merely the
enthusiasm of backers of President Reagan.  Mr. Miller said the findings were
particularly significant because improved confidence was not limited to
Republicans, who might have been expected to be cheered by Mr. Reagan's
election. Confidence among Democrats also increased, he reported, though not as
much as among Republicans and independents.

'Equally Across Most Groups'

He also observed in Public Opinion that ''the increase in trust also occurred
equally across most demographic groups.'' In an interview Wednesday, Mr. Miller
explained that from 1980 to 1982 trust in government among men and women
''increased at about the same rate.''

There was some racial difference, he said. Considering the battery of questions
together, ''whites became more confident, but blacks really didn't become less
confident, or else there was only a slight decrease.''

Mr. Miller said the data showed the rise in confidence was ''clearly not''
representative of a consensus behind President Reagan's conservative policies.
But Mr. Reagan's success in getting legislation passed and the decline in
inflation and interest rates, he said, ''convey the message that government can
act effectively and responsibly.''

Error of Plus or Minus 3 Points

Last fall's survey of 1,418 respondents had a margin of sampling error of plus
or minus three percentage points.  The precise language of the question about
trust is: ''How much of the time do you think you can trust the government in
Washington to do what is right - just about always, most of the time or only
some of the time?'' The other questions Mr. Miller cited as marking a change in
confidence were these:

1. ''Would you say the government is pretty much run by a few big interests
looking out for themselves or that it is run for the benefit of all people?'' In
1964, 64 percent said it was run for the ''benefit of all,'' a percentage that
slid to 21 percent in 1980 before rebounding to 29 percent in 1982.

2. ''Do you think that people in government waste a lot of the money we pay in
taxes, waste some of it, or don't waste very much of it?'' In 1964, 47 percvent
replied ''a lot.'' That percentage increased to 78 percent by 1980. Except for a
statistically insignifcant movement downward in 1972, it either rose or stayed
the same in each survey until 1982, when it slipped to 66 percent.

3. ''Now I'm going to read some of the kinds of things people tell us when we
interview them. Just tell me whether you agree or disagree with them: 'I don't
think public officials care much what people like me think.' ''

In 1964, 35 percent agreed. That percentage rose gradually, more slowly than
some of the others, and reached 52 percent by 1980. But in 1982 it dropped to 46
percent.

Mr. Miller said the ''resurgence in public confidence'' should not be
overstated. ''Let us remember,'' he noted in his concluding paragraph, ''that
the public is still predominantly distrusting.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph of attitudes toward government (Page B6)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 15, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. GOVERNMENT'S EARLY KNOWLEDGE OF DIOXIN IN AGENT ORANGE

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 624 words


To the Editor:

A July 6 news story on dioxin, which covers the release of court documents in
the Agent Orange case, appears to overlook the evidence that the Government had
knowledge of the presence of trace amounts of dioxin in the herbicide. That is,
of course, a major issue in the trial and it might be of interest to your
readers to have some of that information also.


or instance, the released documents contain depositions from members of
President Johnson's Science Advisory Committee and the President's Office of
Science and Technology citing discussions in the spring of 1965 about the
presence of traces of dioxin in Agent Orange and its possible health effects.
Dow did not sell Agent Orange to the Government until late 1965.

Many other documents show that the Army Chemical Corps, the Air Force
Environmental Health Laboratories, the Army Surgeon General's Office, the
Departments of Defense, Agriculture and Interior and the Public Health Service
all had similar knowledge by at least 1965.

Also, the suggestion that Dow was involved in some sort of conspiracy to hide
information on dioxin is clearly controverted by the evidence.

The 1964 incident of chloracne among workers at Dow's Midland, Mich., plant was
widely reported by the company. The problem was reviewed in detail with the
Michigan Department of Health, which was the proper agency to be informed at
that time. In addition, physicians from the University of Michigan and Wayne
State University medical schools were informed and visited the Dow plant site.

Beyond that, information about the problem and its solution was shared with U.S.
industry and representatives of government in England, the Netherlands, the
Soviet Union and South America.

It is important to note that all the health information cited in your report
deals with industrial accidents involving the type of massive exposure that no
soldier in Vietnam, not even those who sprayed the herbicide, could ever have
experienced. For example, the dioxin exposure in the Dow work-place incident was
from 6,000 to 10,000 parts per million.

What appears to be missing from your account is that follow-up studies of
workers involved in the accidents have shown that the initial reactions have
generally cleared up and that neither their health rates, illness rates nor
types of illnesses experienced are different from comparable populations.

Also, the idea that worker deaths have been attributed to dioxin is
questionable. Reports of isolated fatalities in the wake of industrial accidents
in Germany during the 1950's would not be associated with dioxin by today's
medical standards. No one is certain about exactly what caused these deaths. In
industrial accidents, workers are exposed to a variety of potentially toxic
materials.

There is no question that dioxin is a toxic material and one that must be
carefully controlled. But the medical evidence to date does not suggest that
current environmental exposures pose a hazard or that users of products that
contain trace amounts of the contaminant have experienced any untoward health
effects.

We recognize the complexity of the dioxin issue. We hope this letter will help
expand your readers' knowledge of the issue.  E. R. RUSSELL Director of Public
Issues Dow Chemical Company Midland, Mich., July 7, 1983

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 16, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

2 CONGRESSMEN FACE CONSTITUENTS' JUDGEMENT ON REPORTS OF SEX WITH PAGES

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 770 words

DATELINE: URBANA, Ill., July 15


In three successful campaigns for Congress, Representative Daniel B. Crane has
portrayed himself as a solid, churchgoing, family man, a conservative Republican
who set himself apart from what he described as the fast-living ''Washington
set.''

He returned here today to spend the weekend with his wife and six children and
found his largely rural constituency stunned by his admission that he had a
sexual relationship with a 17-year-old female Congressional page three years
ago.

''Even his opponents are in shock,'' said Jerry Wright, a labor leader in
Danville, the farm equipment manufacturing city of 38,000 where Mr. Crane
practiced as a dentist before he was elected to Congress in 1978.

''Will he resign?'' asked John Hirschfeld, one of the 20 Republican County
chairman in Mr. Crane's 19th Congressional District. ''I think the answer is
no.''

''Will he run again?'' Mr. Hirschfeld continued. ''I don't know.''

Potential Replacements

Mr. Hirschfeld said that only a day after the House ethics committee recommended
an official reprimand for Mr. Crane, he was getting calls from Republicans eager
to replace Mr. Crane.

''Prior to this,'' Mr. Hirschfield said, ''I don't think there was any serious
opposition in the primary. I'm not going to suggest that Dan Crane could not
win. But I think the county chairmen are going to want him to tell them how he
can win.''

The Congressman was met at the airport in Danville by his wife, Judy, who has
appeared in campaign photographs with their children and appealed to voters with
handwritten letters describing life in the Crane household and saying that it
was important to re-elect her husband.

Neither the Congressman nor his wife would speak to reporters.  As he left
Washington, Mr. Crane, who is 47 years old and a former Army officer who served
in Vietnam, said, ''I know nothing. I'm not talking.'' He had issued a statement
acknowledging that he ''made a mistake,'' but added that ''in no way did I
violate my oath of office.''

A month ago, Mr. Crane told Republican leaders he would run for a fourth term.
After the ethics committee's report was made public Thursday he refused to say
whether he would run for re-election.

'A Complete Admission'

William Mencarow, an aide to Mr. Crane, said he did not know if the Congressman
intended to resign.  ''I think it's important that the Congressman has made a
complete admission,'' Mr. Mencarow said in Danville. ''No law has been violated
and it's really a matter between consenting adults on something that happened
three years ago. It doesn't have anything to do with his re-election.''

United Press International quoted the young woman who was involved with Mr.
Crane, whose name has not been made public, as saying that the affair ''was my
decision just as much as it was his.''

''Here's a guy who campaigned as a staunch family man,'' said Phil King, a
resident of Urbana. ''I'm somewhat aghast.''

No Prediction of Defeat

A Republican colleague, Representative Timothy Johnson of Urbana said, ''I don't
think we should assume this will defeat him.'' Mr.  Johnson added, ''I'm not
ready to consign him to the political garbage bag.''

In addition to disclosing Mr. Crane's affair, the ethics committee said that
Representative Gerry E. Studds of Massachusetts had had a sexual relationship
with a 17-year-old male page 10 years ago and that James C. Howarth, who
supervises pages for the Democratic majority, had had sexual relations with a
17-year-old page and given her preferential treatment.

Joseph A. Califano Jr., the special counsel to the Committee on Standards of
Official Conduct, said in response to a question that the Congressmen had not
violated any laws because the age of consent for sexual relations is 16 in both
the District of Columbia and Virginia.

In his last campaign, Mr. Crane was against abortion, supported prayer in public
schools and backed a strong military. He is the ranking Republican on the House
Post Office and Civil Service subcommittee that is investigating how Ronald
Reagan's aides obtained debate briefing papers from President Carter's campaign
in 1980. He is the brother of Representative Philip M. Crane of Illinois, who
ran for the Republican presidential nomination in 1980.

In his formal statement, Mr. Crane said he was ''sorry'' and that ''I only hope
my wife and children will forgive me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Illinois, showing 19th Congressional District

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SAID TO WEIGH 40% INCREASE IN MILITARY FUNDS FOR LATIN ALLIES

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2732 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 16


A secret ''working paper'' prepared for the White House proposes a 40 percent
increase in military aid next year to United States allies in Central America.

The proposal was made in a report outlining United States options in the region.
It was prepared by an interagency task force for a National Security Council
meeting on July 8.

White House officials said no decisions had been made about increasing United
States involvement and called the report a ''working paper.'' They said it
formed the basis for high-level discussions but did not necessarily contain the
final options now under consideration.

But other Administration officials familiar with the deliberations said almost
all of the proposals contained in the paper were under active consideration and
accurately reflected current thinking among senior officials.

Resistance in Congress

The policy review comes as Congress, which has resisted increases in United
States involvement, is approaching final decisions on a number of key Central
American issues, including a supplemental military assistance request for El
Salvador for the current fiscal year and a proposal to cut off covert aid to
rebels in Nicaragua.

Administration officials said final decisions about how to strengthen United
States policy will depend in part on the outcome of those crucial votes. The
task force says some of the restrictions under consideration in Congress would
be ''crippling'' to Administration policy.

In its assessment, the task force report said, ''The situation in Central
America is nearing a critical point.'' ''It is still possible,'' the report went
on, ''to accomplish U.S.  objectives without the direct use of U.S. troops
(although the credible threat of such use is needed to deter overt Soviet/Cuban
intervention), provided that the U.S. takes timely and effective action.''

Administration officials said one key recommendation of the task force -that the
White House try to build a bipartisan base of support for its policies by
appointing a special, blue-ribbon commission on Central America - had already
been approved by Mr. Reagan and would be announced next week, probably on
Monday.

The officials said it was not clear exactly how the commission, which was first
proposed by Senator Henry M. Jackson, Democrat of Washington, would be involved
in the Administration's policy-making process. They said the commission would
probably review all aspects of United States policy, including many of the
proposals in the working paper that are currently under consideration, but would
not have veto power over White House decisions and would not ''impinge'' on the
powers of the President.

The contemplated aid increases, which include a doubling of security assistance
to Costa Rica, an 80 percent increase in aid to Guatemala, and increases of more
than 30 percent in aid to El Salvador and Honduras, are part of a plan under
review by President Reagan that is intended to shore up an American policy that
officials increasingly believe is failing.

'An Invigorated Strategy'

Other steps under consideration to produce ''an invigorated strategy'' for
Central America, according to the report and senior officials, include the
prepositioning of United States military equipment in Honduras for use in a
crisis and the improvement of Honduran air and naval installations.

In addition, the report, which deals primarily with security issues, with only
limited references to diplomatic initiatives, recommends proceeding with a
Central Intelligence Agency plan to have Salvadoran troops operate in Honduran
territory to attack Salvadoran guerrilla sanctuaries, and calls for the
immediate development of a plan of action for upgrading the effectiveness of the
Salvadoran military.

It also advocates the continuation of covert activities against the Nicaraguan
Government and the pursuit of a diplomatic strategy intended to isolate
Nicaragua.

Bleak Picture of U.S. Efforts

On a broader diplomatic front, the report briefly urges increased efforts to
highlight United States support for regional peace initiatives and an attempt to
get Mexico to become more supportive of United States interests.

The task force paper, which paints a fairly bleak picture of Reagan
Administration accomplishments in Central America and is highly critical of the
Salvadoran armed forces, was indirectly obtained by The New York Times from an
Administration official who is said to fear that the current policy is leading
toward a major increase in United States military involvement in Central
America.

The paper, which was stamped ''Secret,'' also brought into the open serious,
longstanding policy differences between the State and Defense Departments.

These include a fundamental debate over whether the United States risks a major
foreign policy defeat if it pursues current policies in Central America without
full support from Congress.

The Defense Department, according to the paper, contends that it would be better
to pull out of Central America altogether rather than face a possible failure by
trying to protect United States interests with halfway measures.

The current policy review comes six months after the Administration last
conducted a comprehensive examination of its Central America strategy.

The last review was touched off by a trip to the region by Jeane J. Kirkpatrick,
the chief United States delegate to the United Nations, who reported to the
White House that United States allies were losing ground in their fight to
combat what the Reagan Administration considers Soviet and Cuban subversion.

The winter deliberations led to a request by the Administration in March for
$110 million in emergency military assistance for El Salvador in 1983, and to
President Reagan's speech to a joint session of Congress in April in which he
appealed for support for his policies and warned that the spread of Communism in
the region could threaten vital United States security interests.

The latest policy review, which culminated in the National Security Council
meeting on July 8, was prompted by several considerations, Administration
officials said. The most important, they said, was a growing sense among senior
officials that United States policy, at the financing levels provided by
Congress, had been unsuccessful in blocking the expansion of Soviet and Cuban
influence in the region.

They said recent intelligence reporting from the field indicated that the
Salvadoran military, although making some short-term gains during a spring
offensive, still faced a stalemate at best in the long run in the war against
the guerrillas.

Another factor was the continued resistence in Congress to the Administration's
policies and the sense among Mr. Reagan's aides that his April speech had failed
to produce the level of support they felt was necessary to carry out their
efforts.

Finally, there was an incentive to reconsider policy in light of the recent
power struggle over Latin issues between the White House and State Department,
which led to the dismissal of Thomas O. Enders as Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs.

The task force, which included representatives from the White House, the State
Department, the Defense Department and the C.I.A., addressed some of these
problems in an assessment of the situation in Central America.

''The essential strategy of Cuban/ Soviet surrogates is to use terrorism and
economic destruction to polarize the target countries, encourage repression from
the violent right and governments, and then use propaganda/political action to
isolate the target regimes from their populations and from the regional and
democratic community of nations,'' the task force report said.

''Governments friendly to the United States are having difficulty responding
effectively,'' it continued. ''Our most successful actions to date have been in
the development of democratic processes and preventing the collapse of
threatened economies. Diplomatic results have been mixed. The Departments of
State and Defense agree that military and economic assistance have been
insufficient; and the Department of State believes that poor recipient
performance on critical issues of troop motivation, treatment of civilians and
military discipline are even greater limitations.''

'An Awkward Parallel'

The task force warned that there was a ''danger'' that periodic efforts to seek
increased financing from Congress ''may be perceived as incremental escalation
to stave off defeat for the time being, without any clear strategy for success -
an awkward parallel with Vietnam.''

In light of these general problems, the task force recommended looking ''beyond
incremental improvements; we need to develop a longterm strategy with improved
chances of bipartisan support.''

The State Department, according to the report, believes that obtaining such
support ''depends critically on our ability to secure improved military and
political performance in El Salvador.'' Because of conflicting signals from
Washington, Salvadoran leaders have ''not been motivated to take the minimal
actions required to help us sustain our support,'' the paper said.

''What is needed is a new and reliable contract,'' the task force recommended,
adding that such a contract should be ''one that outlines for the Salvadorans
what they must do to win and what we will do to help.''

'A Greater Cuban Role'

On Nicaragua, the paper said: ''All agencies agree that we must come to terms
with the threat of Cuban escalation of the Nicaraguan conflict. There are
increased indications of a greater Cuban role in Nicaragua which appears to be
tailored to avoid threshold events such as the importation of MIG's or the
deployment of Cuban combat units.''

The Administration previously reported that Nicaraguan pilots had been trained
in Bulgaria and Cuba to fly advanced Soviet MIG fighter airplanes and that
Nicaraguan airfields had been extended to handle such planes.

''What seems likely to occur,'' the report continued, ''and may already be
occurring, is a gradual increase in the number of Cuban military personnel which
would be integrated into Nicaraguan combat units. It is unclear how far the
Cubans are prepared to go in supporting the Sandinistas in this way but it is
clear that such a tactic could seriously affect the prospects of the
anti-Sandinistas, thereby undermining U.S. policy.''

Against this background, the task force discussed the ''fundamental strategic
choices'' facing the United States.

The 'Very High' Stakes

Describing the stakes in Central America as ''very high,'' it warned that if
Communist influence in the region expands, the United States would
''increasingly have to divert military resources to cope with a growing Soviet
military presence in the Caribbean.''

At worst, the report concluded, ''Given their inherent weaknesses, most nations
in Central America (as well as other nations in the Caribbean and South America)
might fall under Communist rule and threaten the political structure in
Mexico.''

''Basically, the United States has the power and the resources to prevent such
outcomes,'' the report said.  ''However,'' it went on, ''the present U.S. policy
faces substantial opposition, at home and abroad; an increased effort would have
to surmount even greater opposition.''

According to the paper, the Defense Department believes that if the United
States effort is ''hobbled and trimmed back'' by opposition, ''the chances of
failure are high.''

If the necessary Congressional support cannot be obtained, the Defense
Department recommends a reassessment of the entire policy and consideration of
partial disengagement.

The Defense Department argument, as summarized in the paper, is that a major but
insufficent attempt to stem Soviet and Cuban control in Central America could
damage long-term United States interests more than a policy of partial
disengagement.

The reasons for this include potential damage to United States prestige abroad,
and the domestic impact of ''another major foreign policy failure'' that could
lead to increased isolationism.

In addition, according to the paper, critics of United States policy, identified
as including Mexico and France, would feel ''vindicated'' by the failure of an
active United States policy to oppose Communist regimes.

A Bipartisan Approach

Although agreeing that such risks exist, the State Department ''believes that
Congressional actions can be shaped by a genuinely bipartisan approach without
sacrificing our ability to attain fundamental objectives,'' according to the
report.

As part of the effort to build Congressional support, the task force recommended
that the State and Defense Departments prepare for consideration by the
commission long-range economic development and security plans for the region.

On Nicaragua, the task force called for continued covert aid to anti-Government
forces and continued efforts to block the passage of a financing cutoff by
Congress.

Compromise negotiations over that issue between the Administration and the House
broke down late this week. Congressional leaders said they were uncertain
whether the House would approve the cutoff of funds, but they said it was
unlikely to be approved by the Republican-controlled Senate.

The task force recommended increasing aid to El Salvador for the 1984 fiscal
year from the Administration's original request of $86.3 million to between $120
million and $140 million.

For Honduras, the group proposed increasing military aid for the same period
from the initial request of $41 million to between $55 million and $65 million,
and urged increasing assistance for Guatemala from $10.3 million to between $18
million and $20 million.

The task force proposed increasing military assistance to Costa Rica from an
original request of $2.2 million to between $7 million and $9 million.

A 'Sizeable' Supplement

Administration officials said Friday that the final figures for additional aid
had not been determined, but that the Administration was almost certain to ask
Congress for ''sizeable'' supplemental security assistance for the four nations.

Congress is still considering supplemental military aid requests for El Salvador
for the 1983 fiscal year that ends in September.  Committees in the House and
the Senate have approved only part of the extra $110 million requested by the
Administration in March and have conditioned their approval on stipulations that
the Salvadoran Government begin talks with the guerrillas.

The report recommended that $10.35 million be added to the military assistance
budget for Honduras in the current fiscal year, bringing the total to $47.6
million.

Beyond additional funding, the paper proposed preparation of a plan to improve
the Salvadoran military, including increased attention to human rights
violations and ''elimination of military participation in death squads.''

It also recommended proceeding with a plan to help the Salvadoran Government
hold presidential elections later this year by providing funds to increase voter
participation and the expand the number of ''democratic/moderate'' political
parties and groups.

The task force concluded that, ''Honduras is pivotal to U.S. policy because it
is geostrategically situated astride the major regional infiltration routes; and
Honduras has offered the U.S. use of military facilities, at considerable risk.
Honduras has openly aligned itself with the U.S.; we have an ooportunity to
provide assistance prior to the situation reaching a crisis point.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DIOXIN TESTS CONDUCTED IN 60'S ON 70 PHILADELPHIA INMATES, NOW UNKNOWN

BYLINE: By WILLIAM ROBBINS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1405 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, July 16


Somewhere, almost certainly in the United States, are as many as 70 men who
could help researchers determine the risks of human exposure to the poison
called dioxin.

The 70, whose identities have been sought without success by investigators for
the Environmental Protection Agency, are the only people known to have been
deliberately exposed to measured external doses of dioxin. All were subjects of
tests commissioned by the Dow Chemical Company and conducted in the 1960's on
the skin of inmates who volunteered at Holmesburg Prison in Northeast
Philadelphia.

Dioxin, a chemical byproduct found in some herbicides, has proved lethal in
small doses to laboratory animals. But there has been no proof that exposure
harms humans, aside from causing a skin condition known as chloracne.

More serious effects, however, have been suspected, including cancer and liver
and kidney damage. Many veterans, among 20,000 who have filed a joint suit
against several chemical companies, have attributed a variety of ailments,
including birth defects in their children and malignant tumors, to exposure to
dioxin in Agent Orange, a herbicide used for defoliation in Vietnam. The
chemical companies deny the ailments are caused by dioxin.

Severe Cases of Chloracne

Some of the inmates in the Philadelphia experiment developed severe cases of
chloracne, patches of pimples. Some of the inmates developed lesions and
blisters that, untreated, lasted four to seven months.

No records of the prisoners' identities appear to have been kept and there were
no follow-up studies after the testing period. Some experts suspect that
complications can occur many years after exposure to dioxin.

The tests were conducted for Dow by Dr. Albert M. Kligman, a dermatologist at
the University of Pennsylvania. Ten of the subjects were treated with dosages
far exceeding guidelines set by Dow. The company wanted to determine the
''threshold,'' or minimum amount, that could be expected to produce chloracne.

In a report this year on the Environmental Protection Agency's inability to
identify the men in the experiment, Frank L. Davido, a pesticides investigator
for E.P.A., wrote, ''The agency believed that records relating to Dr. Kligman's
studies could have provided additional information on the risks associated with
the uses of 2,4,5-T and Silvex because the precise dermal dosages of TCDD in the
studies were apparently known.''

Potent Doses Given

TCDD, or 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, which was applied to the skin of
the prisoners, is the most potent of about 75 dioxin compounds. It is an
impurity formed in the production of the herbicides 2,4,5-T, Silvex (2,4,5-TP)
and Agent Orange.

Dr. Kligman has declined to be interviewed, or to discuss his experiments at any
length.  But, in a brief telephone conversation, he said: ''All those people
could have leukemia now - about one chance in 20 billion. And I could be hit by
an asteroid when I walk out on the street, but I don't think I will.''

He said he had given all his test records to Dow. ''I believe that included the
names,'' he said.  A Dow spokesman, Robert Charlton, said the company had never
had the names. Health officials for the City of Philadelphia and Holmesburg, as
well as Dow and Dr. Kligman, have told the environmental agency they have no
records to help identify the men.

Tests Disclosed in 1980

Dr. Kligman's tests for Dow were discovered by the E.P.A. in hearings the agency
conducted in 1980 on whether the two Silvex and 2,4,5-T herbicides, which are
restricted to some agricultural uses, should be prohibited altogether.

Hearing records provide ample documentation of the tests and how they were
conducted, but offer no clues to the identities of the subjects except to show
that most were black and ranged from 21 years of age to 49. They were paid for
participating in the experiments.

Many cases of chloracne have occurred among workers in chemical plants,
sometimes as a result of industrial accidents. Thousands were exposed to dioxin
in a town in Italy in 1976 after an accident at a plant. In none of those cases,
however, were exact degrees of exposure known.

Also, according to documents filed at the 1980 hearing, an earlier experiment by
another Philadelphia doctor had tested solutions ranging from 2.5 percent to 10
percent of Silvex, which tends to contain a dioxin contaminant, on the skin of
51 volunteers, believed also to have been prisoners. At 5 percent, the solution
caused ''primary skin irritation,'' according to a Dow summary of a report by
Dr. Joseph V. Klauder, a dermatologist then also associated with the university.


No Records or Names Found

Dr. Klauder died about 10 years ago. Neither his test records nor the names of
his subjects are available.  A chloracne outbreak at a Dow plant led a company
official to commission the Kligman experiment.  In a letter to Dr. Kligman in
July 1965, the official, Verald K.  Rowe, said he was sending TCDD to be used in
the tests. He warned that the material ''is highly toxic'' and that an oral dose
of onehalf to one microgram of it ''is always fatal'' in laboratory animals,
with a ''typical clinical picture of severe liver and kidney injury.'' A
microgram is one-millionth of a gram.

''The seriousness of the consequences that might develop from testing with this
type of compound require that we approach the matter in a highly conservative
manner,'' Mr. Rowe said.

Negative Results Reported

On May 11, 1966, 10 months after he apparently received the material from Dow,
Dr. Kligman reported ''astonishingly negative results'' to the company. He had
used six groups of 10 men, though a few dropped out during the test period. The
dosages had not exceeded 16 micrograms and the men had been given liver and
kidney tests.

''No subject developed symptoms that could be related to the treatment,'' he
said in a later report.  Mr. Rowe authorized more experiments and Dr. Kligman
conducted a second set of tests.  ''In January of 1968,'' Mr. Rowe said in
testimony at the 1980 hearing on use of the pesticides, ''I was surprised to
receive a letter from Dr. Kligman reporting new results.''

Dr. Kligman's message was that, with a ''new panel of 10 subjects,'' he had
increased the total application to about 7,500 micrograms. The first test, he
wrote, ''encouraged me to proceed more vigorously.''

''Eight of 10 subjects showed acne lesions usually beginning in three to four
weeks,'' he reported after the second round of tests.  ''In three instances, the
lesions progressed to inflammatory pustules and papules. These lesions lasted
for four to seven months, since no effort was made to speed healing by active
treatment.''

The subjects were given kidney and liver tests for six weeks after the
experiment and ''in no instance was there laboratory or clinical evidence of
toxicity,'' Dr. Kligman wrote.

Dr. Kligman did not testify at the E.P.A. hearings, but Mr. Rowe did.

No Long-Term Followup

''Did you or Dow consider whether the human subjects you had exposed to TCDD had
developed cancers in the years subsequent to the conduct of the study?'' Andrew
Gordon, an agency attorney, asked.

''We have not followed up on that,'' Mr. Rowe said.  He was also asked whether
he would call Dr. Kligman's application of 7,500 micrograms the conservative
approach Mr. Rowe had requested.  ''No sir, I wouldn't,'' he responded.  When
the dioxin tests were first disclosed, by The Philadelphia Inquirer in 1981, 40
prisoners and former prisoners got in touch with the E.P.A., believing they had
been among those tested.

Nine of the men were interviewed, but Mr. Davido concluded that it was hopeless
to try to determine which of them might have been subjects of the dioxin tests.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MUSIC NOTES;
A RECITAL HALL TAKES ON NEW LIFE

BYLINE: By BERNARD HOLLAND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1297 words


Carnegie Hall is taking steps to remake the image of its somewhat seedy
stepchild, Carnegie Recital Hall. Perched off to the side on the third floor of
this honored institution on 57th Street, the 283-seat Recital Hall has served in
recent years mostly as a rental establishment, and its reasonable rates -though
allowing many poor but proud musicians an honorable format -have also attracted
armies of more dubious talents from all over the world. The Recital Hall, in
other words, has become the cheapest and simplest way of making a New York
debut, of attracting a critic to cover it and enabling the performer ever after
to append the word ''Carnegie'' to his or her list of accomplishments. (The
farther one gets from New York the less the distinction between the big hall and
the little one seems to be.)

Carnegie Hall wants to change all this and will begin in the fall with nine
subscription series of its own, adding up to 48 events in all during 1983-84.
They include two separate recital series for emerging young American
instrumentalists and singers, six lecture/demonstrations on Bach to be given by
Rosalyn Tureck and the Tureck Bach Institute, a lecture/performance series by
four young American composers, three concerts by the Raphael Trio, and other
concerts given over to ethnic music from around the world, jazz, along with
contemporary concerts and various chamber recitals.

The ''new'' Recital Hall is obviously intended to have catholic appeal. The
first of the concerts, on Sept. 24, will offer the jazz baritone saxophonist,
Hamiet Bluiett. The last, on March 30, features Bach concertos by Miss Tureck
and her company of players.  The rentals to outside individuals will continue as
before, but prices have gone up a little - from about $500 with minimal services
to about $600. Seymour Rosen, Carnegie Hall's artistic director, says the rise
is part economics, but he also hopes that higher prices will discourage more
frivolous enterprises. ''We'd like to exercise more quality control,'' says Mr.
Rosen, who readily admits to the Recital Hall's depressing image in recent
years, ''but we are owned by the city and we simply cannot deny people access.''

Prior to last year, when reconstruction of the lobby and the replacement of
elevators curtailed usage, Carnegie Recital Hall was opening its doors to
audiences almost 450 times a year (three successive afternoon/evening concerts
on Saturdays and Sundays being the rule at the height of the music season). ''We
feel the Recital Hall has been too long just a piece of real estate to be
rented,'' says Mr. Rosen, ''and we want to influence its character and quality.
We're going to lose a lot of money on things like the Tureck series, and our
jazz musicians and young composers and recitalists are mostly less known people.
But we want to be broader and a little different and to place Carnegie Recital
Hall at the forefront of what's happening in music.''

The Recital Hall is being repainted and cleaned inside, and there are future
plans to reshape the floor, to make the stage smaller and lower, to remove the
proscenium and to ''tone down'' the blaring acoustics and their visual
counterpart, the ''hot'' red seat coverings.

Carnegie Hall originally offered two peripheral halls to complement its main
one. The 1,200-seat Lyceum in Carnegie's basement - the site of the
institution's first concert (a piano recital) in 1891 - is now the Carnegie Hall
Cinema. The Recital Hall was first known as the Chamber Music Hall, and
appropriately the 1891 season featured three different string quartets playing
Beethoven, Haydn, Schubert, Tchaikovsky and Dvorak. Musicians who lived and
taught in Carnegie Hall's studios also used this space for their own concerts,
and Edward MacDowell, the American composer, lectured there before the
classrooms for this purpose at Columbia University were built.

Wine-Country Festival

Summer used to mean low tide for the music season but no more.  Waves of
festivals, concert series, opera companies, academies and workshops continue to
wash over the months of July and August, and the latest manifestation of how
permanent the process has become comes from slightly to the north of us - from
the wine country of New York State, where the the Rochester Philharmonic opened
yesterday the Finger Lakes Performing Arts Center.

For the past seven seasons the Finger Lakes Music Festival has played on its
present site but with temporary scaffolding and outdoor seating. Now there is a
roof, three sides open to the outdoors and protected seating for over 2,500.
There remain, as before, places for up to 10,000 listeners to sit and listen
informally on the surrounding hillside. Rain in former years moved the music and
its audience to a neighboring gymnasium.

The new facility was built by virtue of a $2.2 million given by the State of New
York. The ownership of the Center is now with the County of Ontario, but the
festival is largely managed by the Rochester Philharmonic which serves both as
performer and presenter. The actual site is on the grounds of the Community
College of the Finger Lakes about 30 minutes from the City of Rochester.

Transcriptions Galore

Not too far away, in Lewiston, N.Y., Artpark will try to round up its share of
the summer audience today with a 12-hour marathon called ''Bach around the
Clock.'' Running from noon until midnight, this concert features alternately the
Buffalo Philharmonic conducted by Christopher Keene, the Ars Nova Chamber
Orchestra, the Amherst Saxophone Quartet, the Artpark Opera Chorus and various
soloists and conductors. There will be all kinds of vocal and instrumental
pieces, along with Bach arrangements by Stokowski, Mahler, Gounod, Walton,
Honegger, Elgar, Vaughan Williams and Respighi.

HEMIDEMISEMIQUAVERS: Zubin Mehta conducts the second act of Wagner's ''Tristan
und Isolde'' with Jon Vickers, Ute Vinzing and the Philadelphia Orchestra at
Philadelphia's Mann Music Center on Tuesday. Frederic R. Mann - for whom the
center is named and whose system of advanced subscriptions for a few and free
admission for many rescued the orchestra's Robin Hood Dell summer concerts from
bankruptcy some years ago - was recently named to the New York Philharmonic's
board of directors....Columbia University will host a conference of the
International Council for Traditional Music from Aug. 8 to 15. Major themes this
year are Music in Urban Environments and Ethnomusicology in the Americas, but
performers will come from all parts of the world - Bolivia, Haiti, Vietnam,
Turkey, Ethiopa and Ghana among them....The Museum of Modern Art is currently
offering music by Philip Glass and Glenn Branca at its Performance Video
exhibition which runs until Aug. 16....On Wednesday at the Brooklyn Bridge
Anchorage, Jacob Burckhardt and Alvin Curran are presenting a film and music
performance called ''The Advantages of Great Toys.'' Five film loops will be
projected on the theater space's 50-foot high vaulted walls and there will be
music by Mr. Curran derived from Hart Crane's poem about the Bridge, translated
into Morse code and then into traditional music notation....At the Barge near
the Brooklyn Bridge, Robert DeGaetano will recreate three piano recitals played
by Gottschalk, Schumann and Liszt in 1853. The first is at 6:30 on Tuesday,
while the second and third are scheduled for Aug. 23 and Sept. 25.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DECADES OF STRIFE HAVE MADE SINHANOUK AN ARTFUL SURVIVOR

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 970 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


The Vietnamese call him a has-been, and he has held no power inside Cambodia for
13 years. But Prince Norodom Sihanouk, now 60 years old, keeps springing back
from oblivion.

For the past year he has been president of the exiled coalition Government of
Democratic Kampuchea, which the United Nations recognizes as Cambodia's sole
authority. Over the past couple of months, moreover, he has been voicing a new
idea that some consider scandalous. He has been telling people, not very
privately, that his own anti-Vietnamese coalition - armed by China and greatly
aided by the non-Communist Association of Southeast Asian Nations - has become
too crudely anti-Vietnamese. Independent as ever, Prince Sihanouk has been
saying that the international campaign to save Cambodia from Vietnam may be on a
futile, dangerous course.

What has made Prince Sihanouk an important figure in Southeast Asia since 1941,
when Cambodia's French colonial masters pulled him out of high school and named
him king?

First, he is forgiving to a fault. When tossed from power he finds powerful
friends. Second, his legitimacy as a leader outstripped that of his successors
by a mile: He was Cambodia's traditional ''godking'' once, with much magic over
the peasantry, and he was freely elected Prime Minister. Third, in foreign
affairs he had a realistic bent. The two leaders who followed him - Lon Nol, a
right-wing mystic, and Pol Pot, a fanatical Maoist - both fantasized, as Prince
Sihanouk never did, that little Cambodia might vanquish Vietnam. The chief in
Phnom Penh now, Heng Samrin, is Vietnam's creature.

His worst enemies, who consider him vain and irresponsible, acknowledge his
shrewdness in identifying Cambodian independence and neutrality with himself.
But his shrewdness has often failed.  Furious at his overthrow in 1970 by
pro-American generals, he immediately joined forces with Cambodia's Communist
insurgents. His speeches and prestige helped them grow, and they seized Phnom
Pehn five years later. He became ''President'' for a year in Pol Pot's
Government. Soon he lost even the title and became a captive; more than a dozen
of his relatives died in the general slaughter. By the time Prince Sihanouk flew
off to China - a few days before the Vietnamese entered Phnom Penh on January 7,
1979 - his political career seemed broken and dirtied beyond repair.

Yet he took up the war of words against Vietnam and condemned Pol Pot. He urged
the United Nations to declare that Cambodia had no Government at all. But his
position became a lonely one. Pol Pot's deposed Government held its seat in the
General Assembly, maintained its armed presence inside Cambodia, and lacked
nothing but respectability and a country. A year ago, the Prince was persuaded
to join forces with those he had recently said were ''fighting to keep their own
compatriots enslaved.'' He has been in the limelight since, rallying friends
with his squeaky eloquence.

A Slight Shift

In Bangkok last month, as he was stopping at the airport between planes, the
foreign ministers of five Southeast Asian nations, representing among them more
than a quarter of a billion people, braved the city's hideous traffic just to
chat with him in an airport lounge. They needed him, of course: Without him, Pol
Pot would loom very large.

He then jetted off to confer with Indonesia's President Suharto, flying on to
Africa to push the coalition's cause. He will be in New York this autumn, when
his Government will probably be seated again at the United Nations.

Lately, however, his position has shifted slightly. Frustrated at repeating the
formula that Pol Pot may be a murderer but is nonetheless a ''patriot,'' the
Prince has been telling friends he dreads Pol Pot's return. He reminds listeners
how he once got along with the Vietnamese, and he has been warning his partners
that France, Australia and other countries seem more inclined to deal with
Vietnam despite their disapproval of its venture in Cambodia.

Prince Sihanouk's son, Norodom Ranaridh, said last month after his father
threatened to quit the coalition that the Prince was ''very pessimistic'' about
the coalition's ''narrow'' anti-Vietnamese stance. The coalition just kept
repeating that Vietnam must go, he said. ''Do you think for a moment that
Vietnam would withdraw unconditionally from Kampuchea?'' the son asked. ''No,''
he continued. ''So Prince Sihanouk says that we must find another technique for
dealing with the situation.''

The son confirmed a recent report that Prince Sihanouk suspected China, his
longtime supporter, of planning secretly to eject the Vietnamese by force. The
possibility, thinks the Prince, hints of Pol Pot's return to power and could
legitimize Vietnam's refusal to withdraw. The only alternative, he has said, is
a negotiated settlement involving the neutralization of Pol Pot's guerrillas.

Last April, Vietnamese troops destroyed the Prince's own military camp in
western Cambodia. He has recently learned in detail how Pol Pot's soldiers
killed some of his relatives. He is worried by reports, none yet proven, that
hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese civilians are colonizing his homeland.

Prince Sihanouk looks relatively trim these days, but he doesn't believe - as
Peking, Washington and several Southeast Asian capitals keep asserting - that
time is on his side, or his coalition's, or Cambodia's. So he has been
freshening his sturdy old image as an independent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Prince Norodom Sihanouk

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OUTDOORS;
Repairing Tackle Far From Home

BYLINE: By Nelson Bryant

SECTION: Section 5; Page 8, Column 5; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 988 words


TACKLE that breaks or malfunctions is an inconvenience when one is angling close
to civilization, but on an extended wilderness trip such failures can be
disastrous.

When my oldest son returned from Vietnam, a friend of mine invited both of us to
fish for fresh water salmon and trout in a remote Quebec lake whose waters he
had leased from the province. My son Steve and I caught dozens of salmon
averaging perhaps four pounds and several Quebec red trout over three pounds.

For those like us who had spent many long days catching one or two such salmon
in Vermont and New Hampshire lakes, the experience was intoxicating. We killed
only a few of the salmon we landed, enough for meals for us and the other
members of the entourage, but the fishing was so exciting we couldn't stop
catching and releasing the salmon. We paused only now and then to watch a moose
foraging for aquatic weeds in the shallows or a herd of caribou swimming from
one headland to another.

We angled with such intensity that we began to handle the fish recklessly, and
late in the afternoon we snapped the tip sections of our light, two-piece
fiberglass spinning rods in half.

We had intended to use fly rods alone, had begun our angling with them and had
caught several nice salmon at the lake's outlet and two of its inlets. But soon
we discovered that except for those spots, the fish were too deep for floating
fly lines, and we had no sinking lines.

That evening, I pondered how to repair the spinning rods, the only ones we had
brought with us. An inventory of possible repairing materials turned up a bottle
of Pliabond glue I had tucked in my fishing vest, some nylon thread and needles,
a couple of single-edged razor blades from my shaving kit and my Swiss army
knife whose accouterments included a little saw.

The repairing technique, when it finally occurred to me, was simple: Square off
the jagged edges of the broken tip (I used the knife's saw for this). After
cutting the winding thread away, the ferrule and tip-top have to be heated in
order to soften the glue that holds them in place. This may be done with a flame
from a match, candle or cigarette lighter. Apply the heat sparingly, because too
much will damage the thin, hollow rod material, whether fiberglass or graphite.

Shorn of its thread, guides and tip-top, the upper end of the tip section may be
inserted into the butt of the lower half - through the hole provided by the male
ferrule's removal - and drawn through until it wedges solidly. The joint is then
dabbed with glue and wrapped with thread and the hardware replaced.

Glues such as Pliabond are excellent for securing wrapping thread but do not
work well on ferrules and tip-tops because the fit is so close that air cannot
get at the glue and dry it. Sometimes enough of the original heat-sensitive glue
is left within those rod parts to secure them firmly, but one can't count on
this. Bring along a little piece of stick shellac or a strip of heat-sensitive
glue, which can be bought in nearly every hardware store.

Rods so repaired are shortened by several inches and lose some of their
sensitivity, but they are durable. The rods Steve and I fixed are still being
used. They are ugly things, but they work.

There are occasions when the tip sections of fly rods break right at, or just
below, the tip-top. If the break is close enough to the end so that there is
still room for the slightly shortened tip section to fit within the tip-top, the
flame and heat-sensitive glue approach will have you fishing again in minutes.
Recently, while fiddling around with a short section of lead core line attached
to my leader (in order to get down to deep-running shad) I made a poorlytimed
cast, and my fly rod broke just below the tip-top. I repaired it at riverside,
and the loss of an inch or so in length didn't alter the rod's casting
performance.

If your wilderness fishing trips call for hip boots or waders, make sure you
bring along the proper repair materials. What works on rubber is often useless
on plastic and vice versa. If you don't mind an overnight wait for it to cure, a
product called Shoe GOO or Sportsman's GOOP (they are identicial and are sold in
K-Mart stores) adheres tenaciously to almost anything, including rubber,
leather, wood, vinyl and other plastics, cork and glass.

If the level-wind mechanism on a revolving spool reel lets go when you are far
from a tackle shop, remove it. You'll soon learn to thumb the line evenly on the
spool. Sometimes the bail on an open-faced spinning reel refuses to stay open
while casting. A quick way around this is to cut the bail off just above the
line roller with the stainless steel cutting pliers of the type you see in the
sheath on the belts of most offshore anglers.

To use a spinning reel so-modified, cast in the usual manner and, just before
the lure hits the water, pick up the line with your index finger and place it
over the roller. If you wait until the cast is done and the line is slack, this
maneuver is sometimes awkward.

This so-called manual-pickup approach is favored by a few anglers.  Garcia, now
Abu-Garcia, once put out a huge surf-casting spinning reel with a manual pickup.
I still have one, and although I favor conventional reels for surf casting, I
often use it when speed of retrieve is important, as when working a popping plug
in slack water. It has never failed or needed repair, and I rather imagine it
will outlast its owner.

And, finally, it is a good idea to bring along an extra spool of monofilament
line and an extra fly line when on a wilderness fishing trip.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NONFICTION IN BRIEF

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 5; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1975 words


LOWENSTEIN Acts of Courage and Belief.  Edited by Gregory Stone and Douglas
Lowenstein.  Foreword by Arthur Schlesinger Jr.  Introduction by James A.
Wechsler.  Illustrated. 369 pp.  San Diego and New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich. Cloth, $18.95. Paper, $9.95.

By RICHARD J.MARGOLIS

The world could use a measured biography of Allard K. Lowenstein, that
remarkable reformer remembered as the instigator of the Dump Johnson campaign
that led to President Johnson's bowing out of office. Meanwhile, this collection
of Lowenstein's writings, along with tributes and reminiscences from his
friends, will have to do.  The sampling in ''Lowenstein'' of his own speeches
and articles is rather thin. As James A. Wechsler notes in an introduction,
''Too much of what he said or did is not engraved in any official record or
document.''

Lowenstein's friends, however, afford us an affecting glimpse of both the man
and his times. ''A rare combination of generous passion and acute
intelligence,'' as Arthur Schlesinger Jr. characterized him, Lowenstein became
''the supreme agitator of his day.'' He appeared to have tapped some fountain of
perpetual energy and hope until that moment in March 1980 when he was shot down
in his Manhattan law office by a deranged young protege.

As national chairman of Students for Stevenson in 1952 and then as an aide to
Senator Hubert H. Humphrey, Lowenstein plunged into mainstream liberal politics
without forswearing his maverick credentials. By 1963 he was traipsing around
Mississippi, riskily registering black voters. He spoke against the war in
Vietnam, Jimmy Breslin reminds us, ''at a time so early that the nation thought
any such stand was treasonous.''

A euology from The New Yorker recalls that Lowenstein ''shifted the boundaries
of the possible so that other, more 'political' men could bring it into being.''
That was certainly the case in 1967, when he started the Dump Johnson movement,
an idea, all the experts said, whose time would never come. Not all of
Lowenstein's campaigns yielded victories. He ran for Congress in the unlikeliest
of conservative districts, winning only once (in Suffolk County). Two years
later the Republicans gerrymandered him out of office, but he kept right on
crusading.

Lowenstein's enemies came from the left as well as the right.  ''Lowenstein is
always ebullient,'' David Halberstam observed in a 1968 profile. ''Probably
that's one of the reasons the New Left doesn't like him, just as a lot of
liberals now dislike Humphrey for the optimism of his tone, in what is to them
an essentially dark time. Lowenstein is no Humphrey. He sees all the darkness
... but he is resilient, optimistic and keeps saying that the system can work.''
''Resilient'' and ''optimistic'' are the words that keep recurring in this
affectionate anthology.
GRUNCH OF GIANTS By R. Buckminster Fuller.  98 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press.
$8.95.

By PETER ENGEL

No, the title of R. Buckminster Fuller's book, published shortly before his
death, is not a misprint. ''Grunch'' stands for Gross Universal Cash Heist, a
new addition to his many coinages.  ''Tensegrity,'' ''synergetics'' and
''spaceship Earth'' have already found their way into at least some vocabularies
as part of Fuller's effort to circumvent ordinary language. In his
''synergetic'' approach to life, the whole is greater than the sum of its parts,
and each object or process must be regarded as part of an enormous system. A new
way of thinking requires a new way of communicating, and so biological organisms
are now ''locally interregenerative functions,'' weapons are ''killingry
artifacts,'' and dollars are ''real-life support units.'' The last two are
manipulated by an invisible army of ''soulless supranational giants,'' a
conglomerate composed of the American legal system, the multinational oil
companies and the military-industrial complex - in short, Grunch.

Once one has untangled the language, the point of ''Grunch of Giants'' seems to
be this: Throughout history divisiveness has been caused by the struggle for
limited resources. In our own era, technological advances have obviated the need
for such a struggle; we have ''scientifically and incontrovertibly'' found that
there is enough to support everyone. Selfishness persists only because of the
misconception that there is not enough to go around. On the contrary, Fuller
argues here, only by combining our diverse strengths and working synergetically
can we defeat Grunch and create a ''worldover integrated techno-economic
planetary society,'' a world state with a higher standard of living than ever
before achieved by humankind.

There is a seductive appeal to Fuller's prophecy that technological change will
constitute the world's first bloodless revolution. But in ''Grunch of Giants''
he amassed little new evidence to support the conclusion that we are moving
inevitably toward a harmonious global state. Two of Fuller's earlier books,
''Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth'' and ''Critical Path'' (to which the
present volume is a sequel), present the same case with somewhat greater cogency
and lucidity, though his most original ideas are still contained in
''Synergetics.'' There, in the simpler domain of tensegrities and geodesic
domes, Buckminster Fuller's innovative language conveys innovative ideas. In the
more complex world of economics and politics, it does little more than obscure
thoughts already clouded.
PREVIEWS & PREMISES By Alvin Toffler.  230 pp. New York: William Morrow & Co.
$11.95.

By MARTHA BAYLES

Alvin Toffler has written two international best sellers, ''Future Shock'' and
''The Third Wave,'' and he travels extensively, lecturing and meeting with all
kinds of people involved in technological and social change. Holding that
traditional political ideologies are obsolete, he carries on an argument with
both the right and, as in this book, the left. ''Previews & Premises'' grows out
of interviews between Mr. Toffler and a publishing collective in Boston, the
South End Press.

The author, who has appeared on innumerable panels and talk shows, fields
questions cleverly, coming off as more imaginative and flexible than his
questioners, especially on such subjects as the structure of the workplace, race
relations and the likelihood of high tech development under centralized
socialist planning. It is refreshing to watch him cut through some of the
outmoded assumptions of the left - for example, that heads of corporations are
pleased to see widespread unemployment.

Sometimes Mr. Toffler seems enamored of change to the point of being cavalier
about the present and the lessons of the past. He looks forward to a time when
political power will be decentralized, or ''demassified'' into a mosaic of
competing regions and interest groups. Yet he does not explain how this
competition is to be arbitrated or what his future society will substitute for
centralized planning.

Since his questioners share his dislike of Western political institutions, they
do not press him on this matter - which is too bad, because politics is his area
of greatest weakness. On one page he praises the Western democracies,
particularly the United States, for being the only societies capable of
adjusting to the technological revolution that they originated. On another page
he sweepingly declares the obsolescence of these same political systems. The
reader is left wondering how the new polity Mr. Toffler so vaguely envisions
will cope with the social dislocation he so confidently predicts.
SETTING THE TONE Essays and a Diary.  By Ned Rorem.  383 pp. New York:
Coward-McCann. $18.95

By BARBARA SHULGASSER

Ned Rorem's ''Final Diary,'' it turns out, was not. To add to the Paris, New
York and other editions, we now have ''Setting the Tone,'' more entries from the
recidivist diarist and several fine articles on musical subjects. Mr. Rorem, a
Pulitzer Prize-winning composer, uses his diaries as a record of momentary
observation intended for later release. ''I always hesitate to speak my own
name, feeling somehow that I am dropping it,'' he writes. But hesitation is a
long way from abstention, and Ned Rorem continues to be the author's favorite
subject. Whereas in the past he quoted tributes to his good looks, now he
observes the inexorable damage of time: ''Slim legs have turned skinny, though
my shoulders remain good shaped.''

''Setting the Tone'' rings with opinionated descriptions of others. W.H. Auden
is ''the poet whose bourbon dribbled from an unshaved chin onto a maculate tie,
from there into his lap, and thence down to his humid socks.'' He is kinder to
Noel Coward, whose ''chief barter'' was charm, ''the ability to ingratiate
without cloying.'' But he is not kind at all to Truman Capote, who, he writes,
looks like ''that extraterrestrial embryo from the end of 'Close Encounters.' ''

In the essays reprinted from various publications, Mr. Rorem's imagery is fresh
and arresting. When he looks beyond himself to such subjects as Cosima Wagner as
well as Auden and Coward, he is capable of providing canny insights, and he
offers a particularly luminous essay on the music teacher extraordinaire Nadia
Boulanger.

Why Mr. Rorem, with his considerable gift as an essayist, continues to publish
the diaries is a puzzle. Editing a diary for publication can only sap its most
intriguing aspect - the picture of a man with his guard down. Only for brief
moments does the guard slip here. He is hurt by the criticism of his past
diaries - pale invective next to the vituperation at which Mr. Rorem himself is
so adept. ''I cannot bear to have my sarcasms taken sarcastically,'' he writes.
Well, he could keep them to himself.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Richard Margolis is a columnist for The New Leader.  Peter Engel is a freelance
writer.  Martha Bayles is a novelist who teaches writing at Harvard University.
Barbara Shulgasser is a reporter in Chicago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Dioxin Legacy

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 569 words


Dioxin is the chemical industry's most unpleasant byproduct, an extraordinarily
potent poison that lingers for years at sites where it was created or dumped.
Newly detected dioxin deposits vex citizens in Missouri and New Jersey. And
dioxin haunts its makers, too: Vietnam veterans claim millions in damages for
being exposed to a defoliant that contained dioxin as a manufacturing impurity.

The legal documents in the case bear on whether Dow Chemical and other major
producers of the herbicides shared their full knowledge of dioxin's toxicity
with the Government. That is for the courts to decide. Pertinent to the public's
health, however, as well as the veterans', are still unanswered questions of
just what harm dioxin does to humans, and at what dosage.

The problem has confused even the American Medical Association, whose delegates,
apparently short of nobler causes, voted last month that dioxin was the victim
of a ''witch hunt'' by the news media. The resolution, since repudiated,
contended the chemical had caused no direct deaths and ''very little
morbidity.'' But that's probably because dioxin lacked the opportunity, not the
capacity, to harm humans. The resolution gave an incomplete picture of the harm
dioxin may do through industrial accidents, particularly when people are exposed
to low doses over long periods of time.

Tests on animals show dioxin's unique capacity for deranging living cells. Even
the minutest doses can, over time, cause a bizarre range of effects, like
harming the fetus, damaging the liver and depressing the immune system. The
Centers for Disease Control recommends that an area be evacuated if the level of
dioxin exceeds one part per billion parts of soil. Dow, despite its defense of
dioxin, also recommends an extremely low level - 10 parts per billion - as the
safe limit for children.

Dioxin's danger came to light because of a virulent form of acne it can cause in
chemical workers. In 1965, with that risk in mind, Dow advised other chemical
companies not to let the dioxin in herbicide exceed a certain level. Dow's
purpose, according to a court document, was that the industry ''clean up our own
house from within'' rather than have legislation imposed.

That may have been a responsible initiative rather than the conspiracy the
claimants now allege. Yet it may have denied industry and government the
occasion for exploring a more fundamental question - whether the dioxin level
set to protect against acne was also low enough to protect against less visible
illnesses.

Through accident or carelessness, many soldiers in Vietnam were sprayed with
Agent Orange or allowed to enter sprayed areas too soon. Whether they suffered
any long-term health effects from the dioxin impurities is not yet clear. A new
Air Force study of the pilots who sprayed the defoliant and were most heavily
exposed to it finds no unusual pattern of death. Other progressing studies of
Agent Orange may give a different answer.

The manufacturers contend that the Government knew as much as they did about
dioxin's health effects. The Agent Orange trial, whether or not it vindicates
the veterans' claims, may at least establish whether clues to dioxin's unique
toxicity were adequately heeded by government and industry.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
COME BACK, TOM PAINE

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 893 words

DATELINE: PARIS, July 17


Congress is arguing, without a hint of intentional satire, whether or not to
give money for ''covert'' aid to guerrillas in Nicaragua.

Vice President George Bush has just toured Europe and is going about the U.S. to
seek understanding of policy on Central America.  The problem, as he sees it, is
only that ''we haven't explained it well enough.''

Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard Perle has charged that critics who
question Administration seriousness on arms control are ''damaging and
unworthy'' of America's negotiating stand.

But in the same breath, he said that even if an arms control agreement is
reached with Moscow, the U.S. would still go ahead with the MX missile, the B-1
bomber, the Stealth bomber, the Trident 2 submarine and its new missile. The
current U.S. arsenal was built earlier than Soviet weapons, so it's older and we
have to catch up with their catching up, he insisted, saying it's false to call
this an ''arms race.''

Ambassador Deane Hinton, in a farewell speech in San Salvador, said he fully
agrees with the policy of an Administration which has just dumped him and his
immediate superior, Assistant Secretary of State Thomas Enders, for doubting
that unleashed right-wing killers can ''win'' the civil war.

That's why Seymour Hersh's book about Henry Kissinger in the Nixon White House
matters. The sordid bureaucratic infighting and the ego trips can be set aside
as the gossip of history. Every government has dirty linen.

But Mr. Hersh has carefully correlated the various versions of major policy
decisions, public and private, in a way that shows how much of the
''explanations'' were deliberate lies. Certainly, it didn't begin in the Nixon
Administration.

It was unfortunate, one of the casualities of hurried journalism, that the same
kind of matching what was said out loud and what was being done was never
attempted with the Pentagon Papers, which reached back through the Kennedy and
Johnson Administrations. That would be a worthy subject for a graduate student's
thesis.

The point isn't the revelations. It's that the public has to suppose the lying
hasn't stopped.  We know that Communist governments lie as a matter of course,
above all to their own people. No doubt the K.G.B. has a vast, masterful network
to spread disinformation among us.

It can be accepted that the delicacies of diplomacy require a degree of
dissembling, of veiling detail as a card-player veils his hand until the tricks
are played.

But the question now is what game is being played, what is the purpose of the
decisions the U.S. public is asked to support without challenge, on pain of
being called ignorant or unpatriotic.

There is no need to be as radical as Thomas Paine to see that common sense must
contradict what we are asked to support with our taxes and our votes. The
leaders say that if we only knew what they know and can't tell because it's too
''sensitive,'' we could not but acknowledge their wisdom. But we have learned
too many times that when the records are opened, they show we were misled for
the leaders' own purposes, not the nation's.

The Supreme Court has invalidated the legislative veto on executive decisions.
It isn't clear how that applies to foreign policy, such as the charade of
requiring certification that Salvador is doing a bit better on its murder tally
before Congress releases funds.

Perhaps the Court's ruling should apply across the board. Congress is really not
equipped to conduct foreign relations. The very process of committee haggling
over compromise (well, maybe some covert aid against Nicaragua but with strings)
and the vulnerability to special interest lobbies make clear, reasoned decision
nearly impossible.

But Congress built these traps in the law because it found out the executive
branch wasn't dealing in good faith and some strings had to be attached to its
hidden activities. The Gulf of Tonkin resolution, which President Johnson
secretly used to launch Americans into combat in Vietnam, was the breaking
point. Somebody has to make sure power is used responsibly in international
affairs, and the task fell to Congress out of national frustration.

Take Nicaragua. The Administration says it isn't trying to overthrow the
revolutionary government. The stated policy is no longer just to stop the arms
flow to Salvadoran rebels, however, but to make the Nicaraguan regime keep the
promises of democratic pluralism given to the Organization of American States in
return for support in ousting the Somoza dictatorship.

For that, the Administration asks $80 million in ''secret'' funds for people who
served Somoza and whose avowed aim is to topple his successors. Washington
refuses to help Eden Pastora, who fought Somoza and is now fighting the
Sandinistas to restore their original programs. Confusing?

These things are said to be necessary to ''save Mexico,'' which firmly
disagrees. The spectre of ''millions of feet people'' invading the U.S. for
refuge is evoked to panic the public. Come back, Tom Paine, we need some Common
Sense.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RIFLE WITHOUT A CARTRIDGE CASE

BYLINE: By JOHN TAGLIABUE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 7, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 702 words

DATELINE: BONN, July 17


A West German arms manufacturer is developing a rifle that fires a cartridge
without a case. Weapon experts say the design could revolutionize the
manufacture of small firearms.

Ballistic experts say the cartridge, without the metal case that usually
surrounds the explosive propellant, will be smaller, lighter and cheaper to
make. The rifle's design will be simpler, too, without the mechanism needed to
eject spent cartridge cases.

''The concept is a revolution, so the industry must be interested directly or
indirectly,'' said Edouard Celens, head of the Belgian Military Academy's
ballistic laboratory in Brussels. ''It is in an early stage,'' he emphasized,
but added that industry experts were examining its feasibility.

Production May Begin in 1986

Heckler & Koch G.m.b.H., the family-owned arms company that developed the new
rifle and cartridge, and Dynamit Nobel A.G., the chemical product subsidiary of
Germany's Friedrich Flick group that developed the high-temperature propellant,
say they hope to begin mass production for the West German army in 1986.

But widespread use seems unlikely soon. Arms experts say the product still has
technical flaws, such as the bullet's tendency to fire prematurely, to crumble
or to absorb moisture and fail to fire at all.

According to Gunther Lochner, a Heckler official, the company began developing
the rifle in the early 1970's, after the basic concept was chosen in a three-way
competition to design a rifle for Germany's armed forces in the 1990's. The Bonn
Government paid part of the development cost.

Heckler engineers designed a 4.7 millimeter cartridge weighing only 5 grams,
consisting of a projectile imbedded in propellant baked into a solid square
block. The 30-inch long rifle, called the G11 and vaguely resembling an
elongated movie camera, holds 50 cartridges. It can fire them singly or in
spurts of three. Heckler officials say the unusual design increases accuracy by
reducing recoil.

Concept Is Not New

Arms experts at the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, in Brussels, note that
the concept of a caseless cartridge is not new.  United States military forces,
for example, used caseless shells in Vietnam, but experienced problems with
them. Doubts about the feasibility of caseless cartridges for use as infantry
ammunition remain.

''My concern is that a rifle shell gets carried in a belt, gets knocked around,
you roll over on it and it gets wet,'' a United States Army small arms expert
said. ''The question is, can the advantages in weight and cost outweigh possible
drawbacks.''

Caseless ammunition had long been thought ideal for tanks, since it is lighter
than conventional ammunition and takes up less space.  Moreover, tank shells
stay dry and are not handled roughly.

Nevertheless, there were still problems in Vietnam, even when the shells were
used in tanks. The propellant in caseless shells supplied for the 120 millimeter
cannons on Sheridan tanks degraded in bad weather, crumbled or broke when
handled, and sometimes caught fire.

Lingering doubts from the Vietnam experience are reinforced by the outcome of
NATO tests run in 1977 on several Western rifles, including an early version of
the Heckler G11. The rifle was judged heavy and complicated and its propellant
crumbled easily and absorbed moisture. To avoid embarassment, Heckler officials
withdrew the gun from field tests.

Heckler officials say they have vastly improved the design of the G11 since
1977, principally by using a special high temperature propellant. It reduces the
threat of the cartridge detonating prematurely because of heat in the gun.
Heckler has also developed binding materials that limit breakage and crumbling
and reduce the effects of moisture on the propellant.

This time, however, Heckler plans to be somewhat more cautious before putting
its weapon up for testing. ''It will have to conform to all NATO specifications
before we'll launch it,'' Mr. Lochner said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 19, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FROM VIETNAM, ROAD TO WEST OFTEN ENDS IN CHINA

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1224 words

DATELINE: NINGMING, China


Some were expelled from Vietnam with little more than the clothes on their
backs. Others paid out their meager savings to be smuggled across the border
rather than face military service in Cambodia or exile to an inhospitable new
economic zone.

The flow of refugees from Indochina, most of them ethnic Chinese, has slowed to
a trickle from the torrent with which it began in 1978, yet it continues.

Six refugees have found their way so far this year to one of China's refugee
processing centers in Ningming, 40 miles from the frontier with Vietnam.
Officials say they expect farm work will found for them somewhere in the
Guangxi@ Zhuang Autonomous Region, in which Ningming is situated.

Since 1978, more than 270,000 refugees from Indochina - the overwhelming
majority of them from Vietnam, the others from Laos and Cambodia - have traveled
overland to find sanctuary in China.

Some Want to Go to West

Most have been resettled, primarily in Guangxi and in the provinces of Yunnan,
Guangdong and Fujian. But China is viewed by a minority of the refugees as
little more than a stepping stone on their way to the West, and Chinese
authorities say they do not obstruct applications for reunions with family
members.

The office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Peking has
recorded some 2,100 cases of Vietnamese refugee families in China who have
formally applied to join relatives in the West. So far, it says, 832 refugees
have left China.

Some others would also like to go but have only a fragmentary idea of their
relatives' whereabouts, making a reunion nearly impossible.  At the Ningming
refugee center, Tran Van Ninh, 38 years old, an electrician from Vietnam, said
he was finally giving up, since he does not know where his aunt lives in the
United States.

Sitting dejectedly in the doorway of his room with his wife and small son, he
said: ''I wish the Government could assign me to a job that I know best. But I
have been here several years and I am at their mercy. I will take anything they
give me.''

Reasons for Moving On

His motivation for moving on, like that of many other refugees, apparently goes
beyond a desire to be reunited with family or any aversion to Communism, under
which those who have left Vietnam have already lived. There is also a desire to
better one's economic lot.

Many refugees, among them small traders and urban workers, see nothing ahead for
them in China but a life of manual toil on some isolated state farm. The native
Chinese monopolize the limited opportunities for education or other advancement
because they have the connections that the newcomers do not have.

Those at the Ningming center who are having problems in locating relatives
abroad included Vuong Van Tai, a 17-year-old Vietnamese refugee. His mother and
five brothers and sisters preceded him into China a year earlier and were
resettled in Fujian Province, but he also has a brother who made it to the
United States. Mr. Tai says he wants to go to the United States, but because he
knows no English, he was not aware that his brother lived in Colorado until an
American correspondent visiting the center explained the address on the latest
letter.

''My brother asked me to wait here,'' Mr. Tai said, adding that he had already
been waiting for two years.  Meanwhile, Chen Yongsan, 26, an accountant, has
been invited for an interview at the United States Consulate in Canton, a major
step toward joining his father in Los Angeles.

Status Changes After 6 Months

According to the United Nations office in Peking, refugees lose their transient
status once a country has taken them in for six months, and they then cannot
move on to a third country except to rejoin relatives. Several thousand
Vietnamese refugees unhappy with life in China have fled to Hong Kong and Macao,
only to be handed back by authorities there.

Despite problems of overpopulation, China has done more than any other country
in Asia to make room for the more than 270,000 refugees from Indochina. As for
other countries, only the United States has taken in more -about 426,000,
according to the Office of Refugee Resettlement of the United States Department
of Health and Human Services.

China has spent about $500 million since 1978 absorbing and resettling the
Indochinese refugees, according to the United Nations office in Peking. This
expense has been slightly offset by $40 million in United Nations subsidies.

In Guangxi's Ningming County, 7,321 refugees have already been resettled,
predominantly on state farms.  ''They are mostly peddlers and shopkeepers,''
said Xiang Guangming, chairman of Ningming County's resettlement program. ''A
small minority are of peasant stock, and there are a few workers.''

Something of an Embarrassment

Of the 274 Vietnamese refugees still living at the resettlement center, which
consists of rows of low concrete houses, those holding out for Western countries
seem to be an embarrassment.

Mr. Xiang said at first that ''more than 10 refugees'' were seeking to join
relatives abroad. Asked for the precise figure, he replied, ''About 13.'' But Li
Mingsan, the center's director, said 124 refugees were seeking to go to the
West, half of them to the United States.

Several refugees complained that it took money to make it to the West. Tran Ly
Sang said he had spent more than four years in a Vietnamese prison camp because
he had been a secret policeman for the defeated Saigon regime. After the
authorities threatened to draft his younger brother, Mr. Sang said, he traveled
north and paid a guide the equivalent of $800 at the official rate to smuggle
his family across the border into China last April.

At the nearby Quyang state farm, another young man said his family had settled
in China because ''we had no money.'' ''If you want to go to other countries,''
he said, ''you have to have gold or money.''

Many Have Done Well

Those who have put down roots in Ningming County, however, have done well by
Chinese standards. The Quyang state farm, which was set up for refugees in late
1978, became self-sufficient in one year by planting cash crops like pineapple.
Du Guangcai, a refugee from Hanoi who is farm director, said the farm's
per-capita income last year averaged nearly $400, or three times that of the
usual Chinese peasant.

Hoang Chin Sam, a peasant who left a house and six acres of rice paddies behind
in Vietnam's Langson Province, agreed that life at the state farm was more
prosperous than in Vietnam. But he said, ''If they invited us to go back, we
would go back.''

Mr. Xiang, who let visiting reporters talk freely to the refugees, said that 17
had run away from the Ningming center and that 2 had been returned. They were
''criticized'' but not punished, he said.

In reply to a question, Mr. Xiang said no Vietnamese refugees in the West had
applied to join their relatives in China.  ''The traffic is only one way,'' he
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Tran Van Ninh and family

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 19, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

KISSINGER ON CENTRAL AMERICA: A CALL FOR U.S. FIRMNESS;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1216 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 18


Henry A. Kissinger, who will head the Presidential commission on Central
America, has already indicated he believes a firm American response is needed in
that region to maintain the credibility of the

United States in other parts of the world.  On the crucial issues that are being
debated here and that the commission will be asked to discuss, Mr. Kissinger has
made it clear that he opposes any cuts in American military aid to El Salvador
and would even approve an American military presence on the Honduran-Nicaraguan
border if covert aid to rebels in Nicaragua is no longer feasible.

President Reagan's decision to appoint Mr. Kissinger to head the special panel
on Central America aroused considerable comment here today, even before the rest
of the commission is named. Some people, like Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., the
majority leader, praised the choice. But a number of members of Congress, both
liberal and conservative, were sharply critical.

The reaction was not unexpected. In the eight years that Mr.  Kissinger was
President Nixon's national security adviser and then Secretary of State for
Presidents Nixon and Ford, he was assailed by liberals and conservatives.

Criticized by Reagan in 1976

One of his major critics was Mr. Reagan, who in 1976, during his losing primary
battle with Mr. Ford, said one of his first actions if elected would be to
dismiss Mr. Kissinger, whose policy of detente had antagonized the right wing of
the Republican Party. No explanation was given why Mr. Reagan chose Mr.
Kissinger for this assignment.

Mr. Kissinger had been passed over in the selection of the special envoy to the
Middle East and the head of the special commission on the MX missile.

While Mr. Kissinger has had extensive experience in Middle East diplomacy and in
strategic arms negotiations, he has no special expertise in Latin America, and
this was noted by some of the critics today. But in recent months he has spoken
out forcefully on what he has described as the need for the United States not to
allow Communists to make gains in Central America.

In a published interview last spring he said he viewed the outcome in that part
of the world as crucial for overall American foreign policy objectives.

'How Central America Comes Out'

''A lot will depend on how Central America comes out,'' he said in an interview
in Public Opinion magazine. ''If we cannot manage Central America, it will be
impossible to convince threatened nations in the Persian Gulf and in other
places that we know how to manage the global equilibrium,'' Mr. Kissinger said.
''We will face a series of upheavals that will absorb so much of our energies
that we will be deflected from our previous policies.''

He said he would oppose going to war with Nicaragua over its aid to guerrillas
in El Salvador. But he also said he would do whatever was needed - supporting
through covert aid guerrillas in Nicaragua, or ''an overt American military
presence'' on the Honduran-Nicaraguan border.

Asked if he backed the Administration's policy of giving covert aid to the
Nicaraguan guerrillas, he said he did.  ''It escapes me why we have to apply the
Brezhnev Doctrine in Central America and assert that any Communist government
that has established itself can never be changed,'' he said.

Overt U.S. Military Presence

''As a policy I support it,'' he said. ''But I don't think it can be carried out
with the present system for handling covert operations. If the purpose of the
covert operations is to prevent infiltration from Nicaragua through Honduras,
then I would rather see an overt American military presence on the
Honduran-Nicaraguan border.

''I am sympathetic to the covert operations if we can still conduct them the way
their name implies. But if covert operations have to be justified in a public
debate, they stop being covert and we will wind up losing public support.''

White House officials said Mr. Kissinger was in Denver today and due in Los
Angeles on Tuesday. They said he was formally asked to take the assignment
Sunday night and was surprised by the rapid disclosures in the press, which
originated with some Republicans opposed to his being named.

The officials would not say when they would announce the other appointments to
the commission. But they confirmed that these people had been asked to serve:
Terence Cardinal Cooke, Archbishop of New York; Lane Kirkland, president of the
A.F.L.-C.I.O.; Robert S.  Strauss, former chairman of the Democratic Party, and
Prof. Carlos F. Diaz-Alejandro of Yale, a specialist in economic development.

No Outright Opponents of Policy

An Administration official acknowledged that no outright opponents of
Administration policy were being asked to serve.  The idea for the commission
came from Senators Henry M. Jackson, Democrat of Washington, and Charles McC.
Mathias Jr., Republican of Maryland, and Representatives Michael D. Barnes,
Democrat of Maryland, and Jack F. Kemp, Republican of upstate New York. None of
them said they had been consulted on the appointment.

Mr. Jackson, who was a frequent critic of Mr. Kissinger when he was in the
Government, said, ''It's a good appointment, one that will bring prestige to the
commission.'' Mr. Mathias said Mr. Kissinger ''has the ability to be totally
objective and totally independent.''

Mr. Barnes said he was afraid that the controversy over Mr.  Kissinger would
make it difficult to focus on Central America. ''I am afraid that we're going to
spend the next month talking about Kissinger than about Central America,'' he
said.

Senator Helms Sharply Critical

Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, who heads the Foreign
Relations subcommittee on Latin America, was sharply critical. He said, ''There
may be someone in this broad land farther down my list of choices than Henry the
K, but I can't think of anyone.'' He said he wanted to call Mr. Kissinger before
his committee to see if there was any conflict of interests with Mr.
Kissinger's consultant work for banks and American corporations.

The Conservative Caucus held a special news conference today to denounce the
appointment of Mr. Kissinger. Richard A. Viguerie, publisher of Conservative
Digest, said, ''It would be difficult to find a spokesman less trusted by
conservatives and liberals alike.''

''He was this nation's No. 1 foreign policy official when U.S.  foreign policy
virtually collapsed, leading to the loss of Angola, Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia,'' he said.

Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, a liberal opponent of the
Administration's Central American policy, said he opposed the whole commission
idea and questioned the appointment of Mr. Kissinger. He said, ''Dr. Kissinger
has few rivals in terms of diplomatic experience or expertise, but that
experience has made him a symbol for a foreign policy many would rather forget
than repeat.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 20, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN NAMES 12 TO LATIN PANEL; HOUSE HOLDS SECRET DEBATE ON AID

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1199 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 19


President Reagan today appointed the 12 members of his National Bipartisan
Commission on Central America and told it to report by Dec. 1 on how to build a
national consensus behind a policy of dealing with ''threats'' to United States
interests in the region.

The commission, headed by former Secretary of State Henry A.  Kissinger, will be
free to look into whatever elements of the region it chooses, including the
dispute over covert United States military aid, according to Administration
officials.

The President announced the panel's members after using the occasion of Captive
Nations Week to issue some of his most strongly worded warnings on what he says
is at stake in the region and in the domestic political debate that it has
stirred in this country.

''Help us warn the American people that, for the first time in memory, we face
real dangers on our borders, that we must protect the safety and security of our
people,'' Mr. Reagan said at a ceremony in which he enlarged on the occasion's
traditional concern over Eastern Europe.

House in Secret Session

The House of Representatives, meanwhile, was meeting in secret session, its
doors bolted, on the question of providing covert military aid to insurgents
fighting to overthrow the Nicaraguan Government.

The session, the fourth such closed debate since 1830, is to be followed next
week by a vote on whether to end an $80 million program of aid to the
insurgents. The Administration contends that the program is intended solely to
stop the arms flow from Nicaragua to rebels fighting the Government of El
Salvador. But critics say the aid is actually intended for overthrowing the
Nicaraguan Government. In appointing the bipartisan commission, the White House
was trying to reverse what officials concede is the relatively weak standing in
public-opinion polls of both the issue of Central America and the
Administration's policies there. In designating Mr. Kissinger as chairman, the
President turned to someone whom he has criticized in the past, but who today
was hailed by Administration officials as ''a person of stature and respect''
and a person who would not simply rubber-stamp the Administration's Central
American policy. The White House spokesman, Larry Speakes, was greeted at the
daily briefing with questions about Mr. Kissinger's past service and current
career as a private consultant on foreign affairs. Critics in particular have
questioned Mr. Kissinger's role in the overthrow of the Allende Government in
Chile and in mapping and concealing secret military operations during the
Vietnam War.

Asked about possible conflicts of interest by Mr. Kissinger, Mr.  Speakes
replied, ''If there seems to be any conflict he would not serve, but I
anticipate there is not.''

He added, in response to questions about Mr. Kissinger's consultant business,
''I don't know whether we've gone into his clients.'' But Mr. Speakes insisted
any questions would ''be resolved to the satisfaction of all.''

Says Kissinger Was Best Man

Asked about Mr. Reagan's earlier disapproval of Mr. Kissinger's stewardship as
Secretary of State, Mr. Speakes did not comment directly but said, ''The
President chose the best man for the job, and he thinks that was an appropriate
choice.''

Whatever the commission's final recommendations on Central America, the
appointment of Mr. Kissinger clearly attracted extra attention to the issue,
with critics of Administration policy focusing on him.

There was considerable speculation about whether the appointment was ''safe''
for the President. Some Administration officials noted that Mr. Kissinger might
not shy away from having the commission range considerably beyond the
President's current policy. But others said that in the past, Mr. Kissinger had
shown a preference for viewing third-world problems as a symptom of a larger
struggle between East and West, a view Mr. Reagan is underlining in the Central
American turmoil.

''We see the Soviets and Cuba building a war machine in Nicaragua that dwarfs
the forces of all their neighbors combined,'' the President said in his remarks
on Captive Nations Week. He added, ''It's being built, by their own boasts, to
impose a revolution without frontiers.''

'Heard Nothing Startling'

At least one House member, Representative Gary L. Ackerman, Democrat of
Flushing, Queens, left the secret session wondering why the secrecy was needed.
He estimated from various bursts of applause that the issue continued to remain
divided roughly along party lines. ''I heard nothing startling or revealing that
the public should not have heard, nothing to change anyone's mind,'' he said,
adding that he was still opposed to the Administration's policies.

Representative Bill Alexander, Democrat of Arkansas, said after the secret
session, ''Without revealing classified information, I can say that the covert
action hasn't worked.'' He said he remained convinced that the Reagan
Administration ''has a hidden agenda, undisclosed to Congress and the American
people, and while talking about peace in the region it is seeking a military
victory.''

In discussing the Presidential commission, some Administration officials
privately agreed that the panel, while a bipartisan and indepndent advisory
body, had been chosen with an eye toward promoting, and not undoing, the
President's Central American policy of wielding both economic and military aid
in the region. The President's representative to the commission is to be Jeane
J.  Kirkpatrick, the chief United States delegate to the United Nations, who has
been a principal in shaping the Administration's policy in the region.

In addition to Mr. Kissinger, those appointed to the commission were former
Senator Nicholas F. Brady of New Jersey, now managing director of Dillon Read &
Company; Mayor Henry G. Cisneros of San Antonio; former Governor William P.
Clements Jr. of Texas; Dr. Carlos F. Diaz-Alejandro, professor of economics at
Yale University; Wilson S. Johnson of San Mateo, Calif., president of the
National Federation of Independent Business; Lane Kirkland, president of the
A.F.L.- C.I.O.; Dr. Richard M. Scammon of Washington, a political scientist; Dr.
John Silber, president of Boston University; Potter Stewart, the former Supreme
Court Justice; Robert S. Strauss, the former Democratic national chairman, and
William B. Walsh, president of Project Hope, the international medical care and
education organization.

In addition to the active members named, the commission will have ''senior
counselors,'' four House members and four senators from the two parties,
recommended by Congressional leaders. One rumored appointment that had stirred
some interest, that of Terence Cardinal Cooke of New York, did not occur, and
Administration officials had no immediate comment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of House of Reps. officials locking chamber doors
(Page A8) photos of Latin American panel members

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 20, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING IS LOW-KEY ON ARMS TO TAIWAN

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 535 words

DATELINE: PEKING, July 19


China has responded with uncharacteristic mildness to the Reagan
Administration's plan to sell $530 million worth of military equipment to
Taiwan, directing its displeasure instead toward a dispute over transit visas.

In response to questions from foreign correspondents about the planned sale to
Taipei, which Washington announced Friday, Li Juqing, a Chinese Foreign Ministry
spokesman, today read an official statement that said:

''China's position on the sale of arms to Taiwan by the United States is known
to all. We are opposed to any practice that violates the Sino-United States
communique of Aug. 17, 1982.''

In that communique the United States agreed in part to hold the level of its
military sales to Taiwan, both qualitatively and quantitatively, below the $600
million level of 1979 and eventually to phase out such sales. In return, China
agreed to pursue reunification with Taiwan by peaceful means.

Second-Largest Sale to Taiwan

The planned new sale, which would include surface-to-air missiles and aircraft
spare parts, would be the second largest ever to Taiwan by the United States.
The sale apparently is not subject to Congressional veto.

The Reagan Administration contended that the arms package would fall within the
communique ceiling because the arms would not be delivered in this fiscal year
and because their cost would be less when adjusted for inflation.

Today's response by the Foreign Ministry avoided challenging the Administration.
Instead, the Foreign Ministry chose to take issue with Washington's announcement
last Wednesday that it was canceling the right of Chinese airline passengers to
travel across the United States without a visa.

This was in retaliation for heavy fines that the Chinese have levied on a score
of Americans on international flights that refueled in China.

'Cannot But Express Regret'

Mr. Li, a deputy director of the Foreign Ministry's Information Department, told
reporters at a weekly briefing that ''We cannot but express regret over such a
statement because it is completely at variance with the facts.''

The spokesman alluded to an incident in late 1981, when five Chinese officials
traveling to Canada arrived in San Francisco without transit visas. American
immigration officials ordered the Chinese state airline, C.A.A.C., to fly them
back or pay $1,000 fines each.

The airline paid. But since then, the Chinese have checked flights refueling
here, pulled off Americans without transit visas and assessed them the same
fine.

Mr. Li contended that the Chinese had been proposing since 1981 that transit
visas be waived for travelers who had a connecting airline ticket and did not
stay longer than 24 hours. ''

The United States requires other foreign nationals, except Canadians, to have a
transit visa if they leave the airport. The Chinese have now been put in the
same category as citizens of Cuba, Vietnam, North Korea and Iraq, who must have
a visa even if they don't leave an airport transit lounge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 20, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

JEFFERSON AWARDS GO TO NINE, INCLUDING VOLCKER AND ACTORS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 537 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 19


The actor Kirk Douglas, one of nine people honored today for public service,
urged Americans to open their arms to the world's homeless and hungry.

''My mother and father came to this country on a boat from Russia, illiterate
immigrants,'' Mr. Douglas said. ''The boats are still coming. How much are we
willing to share to strengthen this land of immigrants?''

Mr. Douglas and the others were recipients of the 11th annual Jefferson Awards,
given by the American Institute for Public Service. The organization was founded
in 1973 to honor public service achievements on the national and local levels.

Mr. Douglas received an award for the greatest public service performed by a
private citizen for his ''continuing efforts to share the meaning of American
freedom with other nations and his concern for refugees.''

Paul A. Volcker, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, was honored for service
by a Government official and cited for his ''courage and leadership in guiding
the country's monetary policy in difficult economic times.'' He said he hoped
the award ''is some kind of symbol of progress.''

The actress Helen Hayes was cited for service benefiting the disadvantaged and
her ''countless activities as a humanitarian and as an advocate for senior
citizens.''

Jan Scruggs, an infantryman in the Vietnam War who was founder of the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial Fund, received an award for the greatest public service by an
individual 35 years old or under for ''his individual leadership and integral
role in the building of the Vietnam Veterans' Memorial.''

Awards for Local Service

Receiving awards for local public service were Dean Crisp of Asheville, N.C.;
Darlene Handley of Chicago; Dr. Robert Kustra of Franklin, Wis.; Candy Lightner
of Fair Oaks, Calif., and Tony Messineo of St. Louis.

Mr. Crisp, who is a member of the Asheville Police Department, was honored for
volunteer work with young people, including the disadvantaged.

Miss Handley is the founder of Anchor No. 1, a community center in an area that
was known for its crime and lack of programs for the needy.

Dr. Kustra was honored for providing dental services to the disadvantaged at a
medical clinic for children.  Miss Lightner was cited for her campaign to
toughen drunken driving laws. She founded Mothers Against Drunk Drivers, an
organization of victims and concerned citizens.

Mr. Messineo, the kitchen and dietary manager of St. John's Mercy Medical Center
in St. Louis, was honored for his volunteer work with the homeless.

Mr. Douglas, Mr. Volcker, Mr. Scrugg and Miss Hayes were awarded medallions and
$5,000 each. The five people honored for their public service in their
communities received medallions and $1,000 each.

The nine were chosen by the institute's 81-member Board of Selectors.
Nominations in the first four categories came from the general public. Those
honored for local service were nominated by newspapers and television stations
participating in the institute's awards program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 20, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Dr. Kissinger's Surgery or Massage?

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 698 words


It might have been arms control, and should have been the Middle East. Instead,
it is the palpable dread of disaster in Central America that has impelled the
Reagan Administration to seek the help of Henry Kissinger.

If the former Secretary of State is wanted to supply a sense of global
perspective to two years of panicky military responses, a lot of Reagan rhetoric
and C.I.A. plotting are going to have to be artfully buried. If, however, he is
wanted mainly to polish up a failing policy, he will again provide only the
verbal gloss for a destructive foreign venture.

Which it is to be will be clear soon enough. It's a long, long way from July to
December, when Mr. Kissinger's commission is to give its report. To make its
deliberations meaningful, Mr. Reagan needs to put on hold any interventionist
designs against Nicaragua or Cuba and any military plans that may involve more
U.S. forces in El Salvador.

Mr. Kissinger cannot sell what Mr. Reagan has so plainly failed to sell. He can
contribute only by redesigning the policies that have produced the President's
desperation.

It is not just some communications failure that explains the lack of public
support for Mr. Reagan's approaches to Central America.  Polls show that most
Americans do not even know whether he is backing the Government in El Salvador
and the insurgents in Nicaragua or vice versa. But most also do not share the
President's sense of peril, and the best-informed tend to be the most skeptical.

How does a leftist dictatorship in Nicaragua threaten the United States - and
how much? Why, if that regime is not marked by Washington for overthrow, can it
not be easily insulated from Salvador's civil war? Why is ''our'' side in El
Salvador incapable of the most elementary respect for human rights that would
broaden its appeal and shed its reputation for corruption? Why, in any case, is
this fixation with Central America diverting attention and resources from even
more pressing hemisphere crises, like the austerity now jeopardizing a
democratic transition in Brazil?

To these doubts and fears, the Administration has responded mainly with slogans
and disingenuous mumbles. An extraordinary commission of citizens is, at best, a
poor way of offering a reasoned answer.  And the failure to appoint to it some
notable doubters, like Senators Mathias or Moynihan, can only diminish its
influence.

Still, Mr. Kissinger's diplomatic gifts are as outsized as his faults. And he
understands the piranha ways of bureaucracy, perhaps too well. He needs no
tutoring on his own vulnerability as a devious meddler against an elected
leftist regime in Chile and coddler of Latin dictators. One must assume he wants
no suicide mission into history.

The prize in Central America is to locate the space for compromise before much
more that is precious is lost and leaves America isolated and divided.
Blueprints for a Marshall Plan of aid will lead nowhere if the present martial
plans are not put aside.

Even the authors of those proposals smell their failure as they seek a 40
percent increase for covert and overt military operations in Central America.
Such an increase, an Administration report concedes, ''may be perceived as
incremental escalation to stave off defeat for the time being, without any clear
strategy for success - an awkward parallel with Vietnam.''

The parallel is sinister as well as awkward. As Mr. Kissinger's appointment was
announced, so were war games in the Caribbean, with the aim of showing that
United States naval ships can blockade Nicaragua. When Senator Jackson proposed
the idea of a commission on Central America, he pleaded for creativity to end a
policy paralysis - not for a prestigious endorsement of incremental
interventionism.

Given time and room to maneuver, Mr. Kissinger might still vindicate the arts of
diplomacy. If that is not what the President wants, this commission is pointless
and no place for honorable service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 20, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

JERRY GREENE

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 121 words


Jerry Greene, former chief correspondent of the Washington Bureau of The New
York Daily News, died of cancer Saturday at the Sun City Regional Medical Center
in Sun City Center, Fla. He was 72 years old and lived in Sun City Center near
Tampa.

Mr. Greene, who had been a colonel in the Marine Corps, joined The News in 1945
and became a national correspondent. In the early 1960's he was the paper's
military editor and wrote extensively about the Vietnam War. He became chief of
the Washington bureau in 1969 and wrote a column, ''Capitol Stuff.'' He retired
in 1975.

He is survived by his wife, Helen, and a stepsister, Katherine Whatley, of Lake
Junaluska, N.C.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 20, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PERSONAL HEALTH

BYLINE: By Jane E. Brody

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 3; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1488 words


MOST of us give little thought to protecting ourselves against heart disease
until this leading killer strikes a friend or parent or until we ourselves
develop signs and symptoms of impaired cardiovascular function. Often there is
no advance warning, and the first sign of trouble is sudden, unexpected death.

Yet considerable scientific evidence shows that, while heart disease rarely
strikes before midlife, it actually begins in early childhood, with damage
occurring for decades before we have any inkling of its presence. Although we
may think of childhood as a time of innocence and invulnerability, this is when
lifetime habit patterns are formed and the foundations for health are laid.

For far too many of us these youthful underpinnings are anything but sound.
Screening programs among schoolchildren in various parts of the country show
that as many as a third of them can already be described as facing a high risk
of premature heart disease. They may have raised cholesterol levels in their
blood, high blood pressure, excessive body fat and inadequate exercise habits,
and/or they may be cigarette smokers. Many can also be classified as having
coronaryprone type A personalities, exhibiting unhealthy reactions to stress.

Autopsies of preschool children who die from accidents or unrelated illnesses
show that their coronary blood vessels already have the fatty streaks and
plaques that are the beginnings of atherosclerosis, the disease of fat-clogged
arteries that causes half the deaths in this country. By age 15 to 20, one study
found, 20 percent of our young people have significant fatty deposits in their
coronary arteries. And autopsies of American casualties in Vietnam found that 45
percent had coronary atherosclerosis at an average age of 22.

About 5 percent of American children aged 5 to 18 have blood cholesterol levels
that exceed 200 to 220 milligrams per 100 milliliters, which is extremely high
for a child, and the average American youngster has a level of 150 to 200. In
countries where heart disease is rare the cholesterol level in children ranges
from 100 to 150.

Blood-pressure patterns, too, are often laid down in childhood. In addition to
hereditary factors, salt intake influences blood pressure, even in children.
Among children aged 5 to 18, one in a hundred has permanent high blood pressure
and nearly one in five exhibit blood pressure that fluctuates in and out of the
dangerously high range.

About half the children with high blood pressure are seriously overweight. Ten
percent of American elementary-school pupils and 20 to 30 percent of those in
high school are more than 20 percent above their best weight and well on their
way to lifetime obesity. Four out of five children who are fat at age 6 will be
fat as adults, studies have found - unless something is done to change the
unhealthy living patterns that were established early.

The most helpful changes involve eating and exercise habits. Last month the
American Heart Association recommended for the first time a set of dietary
guidelines for healthy children over age 2 (previous recommendations by the
association were directed at adults and at children genetically predisposed to
high blood cholesterol and premature coronary death).

The guidelines were issued even though no proof exists that the recommended
changes will actually prevent heart disease. However, the association noted that
there was no reason not to adopt its dietary plan since it is moderate,
nutritionally sound and medically safe.  Besides, the menu guidelines should
produce satisfying meals that would help protect the hearts of the entire
family, so there is no need to prepare special foods for the youngsters.

Few health and nutrition experts would argue with the association's definition
of a healthy diet as one that emphasizes a variety of foods, including fresh
fruits and vegetables, complex carbohydrates (starchy foods, especially in their
unrefined, high-fiber form) and high-quality protein from low-fat dairy products
and lean cuts of meat, fish and chicken.

The guidelines urge a reduction in fats, cholesterol and salt since these are
the most serious and best-defined dietary hazards. They suggest that, on
average, 15 percent of the day's calories come from protein, 55 percent from
carbohydrates (primarily complex carbohydrates like cereals, grains, potatoes,
pasta, bread and beans) and 30 percent from fat, with less than a third of that
fat as saturated fats (those that are hard at room temperature).

Furthermore, as with the recommendation for adults, daily cholesterol intake
should be limited to 100 milligrams for every 1,000 calories consumed (not
exceeding a daily total of 300 milligrams). Salt intake should also be limited;
no level was specified, but reducing intake to a half or a third of its present
level is the usual recommendation.

In the face of such advice, whatever will become of breakfast, lunch and supper
from a package or the nearest fast-food establishment? Can youngsters ever again
delight in such favorites as hamburgers, hot dogs, french fries, potato chips,
soft drinks, shakes, cookies, candy and ice cream? According to most nutrition
specialists, such foods can be included in a healthful diet at any age, but they
should not be daily fare. Furthermore, the foods to emphasize include many that
are loved by most children, although some changes in particular choices may be
needed.

For example, breakfast can be a whole-grain cereal with low-fat milk and sliced
bananas or raisins instead of a highly refined presweetened cereal with regular
milk or half and half. For lunch a sandwich of peanut butter and jelly, sliced
turkey with lettuce and tomato, or even a slice of pizza is a better choice than
a burger with everything on it. For dinner a chicken-and-vegetable stir-fry with
rice, or pasta with a low-fat meat-and-tomato sauce, or sauteed vegetables and
grated cheese, plus a salad with low-fat dressing, are less damaging to blood
vessels than steak, fries and creamed vegetables.

Dessert and snacks can be a minimally sweetened apple crisp, banana bread, bran
muffins, applesauce or fresh fruit rather than fat-and-sugar-laden ice cream or
pie and fat-and-salt-laden chips and nuts. A child who grows up eating in the
suggested way may still like the no-no's but will be more inclined to regard
them as occasional treats than as a way of life.

The frequency of meals may also warrant consideration. A University of
California study showed that lean children eat five or more times a day, whereas
obese children eat only three or four times. Other studies have indicated that
the body handles calories better when it gets fewer of them at one time and they
are spaced out in many minimeals. The lean children are also more likely to stop
eating when they are satisfied rather than compulsively clean their plates. And
they are more inclined to eat their vegetables.

As for exercise, studies at Harvard University found that overweight children
tend to move less than lean children when performing the same activity.
Overweight in children is often a vicious cycle: a child who is heavy is less
likely to enjoy and be good at physical activities, and the less active that
child is the more of a weight problem he or she is likely to have. Regular
exercise is also an excellent antidote to stress.

The best time to establish sound exercise habits is in childhood.  As new
information accumulates, daily exercise is turning out to be as important to a
child's health and future well-being as eating, sleeping and going to school.

The pediatrician or family physician also has an important role to play. The
American Heart Association urges all physicians who care for children to
recommend proper diet and other preventive measures for every child past age 2.

The American Academy of Pediatrics urges physicians to check the blood pressure
and cholesterol levels of children over 2 who have a family history of
cardiovascular disease, and many experts in heart disease recommend such
checkups for all youngsters, regardless of family medical history. The academy
further advises that physicians pay attention to children's weight and exercise
habits and that teenagers be counseled on the dangers of smoking.

Noting the trend toward less saturated fats, cholesterol and salt in the diet,
the academy suggests avoiding extremes but sees no harm in moderate changes in
this direction.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 21, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

KISSINGER CALLS PRINTING OF PENTAGON PAPERS PROPER

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 545 words


Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger has stated that the press did
nothing improper by publishing the Pentagon Papers in 1971 although he was
''outraged'' by their appearance in public at the time.

In an interview with American Heritage magazine, Mr. Kissinger discussed
international relations, diplomacy and the secrecy required during sensitive
negotiations like the ones he was then conducting to end the war in Vietnam. Mr.
Kissinger was national security adviser to President Richard M. Nixon and, he
said, ''most intensely concerned with controlling leaks'' that could compromise
those talks.

But he says in the magazine's August-September issue: ''I do not believe that it
is the press's job to discipline itself about what information it receives, or
to reject information it can obtain, on the ground that it might harm a
negotiation. The media are in no position to make such a judgment.''

At the same time, Mr. Kissinger remained critical of government officials like
Daniel Ellsberg, the former Government official who helped compile the 47-volume
study on United States involvement in Southeast Asia from World War II to 1968.

Mr. Ellsberg passed on the secret study to the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee in 1969. He later said he was the one who gave the documents to the
press.

''If the press broke into a Government office, I would think that highly
improper,'' Mr. Kissinger told Robert Bendiner, the author, who interviewed him
for American Heritage. ''And I have contempt for individuals in government who
turn over to the press classified documents in their trust. But I don't have
contempt for those in the press who receive it.''

Mr. Kissinger said he found the receipt of stolen information by the press
deplorable.  ''But,'' he added, ''I do not think the media should censor
themselves with respect to information that has come their way, provided they
did not commit the act of theft or get somebody else to steal it for them. But
if somebody takes a document and gives it to them, however ill I think of the
thief, it is not the media's responsibility to police themselves in that
regard.''

Mr. Bendiner then observed that, in other words, it was all right for the press
to publish the papers but that Mr. Ellsberg should not have made them available.

''At the time I was outraged by the whole procedure, which seemed to me to
threaten vital and delicate negotiations in which we were engaged,'' Mr.
Kissinger responded. ''On sober reflection I would go along with the distinction
I have just made.''

When The Times began to publish its series of articles based on the Pentagon
study, along with documents contained in it, the Nixon Administration went to
court to prevent their publication. But the United States Supreme Court issued a
benchmark ruling that this would violate the free-press guarantees of the
Constitution.

The Government charged Mr. Ellsberg with espionage, theft and conspiracy only to
have the indictment thrown out by a Federal judge on the ground of improper
government conduct against the defendant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 21, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Park Renamed to Honor Vietnam Veterans

BYLINE: By Laurie Johnston and Susan Heller Anderson

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 238 words


A brick-paved park in the financial district was dedicated yesterday as the
city's Vietnam Veterans Memorial, while helicopters whirred in the background,
landing and taking off from the Downtown Heliport.

''It reminds me of the war,'' said H. Scott Higgins, co-chairman of the memorial
commission, a Vietnam veteran and senior vice president of the Lehman Management
Company, an investment concern.

A $1 million fund-raising drive is under way to build a memorial and to aid
Vietnam veterans. ''This shouldn't be the only kind of memorial New York has for
its Vietnam vets,'' proclaimed a pamphlet showing a gravestone for Martin Edward
O'Grady of Queens, killed in Vietnam in 1969 at age 21.

The soldier's brother, Brendan, and sister, Maureen, helped Mayor Koch unveil a
sign, ''Vietnam Veterans Plaza,'' as the 26th United States Army Band played
and, behind the heliport, the Fireboat John D. McKean spewed red, white and blue
water streams.

Mayor Koch was introduced using his World War II rank of sergeant.  He told the
crowd of 200 or so gathered on Water Street near Broad that it was ''outrageous
that we as a country have taken so long'' to honor Vietnam veterans.

He noted that Thomas J. Cuite, majority leader of the City Council, had helped
change the plaza's name from Jeannette Park, which had immortalized the flagship
of an 1879 Arctic expedition.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A CALL FOR 'DESCALATION'

BYLINE: By John B. Oakes

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 851 words


It's time for the word "descalate" to enter the language, for Congress to learn
what it means - and to have the courage to act on it.

A 40 percent increase in arms aid to our Latin American ''allies'' is being
considered for next year. Extraordinary military and naval maneuvers are to be
held in the Caribbean within the next weeks.  Large increases in military aid
for El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras are being demanded of Congress within
the next days.

Escalation of arms by sale, loan or gift, or by direct application, is the
Reagan Administration's answer for every tough political and diplomatic problem
anywhere in the world. It is a sterile answer, and a fatal one, particularly in
Central America.

''Descalation,'' not escalation, of our military involvement is what is needed
in Central America, and only Congress can carry it out. This means voting
against arms increases for both overt and covert operations in the region.

The total bankruptcy of Ronald Reagan's policy in Central America is reaching
the dangerous point of no return. It is a policy orchestrated by Ambassador
Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, an ideologue, and by the national security adviser,
William P. Clark, a Presidential confidant. It is a policy for which a
Presidential commission headed by Henry A. Kissinger is now being set up to
provide a spuriously ''bipartisan'' cover. It is a policy leading this country
to political, moral and perhaps even military disaster (a la Vietnam) in Central
America. The most bitter part of it is that it is all so unnecessary.

With a little more historical perspective, and a lot less kneejerk reaction to
social revolution below the Rio

First of two articles.
Grande, the United States would not be in the no-win position we are in today.
Instead, we would have become the rallying point for political and economic
freedom in the Americas, befitting our own principles instead of betraying them.

As it is, the Reagan policy is turning the people who ought to be our friends
into our enemies, turning the people who ought to be our enemies into our
sycophants. It is weakening what fragile democracy exists in the region. It is
strengthening the extremists of both camps. It distorts our position on human
rights. It is alienating our natural allies on this and other continents. It is
fueling internal conflagrations that we cannot control and is promoting little
wars (viz., between Nicaragua and Honduras) that threaten to develop into big
ones.

In doing all this, it is playing directly into the hands of Soviet Communism and
it is destroying respect both abroad and at home for our own democratic
institutions by deliberately deceiving the American people and flouting the laws
of Congress. Our Central America policy reflects an obsession with Soviet
Communism, magnifies its feeble power in this hemisphere and cripples our
ability to provide for national and world security where it counts.

If one looks at the long history of American military intervention below the Rio
Grande - as Mr. Reagan chooses not to - one discovers a record that almost every
North American has forgotten but every Central American remembers. When Mexico
was in revolutionary turmoil three quarters of a century ago, United States
troops moved in.  That's as inconsequential an event to Americans today as the
War of 1812 is to Britons, but (along with the results of the Mexican War) it
remains as fresh in Mexico's collective memory as the Battle of New Orleans and
the burning of Washington do to every American schoolchild.

American marines occupied Nicaragua for 20 years and no Nicaraguan has forgotten
that - but most Ameri-
---------------------------------------------------------------------
John B. Oakes is the former Senior Editor of The New York Times.  cans have. The
United States sponsored the coup that destroyed a democratically elected (but
left-wing) government in Guatemala 30 years ago, only to bring on the savagely
repressive military rule that still exists there - and that the Reagan
Administration enthusiastically supports. Nationalism is today the most dynamic
and pervasive of all modern forces; and it should not be too surprising that in
most of Central America, wherever North American pressure is heavily felt,
nationalism and patriotism mean anti-Americanism -just as in Eastern Europe they
mean anti-Sovietism. In the name of anti-Communism, we are unqualifiedly
committing ourselves to military governments that we can control no better than
the Russians can control the ruling Nicaraguans or the Salvadoran guerrillas
whom they are supporting. Instead of resisting indigenous revolution, we should
be rolling along with it. In that way we would be able to retain an influence
that we are now handing over in daily increasing measure to the Russians and to
their Cuban surrogates.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
HOCUS-POCUS OR POLICY?

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 804 words

DATELINE: LONDON, July 21


The principle of seeking a basic bipartisan policy on Central America is a good
one. The main concern about the United States in the rest of the world, friend
and foe alike, is lack of continuity in its approach to foreign affairs.

Rebuilding the consensus that existed between World War II and the Vietnam War
would serve United States interests, and restore lost guidelines for measuring
critical decisions. It would help remove the risk of impetuosity, such as the
initial Reagan Administration announcement that El Salvador was ''the test of
Soviet-American relations.''

It would have obvious advantages for the Administration now, reducing as a
campaign issue the failure to do anything but aggravate the situation in Central
America so far.

There are advantages for the Democrats. Waffling Congressional opposition
reflects an underlying fear of a campaign on ''Who Lost Salvador,'' and the lack
of Democratic ideas on how to counter it.

And it could bring solid advantages for Central America, where moderates and
right-wingers can never be sure which side really has Washington's ear. At
present, each can argue that despite public statements, it has the inside track
and can come up with partial facts to prove it.

A bipartisan policy would separate the mainstream from the noisy fringes that
are always with us.  So the question has to be which policy. When he announced
the Kissinger commission members, President Reagan made this appeal: ''Help us
warn the American people that for the first time in memory, we face real dangers
on our borders, that we must protect the safety and security of our people.''

That is hardly an objective mandate. Is the President's memory so short that it
doesn't include the 1962 Cuban missile crisis? What on earth in the present
messy situation, involving civil war over local issues, compares with that
clear-cut threat?

Obviously, Mr. Reagan decided on the commission approach because he felt
well-served by commissions on Social Security and the MX missile. But the
Scowcroft MX recommendation was an unfortunate precedent, a political trade-off
that is going to be enormously costly.

In effect the commission, headed by Gen. Brent Scowcroft, accepted one more
gigantic, immediate strategic error in return for making better sense in the
longer term. It accepted the MX now, in contradiction of its own reasoning,
because the President wanted it and cared most about another win in Congress.
For that, he was willing to accept a long-range weapons policy shift to
single-warhead missiles and a new promise to seek arms control.

According to friends, Henry Kissinger had some careful negotiations with the
Administration before he accepted his surprising new appointment. He had been
considered, and rejected, for both the MX job and as special Middle East
negotiator, subjects on which he has expertise - which he hasn't at all on
Central America.

The initial proposal was that the commission would advise on running the office
of Assistant Secretary of State for Latin America, getting involved in current
issues. But the war Mr.  Kissinger knows more about than any other is
bureaucratic infighting, so he refused to deal with day-to-day operations from
outside.  Instead, he is to focus on medium- and long-term approaches.

What can that mean? Another compromise endorsing current mistakes in return for
a distant vision? Central America isn't just a highpriced missile that can be
stuck in a silo and then thrown away one day, when its supposed use as a
''bargaining chip'' has worn out.

What is done there now, and in the coming year, will determine what is possible
later. If the war continues to be spread now, it will be too late to turn back
and say we should have negotiated a way out.

Devising a bipartisan policy can only be useful if it brings a new focus on how
to reduce fighting in Central America, not how to pursue the illusion of United
States victory against the ''dangers'' in Nicaragua.

Mr. Kissinger, whose record brings him under attack from both left and right,
will have a chance now to show that his analytic skills can be put to better use
than in Chile, or Cambodia, or Angola. This time he is not a member of the
Administration. He doesn't have to serve an insecure President's personal or
partisan needs.

And if he and his group can come up with a constructive policy, not just
scaremongering and saber-rattling, they will get wide support.  If it's more of
the old hocus-pocus, it will be seen as the old hocus-pocus. Magic wears off.
Results count.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON SEEKING A RISE IN ADVISERS IN SALVADOR TO 125

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1311 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 23


The Defense Department has recommended to President Reagan that he raise the
number of American military advisers in El Salvador to 125 next year, more than
doubling the current total, senior Administration officials said today.

The Defense Department, according to the officials, has also proposed that the
advisers be allowed to increase their mobility by accompanying Salvadoran forces
into the field. But the department has recommended no change in the current
policy that prohibits American servicemen from being involved in combat
operations or working in combat zones.

Mr. Reagan has the proposals under consideration but has not yet decided whether
to approve them, the officials said. Some aides have warned Mr. Reagan that any
rise in the Administration's self-imposed limit of 55 advisers in El Salvador
could touch off serious opposition in Congress and might lead to the adoption of
a legally binding limit.

55-Man Limit Adopted in '81

A spokesman for the White House, asked about the officials' statements on the
Pentagon recommendation, said President Reagan ''has no such request under
consideration'' at this time. But the spokesman added, ''Generally, the
55-adviser limit is self-imposed and is always under review.''

At the suggestion of Congressional leaders, the Reagan Administration informally
adopted the 55-man limit in 1981 soon after the first advisers were sent to El
Salvador, but a ceiling was never written into law.

Mr. Reagan has also been warned, the officials said, that a decision to raise
the number of advisers could undermine support for his overall policy on Central
America because the current limit has been viewed by Congress and the public as
a symbol of Administration restraint in the region.

'Number Has a Life of Its Own'

''The number has taken on a life of its own and has become much more important
than it should be,'' a senior Defense Department official said today. He added,
''Any increase, no matter how insignificant in actual numbers, would be
portrayed as a major American escalation. That's foolish.''

Senator Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island, the senior Democrat on the Foreign
Relations Committee, said, ''It would be a mistake for Mr.  Reagan to approve an
increase in the number of advisers because the essential result would be to
further Americanize the war in El Salvador.''

The Defense Department has advised Mr. Reagan that an increase is essential to
help improve the performance of the Salvadoran military in its fight against
guerrillas. Although recent intelligence reports from El Salvador indicate that
the military has made gains in a spring and summer offensive, the long-term
outlook still appears to be a stalemate between Government and guerrilla forces,
according to senior intelligence officials.

Top American military officers have long advocated sending more advisers to El
Salvador. Gen. Wallace H. Nutting, until recently the commander of United States
forces in Latin America, urged the Administration this year to increase the
number of advisers to more than 300 over the next two years.

More Aid for Salvador

Until recently some civilian officials in the department argued that any change
would alarm Congress and might damage Administration efforts to get
Congressional approval for more military aid to El Salvador.

Administration officials said the Pentagon's recommendation, which was relayed
to the White House by Defense Secretary Caspar W.  Weinberger last week, was an
important victory for Defense Department proponents of an expanded United States
military role in Central America.

Mr. Reagan and his senior advisers, concerned that the level of American
military involvement in Central America was insufficient to block the expansion
of what they see as Soviet and Cuban influence, recently reviewed American
policy in the region. They concluded that the United States should make a
substantial increase in its military presence, according to senior officials.

This month Mr. Reagan approved a series of military exercises in Central America
and the Caribbean that are designed to lay the groundwork for the expanded
presence and for a possible limited military blockade of Nicaragua.

U.S. Base in Honduras

The air, sea and land operations are to last a minimum of six months and will
include two aircraft carrier battle groups.  They will also include the
construction of a $150 million United States military base on the Atlantic coast
of Honduras and the stockpiling of large quantities of United States military
equipment in the region.

The plan does not envisage any immediate combat role for American forces,
officials said Friday, but does call for making preparations so American forces
can be swiftly called into action if necessary.

Officials said today that an increase in the number of American military
advisers in El Salvador was part of the Defense Department's overall plan for
carrying out Mr. Reagan's orders.

Defense Department officials said that as of today there were 42 American
military advisers in El Salvador, as well as a 5-man military group that
supervises the advisers and handles the transfer of American arms to the
Salvadoran military.

U.S. Medical Team in Salvador

In addition, the officials said, a Defense Department team composed of 26
doctors and medical aides is based in El Salvador. Five others Defense
Department employees are assigned to the office of the United States military
attache at the American Embassy.

In its recommendation to Mr. Reagan, Administration officials said, the Defense
Department suggested tightening the definition of adviser to insure that some of
the other American military personnel in El Salvador, including members of the
supervising military group, are not counted under any ceiling on advisers.

American training of the Salvadoran armed forces has been the subject of intense
debate since the first American advisers were sent to El Salvador in 1981.
Because of wide concern that the training role could spill over into combat,
producing the kind of slow but steady increase in American involvement that
marked the initial phases of the Vietnam War, opponents of an expanded American
role in Central America have tried to limit the number and duties of the
advisers.

Along with the 55-man limit adopted by the Administration, and prohibitions
against any combat role for the advisers, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
directed this year that whenever possible the training of Salvadoran soldiers be
done outside El Salvador.

Training Salvadoran Infantry

The United States has trained three Salvadoran infantry battalions, one at Fort
Bragg, N.C., and two in El Salvador. In 1982 the Defense Department also trained
477 Salvadoran officer candidates at Fort Benning, Ga. Last month training began
at Fort Benning for another 525 officer candidates.

To accommodate the 55-man limit in El Salvador and cut down on the expense of
flying Salvadoran soldiers to the United States, the Defense Department recently
opened a military training camp in Puerto Castilla, Honduras, that is being used
for the training of both Salvadoran and Honduran troops.

The Pentagon recently sent 125 Army Special Forces soldiers, better known as
Green Berets, to Puerto Castilla to conduct the training.  Defense Department
officials said a Salvadoran infantry battalion, which generally numbers about
1,000 men, recently arrived at the camp.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of two American advisors, a Salvadoran trooper

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POLL REVEALS FEAR OF EL SALVADOR AS A NEW VIETNAM

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 417 words


A majority of Americans questioned by Gallup pollsters say they continue to
think the United States will become involved in El Salvador as it was in
Vietnam, and nearly half disapprove of President's Reagan's policies in Central
America.

According to the poll, released Thursday, 71 percent of the people familiar with
the situation in El Salvador felt that it was at least ''fairly likely'' that
the United States would become more deeply involved.

By contrast, 19 percent thought this was ''not very likely'' and 5 percent said
this was ''not at all likely.'' These results mirrored those obtained by Gallup
in March.

Even among those most supportive of the Administration - Republicans, people
approving of Mr. Reagan's overall performance and supporters of his policies in
Central America - majorities of those questioned expressed fear that the United
States would become embroiled in a Vietnam-like commitment.

Poll Taken in Late June

The poll was based on in-person interviews with 1,558 adults in 300 locations
across the country from June 24-27. That was before President Reagan ordered
military maneuvers off both coasts of Central America and reports that he
planned to send Army engineers and Air Force transports to Honduras.

The survey did not distinguish between different levels of involvement in El
Salvador.  The public's assessment of the Administration's policies in Central
America was closely linked to its fears of such a situation.  Those who thought
the United States involvement would increase were far less likely to support the
President's policies.

Only 20 percent of those who said the United States was very or fairly likely to
become more deeply embroiled in the El Salvador civil war approved of Mr.
Reagan's policies. By contrast, 60 percent of those fearing more extensive
commitments disapproved.

The poll also showed that more than four out five people said they were familiar
with the situation in El Salvador. That finding, differed sharply from The New
York Times/CBS News Poll in June, which showed that most Americans knew few
details about United States policy in Central America.

The conflicting conclusions may be due to the fact that Gallup asked only a
general question while The Times/CBS News Poll sought detailed knowledge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS FORUM;
AN ECONOMIC DEMOCRACY

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 944 words


Following are excerpts from ''Beyond the Waste Land: A Democratic Alternative to
Economic Decline,'' by Samuel Bowles, David M. Gordon and Thomas E. Weisskopf.
THE prevailing economic wisdom has insisted on a trickle-down a pproach to
economic recovery. It advocates a transfer of wealth fromt he needy to the
powerful in order to fuel the engines of expansion. T rickle-down economics
builds upon a fundamental premise - that the k ey to economic growth is
expanding the stock of machinery and other p roductive equipment. This premise
may be termed the c apitalshortage explanation of economic decline: The economy
has g rown less rapidly as a result of sluggish capital formation.

Our alternative explanation focuses on power relationships in the postwar U.S.
economy. We refer to this analysis as the costs-ofcorporate-power model. The
rate of productivity growth fell, we argue, because people increasingly balked
at the tasks and roles upon which prosperity in the postwar corporate system
depended. The result was a stalemated economy in which the costs of goading
reluctant participants drained more and more out of the system.

Coal mining provides a simple example. Productivity growth essentially stopped:
In the late 1960's and early 1970's there was a marked decline in the average
number of tons of coal mined for each hour worked by a coal miner. This decline
cannot be explained by a shortage of machinery, however, since capital equipment
per worker in coal mining was one-third higher in 1973 than in 1966. Social
factors provide a much more promising explanation - the miners' rejection of
unsafe working conditions, the coal-miner operators' stonewalling on the safety
issue, and the subsequent breakdown of labor-management relations.

This example reflects the entire postwar experience. The postwar corporate
system was based upon relations of domination and subordination, forged into an
inflexible and hierarchical structure of private privilege. U.S. corporations
achieved their power in the world economy shortly after World War II - but only
at the expense of European and Japanese companies, third world countries, and
many people in the United States. This particular structure of domination was
likely to last only as long as corporations could sustain it against challenges
from below.

They could not do so for long. European and Japanese corporations regrouped;
international competition eventually intensified. Third world people rebelled;
the erosion of U.S. domination in the third world was signaled by both the
defeat of the U.S. military in Vietnam and the burgeoning market clout of the
OPEC nations. At home, the capitalist order also began to crack, as minorities,
the elderly, women, and organized workers demanded better terms in the
distribution of prosperity's bounty. Both at home and abroad, the tasks of
preserving the postwar corporate system grew more and more arduous. The costs of
maintaining private power and privilege ultimately overtaxed the resources and
flexibility of the U.S.  capitalist economy.

Is it possible to make projections about a democratic economy in 1990?  Economic
life would be more decentralized than now, organized more around community
institutions.  People would be actively involved in a much wider variety of
institutions affecting economic decisions - work teams implementing cooperative
work agreements, in union investment boards allocating both pension funds and
collective profit shares, in the boards of community enterprises and community
investment agencies, in hearings on consumption needs, and in a wide variety of
public agencies aimed at determining priorities for public programs. Many more
economic decisions would be made at the local and community level, with active -
and, we assume, lively - political debate about their directions. Communities
would begin to acquire much more focused definition in people's lives.

The average workweek would have fallen considerably; correspondingly, a boom may
be anticipated in sports, cooking, dieting, block parties, local politics, and
the pursuit of selfunderstanding. Flexible work-time options would have opened
new opportunities for the sharing of child-rearing tasks and for making more
productive use of the creative energies of older people.

Perhaps most important, a democratic economic program would have begun to
transform the waste in our present economy into useful goods and services.
Substantial progress would have been made toward the full-employment goal of 2
percent, making the right job at decent pay a reality. An adequate program of
child care and payment for singleparent home child care would have begun to
broaden options facing parents. People would be able, in short, to move beyond
nagging worries about where the next paycheck is coming from and to pay more
attention to improving the quality of their lives. A democratic economy could be
on track, by 1990, because all of us would be contributing to its direction.

Reprinted by permission of Anchor Press/Doubleday, from ''Beyond the Waste Land:
A Democratic Alternative to Economic Decline,'' copyright c 1983, by Samuel
Bowles, David M. Gordon and Thomas E.  Weisskopf.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of the book 'Beyond the Waste Land'

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE BOILING POINT

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1843 words


WASHINGTON NOT since the Vietnam war has an issue so engaged the political
passions of the President and his advisers, Congress, the public and many
nations around the world, as recent Reagan Administration decisions about
Central America. Wounding and basic questions are again being asked about how to
deal with revolutionary change in the third world, democracy versus communism,
the proper role of Congress and whether to support or reject Presidential
policies.

The clear sense in the Administration is that Mr. Reagan's policy until now is
not working. Some blame Congress for not providing enough aid; a House vote on a
new aid package is expected this week.  Others insist the American-backed
guerrillas in Nicaragua and the Salvadoran Government simply cannot do the job.

To turn the tide, Mr. Reagan is on the verge of sharply escalating American
involvement - stepped-up military exercises in Central America, increased covert
operations, a proposed 40 percent increase in aid, tougher rhetoric. Last week,
he named a bipartisan commission to fashion long-term policy and build
short-term support.

Mr. Reagan is thus on the edge of transforming what Administration experts
concede as essentially indigenous revolutions in their origins into a test of
wills between the United States and ''totalitarian Communism'' led by Cuba and
the Soviet Union - the issue much as former Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig
Jr.  presented it two years ago. To buttress its case, the Administration is
using highly charged arguments critics find contradictory and dangerous. It is
maneuvering in the name of bipartisanship in ways Democrats suspect are designed
mainly to isolate opponents.

The policy is deeply rooted in anti-Communism and in what senior officials see
as the ''lessons'' of American setbacks in Cuba and Vietnam. They believe that:

* A basic mistake in Cuba was in not realizing Fidel Castro was always a
Soviet-oriented Communist pretending to be a local revolutionary. ''The Soviets
and the Cubans are operating from a base called Nicaragua,'' Mr. Reagan said
last week. ''This is the first real Communist aggression on the American
mainland.''

* Failing to persuade Congress and the public that Cuba and Vietnam involved
''vital'' national interests was a key error. ''If the Nazis during World War II
and the Soviets today have recognized that the Caribbean and Central America is
vital to our interests, isn't it about time we did, too?'' Mr. Reagan asked.

In a secret paper prepared for a National Security Council meeting on July 8,
officials predicted the direst consequences should El Salvador become Communist.
''Given their inherent weaknesses,'' it argued, ''most nations in Central
America (as well as other nations in the Caribbean and South America) might fall
under Communist rule and threaten the political structure in Mexico.''

* The United States erred in not taking decisive military action.  In the July 8
document, the Defense Department asserts ''The United States should not continue
to pursue a policy toward Central America that increases its commitment - in
terms of assets, involvement, and Presidential prestige - unless Congress grants
the means to succeed.''

Congressional critics such as Senator Nancy L. Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas
and Representative Lee H. Hamilton, Democrat of Indiana agree that the
Sandinistas and Salvadoran guerrillas are essentially Marxist, drawn to the
Cuban model and anti-United States and that the Sandinistas seek to export
revolution. But these critics do not agree that the Sandinistas are controlled
by Moscow and Havana; they see them as essentially home-grown revolutionaries
being driven into the arms of Moscow and Havana by Washington.

Mr. Reagan agrees the Central American revolutions are rooted in ''decades of
poverty, social deprivation and political instability,'' but he says they are
exploited ''by the enemies of freedom.'' No one in Washington has proven the
Sandinistas or Salvadoran guerrillas are closet Soviet puppets. Critics and
Administration alike are guessing and taking gambles. Most Congressional critics
would agree the United States would pay a heavy price should Moscow establish
new bases in the area. But hardly any think the Russians would risk it, faced
with a clear signal from Washington. If Moscow misunderstood, many would favor
using force to evict them.
Would More Aid Work?

Critics such as Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, also worry
about revolution spreading. But they contend Salvadoran events will not
predetermine Guatemala's future or Honduras's or Mexico's. When Mr. Castro took
over Cuba, they note, Latin America did not crumble. When Hanoi conquered South
Vietnam, it gained Laos and Cambodia, but elsewhere in Asia, the American
position is probably stronger than ever.

Like the Administration, the critics judge Mr. Reagan's policy is not working.
But they do not believe more of the same will work.  Escalation, they say, would
only breed more escalation and spread the war. Representative Bill Alexander,
Democrat of Arkansas, spoke for many of them after a closed House debate last
week. ''I can say that covert action hasn't worked,'' he said; the
Administration ''has a hidden agenda, undisclosed to Congress and the American
people, and while talking about peace in the region it is seeking a military
victory.''

According to the secret July 8 paper, even the State Department does not believe
more aid by itself will provide the key. Pointing to Salvadoran confusion about
American purposes and to the participation ''of some security force personnel in
death squad activities,'' State called for a ''new and reliable contract'' that
''outlines for the Salvadorans what they must do to win and what we will do to
help.'' The paper also made clear the Pentagon was calling for much more than
aid. It sought authority for Salvadoran forces to attack the guerrillas in
Honduras and for expanding the anti-Sandinista forces. All officials involved in
the paper recommended imposing ''discouraging'' costs on the Cubans for their
aid but stressed that no threat should be made without ''willingness to follow
through with military force.''

Mr. Reagan appeared to pursue this point when he said Cuban and Soviet military
help for Nicaragua ''cannot be allowed to continue.'' But what did he mean? For
example, does the large United States naval battle group moving into the area
prefigure a quarantine or even a more extensive blockade? Does following through
with force mean readiness to attack Soviet and Cuban ships and aircraft bound
for Nicaragua, as in the 1962 Cuban missile crisis? Is the Administration
willing to risk war? Or is this the very kind of bluff that Mr.  Reagan says has
plagued American foreign policy for decades at the cost of national crediblity?

''A blockade is an act of war and the Constitution places the decision to go to
war in the hands of Congress,'' Representative Don Edwards, Democrat of
California, insisted yesterday.

Senator Dodd and others also question Mr. Reagan's credibility.  They argue he
is being deceptive when he denies his objective is to overthrow the Sandinista
regime while acknowledging this is the aim of the guerrillas he is supporting -
while insisting he cannot control them. To these critics, there is also
something disingenuous about the President's statements that the United States
can support the sovereign Government of El Salvador, but that Cuba and the
Soviet Union cannot do the same for Nicaragua, or that Washington can support
guerrillas seeking to overthrow Soviet puppets in Afghanistan but that Moscow
cannot play the same game in Central America.
Kissinger Appointment

The critics also ask why, if Nicaragua's support of the Salvadoran guerrillas is
as substantial as Mr. Reagan claims, little evidence of it has been produced.
They also find it disquieting that virtually no American friend or ally is
supporting Washington's Central American policy.

Liberal and conservative critics were not quieted by the appointment of former
Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger to head the President's bipartisan
commission on Central America. They quickly dug into the files for ammunition
such as Mr. Kissinger's widely reported comment after Salvadore Allende, a
Marxist, was elected President of Chile in 1970. ''I don't see why we need to
stand by and watch a country go Communist due to the irresponsibility of its own
people,'' he told a meeting of President Nixon's highlevel ''40'' Committee on
national security. Neither the commission's mandate to deal with the ''threat''
to the region, nor its 12 members, almost all supporters of Mr. Reagan's
approach, are likely to create the kind of bipartisan support the Administration
knows is necessary to give the policy a chance of success.

The critics were heartened last week when Nicaragua dropped its demand for
bilateral negotiations and said it accepted a regional or multilateral framework
for talks. Mr. Reagan welcomed ''this first step'' but he added that the
Sandinistas had broken promises to establish a free society. A settlement while
they remain in power would be ''extremely difficult because I think they're
being subverted'' by outside forces, he said.

The Administration sent Ambassador Richard B. Stone to the region again last
week to seek negotiations, but key officials privately admit they believe civil
and revolutionary wars cannot be ended at the peace table. An agreed settlement
would entail power-sharing, the Salvadoran guerrillas insist. The Administration
is convinced this would lead to another Marxist takeover, as happened in
Nicaragua. Officials see it as a cosmetic way of losing, to be chosen only as a
last resort.

The debate has the familiar ring of the Vietnam years. Although the political
and military issues are different, Reagan Administration thinking about El
Salvador is virtually the same as past Administrations' thinking about Vietnam.
Unable to win militarily because of domestic and international constraints,
unwilling to lose because of the vitalness attached to the area, Mr.  Reagan
follows a tricky middle path. As the July 8 paper conceded, ''There is the
further danger that the periodic efforts to seek increased resources may be
perceived as incremental escalation to stave off defeat for the time being,
without any clear strategy for success - an awkward parallel with Vietnam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Sandinista soldiers photo of Henry A. Kissinger

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

UNCLE SAM PAYS A HIGH PRICE FOR BEING IN 359 PLACES AT ONCE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1545 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


American diplomats sat down with Portuguese officials in Lisbon last week to
resume arduous negotiations toward renewing United States rights to an air base
in the Azores. No one is saying what the price will be but the Portuguese are
asking for much more than the $140 million in military aid they got under an
agreement that expired in February. Earlier this month, the United States
concluded a renewed base agreement with Greece that calls for $500 million in
military assistance; last month, a basing pact with the Philippines carried a
$900 million price tag.

Other than troops themselves, United States military outposts abroad are among
the most visible evidence of American commitments to other nations and are
critical to executing a doctrine that some analysts refer to as forward defense
(also known as forward deployment). Moreover, the bases are visible evidence of
the cost of that doctrine.

Since the Spanish-American War in 1898, the United States has increasingly
sought to defend itself with military forces far from American shores. The most
recent expansion of the basing network began in 1980, after President Carter
responded to the Russian invasion of Afghanistan by asserting that a Soviet
threat to oil resources around the Persian Gulf would ''be repelled by any means
necessary, including military force.''

With that commitment, Mr. Carter dispatched aircraft carriers to the Indian
Ocean, organized the Rapid Deployment Force and negotiated agreements to gain
access to bases in Egypt, Somalia, Kenya and Oman. Construction at the naval
base and airfield on Diego Garcia, a small British island in the Indian Ocean,
was accelerated.  President Reagan continued those efforts and embarked on a
shipbuilding program that includes three battle groups costing $18 billion
apiece (each group includes an aircraft carrier, 100 planes, and cruisers,
destroyers, and submarines).

No one agrees on the overall cost of keeping troops, ships and planes on distant
seas and shores because such calculations vary according to the forces and
supporting elements that are included or omitted. But it is generally agreed
that forward deployment is the single largest cost in the military budget of the
United States.

The Defense Department has reported to Congress that United States forces
committed to the defense of Western Europe cost $105 billion in 1982. Senator
Ted Stevens of Alaska, chairman of the Defense Appropriations Subcommittee, has
estimated that cost would be $133 billion this year. Earl C. Ravenal, a former
Pentagon analyst now at Georgetown University, has asserted that United States
commitments to Europe, Asia and the Persian Gulf region would cost $212 billion
in 1984.

Maintaining overseas bases is no small part of those costs. By the end of World
War II, the United States had acquired a string of bases that stretched from
Korea in Northeast Asia around to Iceland in the North Atlantic. Ten years ago
there were 323 sizeable installations outside the continental United States,
including a few in American territories such as Guam. Today, the total is 359,
not including foreign military bases to which American forces have access but
not control.

In contrast, the Soviet Union has come but recently to what military officers
call power projection and has few military units abroad, save for the massive
land and air forces occupying Eastern Europe and the forces that invaded
Afghanistan in late 1979. Soviet ships and aircraft are limited to access to
bases in countries such as South Yemen, Ethiopia, Vietnam and Cuba. A combat
brigade has long been stationed in Cuba and Soviet warships and aircraft call
there frequently. Elsewhere abroad, the Russians, East Europeans and Cubans have
large numbers of military advisers.

The mix of American bases overseas has changed year by year.  American forces
have been thrown out of bases in Libya and Saudi Arabia. The advance of
technology has permitted the Pentagon to close others, such as a communications
base in Ethiopia that was made outmoded by satellites. Urban growth has pushed
American forces out of Tachikawa, one of the air bases in Tokyo; it was in a
rural setting when the Americans first moved in after World War II. In Vietnam,
American forces were withdrawn and bases closed as the war there came to a
close. But the buildup of American forces in Europe has meant 176 posts for the
Army alone in Germany.

For many years, the writ of United States forces on bases abroad was
unchallenged. But rising nationalism has changed that. In 1960, the Japanese
demanded a new treaty that gave them more control over American forces in their
country. The island of Okinawa, taken by American troops in costly battles
during World War II, was returned to Japan in 1972 and a number of restrictions
imposed on an air base and marine garrison. Sovereignty over Clark Air Force
Base and Subic Bay Naval Station in the Philippines was given to Manila in 1979;
today the Filipino and American flags fly over the bases and a Filipino officer
is in command. In Oman, Kenya and Somalia, Americans have even less say. They
have been granted access but under tight restraints and must pay for
improvements that eventually will revert to the host nation.

Access to some bases is not acknowledged to avoid offending local sensitivities.
Pentagon officials have informed Congress, perhaps inadvertently, that a secret
air base in Egypt had been made available to American forces.

Political problems connected with foreign bases have multiplied.  American
negotiations with Egypt over access to Ras Banas, an Egyptian base on the Red
Sea, collapsed in the spring after a dispute over construction contracts.
President Marcos of the Philippines told visiting American Congressmen he would
seek a deal with the Soviet Union if Capitol Hill did not like a $900 million
package of military aid with the new basing agreement. Prime Minister Papandreou
of Greece asserted that his new agreement requires the United States to withdraw
at the end of five years; the State Department says only that the pact can be
renegotiated.

Rent by Another Name

Because most base agreements are made public, every nation negotiating with the
United States demands a deal at least as lucrative as that reached in the last
negotiation. American officials say the Greeks had diplomatic observers in
Manila during negotiations there. ''Open covenants, openly arrived at,'' sighed
an American official. ''Mr. Wilson would be proud but it sure complicates
things.''

American officials all insist that ''we don't pay rent for foreign bases''
because the agreements contribute to the common defense. But they say privately
that military aid packages tied to basing agreements are euphemisms for rent.

Beyond that, the cost of maintaining bases has risen steadily. The Reagan
Administration has asked Congress for $8.5 billion for military construction in
1984, about half of it to be invested outside the continental United States.
That includes spending $1.4 billion in Europe to build ground launching sites
for cruise missiles, facilities to support tanks and rocket launchers, fuel
storage, and family housing. In Turkey, $35.6 million has been requested,
including $7 million to build an addition to the high school at the Incirlik air
base. Construction in Oman would cost $39.6 million, expansion of installations
at Diego Garcia calls for $92.7 million, and 55 projects in South Korea are
priced at $143.3 million. Another $210.8 million was alloted to secret basing
projects around the world.

The political costs of bases overseas are immeasurable but still evident. Many
basing agreements are supplemented with Status of Forces Agreements that govern
ticklish questions such as customs duties for imported household goods, taxes
and, especially, jurisdiction over American military personnel accused of
crimes.

Security of bases abroad has always been tenuous. Some installations would be
vulnerable to mob attacks if local police or armed forces permitted; the
political and diplomatic repercussions could be too high if American troops used
force to resist the invaders. More recently, the threat of terrorists breaking
into nuclear storage depots in Europe has given American officers nightmares and
stimulated a new program of protective measures.

The politics of bases abroad produce anomalies. The United States maintains a
naval station at Guantanamo Bay despite Fidel Castro's rule in Cuba but has not
accepted access to Israeli bases despite invitations from the Israelis. The
United States has acquired the rights to use a base the Russians built in
Berbera, Somalia. But then the Russians have ships and aircraft stationed at the
large installation built by the Americans at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Subic Bay in the Philippines Map of where U.S.
has military bases in world

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Sports of the Times;
Why the Russians Will Be in Los Angeles Next Year

BYLINE: DAVE ANDERSON

SECTION: Section 5; Page 8, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 995 words


Ever since the United States boycotted the Moscow Olympics in 1980 over the
Afghanistan situation, cynics have wondered if the Soviet Union will create a
political reason to boycott the Summer Olympics in Los Angeles next year. Now,
almost a year to the day before the pageantry in the Memorial Coliseum of the
July 28 opening ceremony, Monique Berlioux, the executive director of the
International Olympic Committee, has mentioned a reason for a Soviet boycott -
the NATO plan to deploy Cruise and Pershing 2 missiles in Western Europe by
December.

During a visit to Los Angeles last week, the boss lady known as Madame Berlioux
talked about a potential boycott by the Soviet Union and other Eastern European
bloc nations over the NATO plan. She learned of this possibility, she said, from
Juan Antonio Samaranch, once the Spanish Ambassador to Moscow and now the I.O.C.
president.

The I.O.C., of course, is supposed to be dedicated to the proposition that
politics don't belong in the Olympics, but here was Madame Berlioux injecting
politics into the Olympics even before the Soviet Union did, if indeed it would
do so. Despite the warning from Madame Berlioux, the United States Olympic
Committee's executive director, longtime Soviet watchers and even a spokesman at
the Soviet Embassy in Washington sound sure that the Russians will lead the
other Eastern European teams into the Memorial Coliseum next year, when the
Olympic torch is lit.

In a phrase that is hardly original, the conclusion is that the Russians are
coming; to be precise, they are coming, missiles or no missiles.

At the Soviet Embassy, its press officer, Vladimir Mikoyan, commented, ''I
wouldn't dramatize the situation, but it is not for me to talk about sports.''
He suggested a phone call to Edward Malayan, the cultural and sports attache.

''Hold on, please,'' the switchboard operator said, ''I'll see if Mr. Malayan is
in or not.'' After a few seconds of silence, a dial tone was heard, indicating a
disconnection. But when the number was dialed again, Edward Malayan answered
quickly.

''As I understand,'' he said, ''not all countries who are Olympic members have
yet made an entry. Why is there special attention for the Soviet Union?''

''The Soviet Union,'' his caller suggested, ''is not Honduras or Chad.'' ''But
there is plenty of time,'' Edward Malayan said, alluding to the entry deadline
of June 2, eight weeks before the Olympics. ''You have to know that the Soviet
Olympic Committee deals directly with the I.O.C., the United States Olympic
Committee and the Los Angeles Olympic Organizing Committee. You must ask Mr.
Samaranch or Mr.  Peter Ueberroth of the Los Angeles Olympic Organizing
Committee. They are in constant connection with people in Moscow who are dealing
with this situation.''

Thus far, the Russians' only public complaints about Los Angeles have concerned
smog, security and the crime rate.  According to Peter Ueberroth, the Los
Angeles organizers have developed a ''very solid relationship'' with the
Russians and ''fully expect'' their athletes to compete. He added that the
Soviet sports leaders had shown ''extraordinary leadership in not mixing sports
and politics'' - as if the Russians, like so many other nations in Olympic
history, had not mixed sports and politics as easily as gin and vermouth.

Through the years, the Russians boycotted three dual track meets with the United
States, in the late 1960's, to protest this nation's Vietnam involvement; the
1967 World University Games in Tokyo because of a dispute over the wording of
North Korea's name; a 1974 qualifying round of soccer's World Cup because Chile
was the site; a Davis Cup match with Chile, and a variety of sports events in
West Berlin.

But they profess that the Olympics are ''different,'' and in their minds perhaps
the Games are.  Soviet watchers contend that participation in the Olympics has
too much propaganda value to the Russians for them not to compete in Los
Angeles, especially in view of the loud Soviet complaints that President Jimmy
Carter mixed sports and politics in ordering the 1980 boycott of the Moscow
Games.

''All the Soviet Olympic officials,'' says Don Miller, the executive director of
the U.S.O.C., ''have given us the indication that their athletes will compete,
with no question. And before his death, Brezhnev indicated they would compete.''

Yuri Andropov, the new Soviet leader, has yet to be heard from, but Don Miller
expects the Russians to be in Los Angeles, if for no other reason than to show
that their country is more dedicated to the Olympic spirit than the United
States was in 1980 when its boycott was joined by 36 other nations.

In Los Angeles, the director of Olympic security, Edgar N. Best, has had
numerous meetings with Soviet officials over security.  ''Soviet officials are
concerned, one, with the general crime conditions in Los Angeles, and two,
assurance of no political demonstrations before and during the Olympics,
especially against the Soviet Union,'' says the former Federal Bureau of
Investigation special agent and bureau chief who once supervised its Los Angeles
division. ''When we tell them our plans, they seem satisfied, but an hour later,
they will go through the rhetoric of their concern over the same subjects we
just discussed.''

The Russians have been alerted that in the United States citizens have the right
to protest.  ''During the Olympics, permits will be required for a political
demonstration,'' Edgar Best says. ''We'll do everything we can within the laws
of Los Angeles, California and the United States to control any demonstrations
as best we can. As for our security at the Olympic villages, I hate to use the
word elaborate. It will be more than adequate, but not excessive. We want the
Olympics to be an international sports event, not an international security
event.''

One way or another, of course, the Olympics will be an international political
event. It always is.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE ODDS IN EL SALVADOR

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6082 words


Lydia Chavez is The Times's correspondent in El Salvador. By Lydia Chavez HE
SHABBY OLD FORD JOUNCED THROUGH THE FASH-ionable neighborhood of San Salvador,
past the fortresslike homes of the rich. Col. John D.  Waghelstein rode shotgun,
in civvies, his cowboy boots buffed to a shine, a pistol tucked under his
loose-fitting guayabera shirt.  Beside him lay a satchel of charts and graphs.

The colonel, the top American military adviser in El Salvador, was making
another of his periodic calls on Gen. Jose Guillermo Garcia, the Minister of
Defense. This time, he had something very special to say, and the conversation
at the Defense Ministry was joined by the Provisional President, Alvaro Magana,
and the United States Ambassador, Deane R. Hinton. The documents that Colonel
Waghelstein spread before El Salvador's two top officials demonstrated the
country's slow slide into the hands of the Communist-led insurgents.  They gave
a breakdown of the havoc - the blown-up bridges, the burned buses, the lost
lives. Just two days earlier, the guerrillas had taken Berlin, a city of 35,000,
their biggest victory to date.

There was a way, the military adviser and the Ambassador said, to turn the
situation around, and that was by adopting a plan developed over the previous
three months by the United States Southern Command Post in Panama. The program,
the National Plan for El Salvador, called for civic and military measures to
clear the provinces of guerrilla camps and for follow-up redevelopment projects.
The object: to ''win the hearts and minds of the people.'' The alternative? The
colonel's closing words made his message clear. Unless the Salvadoran Government
adopted such a change of strategy, the war would be lost.

Colonel Waghelstein is back in the United States now, his 15-month tour of duty
concluded a month ago, but the problem he defined at that meeting last Feb. 2
will be with his successor - and, some add gloomily, with his successor's
successor -as the United States Military Group in El Salvador confronts the
forbidding realities of its mission. General Garcia has been replaced as Defense
Minister, but these reshuffles are bureaucratic in nature, with little bearing
on the Salvadoran war effort. Deane Hinton has been reassigned, but the
political aspects of the war effort represent just as baffling a problem for the
new Ambassador, Thomas R. Pickering, who is expected to take up his post
shortly.

Once again, for the first time since the mid-1950's, a small group of American
military advisers has been placed at the outer edges of American foreign policy,
charged with the task of helping the government of a strategic country defeat a
Communist-led insurgency described by the Administration as a threat to the
security of the United States. Once again, the American people are not exactly
sure what those uniformed professionals are doing there, or how far the United
States ought to go in saving a country that many Americans would have trouble
finding on a map.

The last time, of course, was in South Vietnam. Most of the advisers in El
Salvador, whose number lately has been running close to 55 - a number that was
set by the Defense Department in 1980 and that has become a kind of de facto
ceiling for Congress - are veterans of the Vietnam years. A highly qualified
group (half of them officers, many with advanced degrees, most of them Green
Berets, with an expertise in counterinsurgency augmented by subsequent
experience in Latin America), the men are acutely conscious of the Vietnam
parallel. Whatever the differences between Vietnam and El Salvador, they are
determined not to repeat the mistakes of the past.

They are also painfully aware of the odds against them. For three and a half
years, an army of 22,400 soldiers has been outfought by a force of about 7,000
guerrillas. The advisers' mission is to transform that army into a winning team,
and to do it quickly.  Another American Presidential campaign will be starting
up in less than six months; the advisers are all too aware that President Reagan
needs some tangible evidence that El Salvador is salvageable, that his policy is
working. There is pressure from the White House, as well as from Congressional
leaders of various political persuasions, for something to show the voters back
home. There is pressure from the Southern Command Post in Panama, the
headquarters for all United States forces in Latin America. Sometimes it seems
to the advisers in El Salvador that their superiors want them to pull off
something comparable to General Patton's saving the Rhine in one clean strike.

It's in the American grain. ''Americans like their wars quick, dirty and
violent,'' Waghelstein used to say, chewing the fat with his men, distilling the
les-sons of his two years in Vietnam and his five tours of duty in Latin
America. It is not, he would make clear, the way to defeat a guerrilla
insurgency. His place in San Salvador has been taken by Col. Joseph Stringham, a
West Pointer who was previously deputy chief of staff for the Army's Panama
command post, but the contradiction between the can-do spirit of the stateside
leadership and the complex difficulties of the Salvadoran tangle continues to
characterize the advisers' task.

The Salvadoran High Command has accepted the National Plan, after initial
resistance, and has begun putting it into effect - but, it should be remembered,
the Pentagon's very similar Civil Operations and Rural Development Support
program was accepted in South Vietnam, too. The question that hangs over the
American counterinsurgency experts in El Salvador is whether any amount of
training and cajoling and convincing can enable an unpopular military
establishment to quell a leftist armed rebellion, and whether, in the end, the
job once again will have to be taken over by American combat troops.  The
American adviser, an Army colonel with close-cropped hair and a neat mustache,
sat in the mess hall of the cuartel, or barracks, in the heart of San Vicente, a
provincial capital some 30 miles in the interior. It was evening, and a big air
conditioner battled the humid air. The colonel's green Army fatigues were
laundry-crisp; they rarely got soiled, since the advisory mission's ground rules
forbid him or his men from going out into the bush with the ''Salvos.'' From the
outside, the cuartel looked like a badly constructed medieval fortress. The
barracks opened onto a courtyard, where, each day, the colonel's detail of 17
men trained Salvadoran recuits hardly taller than their new M-16 rifles.

''I've gotten some good vibes,'' the colonel said, drawing deeply on his Delta,
a harsh Salvadoran cigarette, talking of the start of the National Plan. He
would speak for publication, but only on one condition: no attribution by name.
Embassy policy, he said.

The policy applies to the entire military mission; Waghelstein spoke for
attribution before leaving only because he would soon be gone. The other
advisers have various periods of time left, and one of the dangers they face was
underscored when Comdr. Albert A.  Schaufelberger 3d was gunned down last May
while picking up his Salvadoran girlfriend at the University of Central America
- the first American serviceman to die in El Salvador. In claiming
responsibility for the murder, the Popular Liberation Forces, the most radical
of the five guerrilla groups, boasted that it would send other advisers home in
coffins, one by one, until the entire mission was withdrawn. While it stands to
reason that at least some of the advisers' names are known to the leftist
assassins, the Embassy feels it would make it that much easier for the
terrorists if the names were published. For the same reason, the Embassy asks
photographers not to show the advisers' faces when they take pictures.

The precautions are not only against terrorism of the left.  American officials
in El Salvador must also keep in mind that at least six Americans, including
four churchwomen and two labor advisers, have been assassinated by right-wing
elements in the security forces in the last three years. In fact, before the
guerrillas took credit for Commander Schaufelberger's death, the Embassy
suspected that it could have been the work of the extreme right.

The rich agricultural province of San Vicente is the first testing ground for
the National Plan. Here, in an area of 480 square miles of sugar, cotton and
coffee fincas, some 17,000 peasants have been displaced by guerrilla forays, and
more than 100 schools have been closed. Salvadoran Army offensives have been
limited to what the advisers called ''walks in the sun.'' The Salvos would march
into town as the guerrillas slipped out, and a day later they would march out
again and return to their barracks in the provincial capital. The new strategy,
developed after the Feb. 2 meeting, requires them to stay for several months, to
allow time for development projects, such as rebuilding blown-up roads and
reclaiming abandoned land, to be started, and for local militia to be raised and
trained for local defense.

At the San Vicente cuartel, some of the American advisers went off to the city's
one decent restaurant. The colonel stayed behind. He was thoughtful. The day's
reports were in.

The first phase of the local operation - to secure the 7,000-foothigh
Chichontepec volcano that dominates the middle of the province - had been easy,
he said, since the enemy withdrew from the mountain before the army arrived. The
worst that the soldiers encountered on the peak was the cold rain. They had been
tramping around there ever since, many without ponchos or canteens, and every
day a number of them returned to the cuartel, sick from exposure.

The colonel seemed worried by the lack of resistance on the guerrillas' part.
''They're doing just what they should be doing - get out of here until it cools
down, let the redevelopment projects get started, and then come in and create
economic sabotage,'' he said.

Out in the courtyard, the young recruits were waiting for the final roll call.
There was a celebration in town - 300 teachers were gathered to mark National
Teachers Day. Music drifted in over the barracks wall, and the enlisted men were
itching to join in the fun.  One by one, they came up to a Salvadoran sergeant
seated behind a desk, slapped their boots together, saluted and asked for
permission to leave. Each time, permission was denied. But the sergeant could
hardly keep from laughing at the way the recruits tried to outdo each other in
caricaturing the posture and snap they had learned from the norte americanos.

It was mockery - high-spirited, young - but mockery all the same.  It reflected
a kind of resentment that was growing among the Salvadoran military. This
National Plan, it was a gringo operation.  And this whole advisory program, it
was something that had to be accepted, as a price for Washington's military and
political support. But it exacted a price in bruised national sensibilities, and
approval of it was slow in coming.  There used to be a saying in Vietnam that
the American advisers find relevant to their present assignment: ''I don't drive
this engine, I can't even ring the bell, but let the train get off the track and
see who catches hell.'' By mutual consent and in deference to the character and
traditions of a proud, if small, nation, the advisers do not command in El
Salvador; they influence. And influence can come hard.

At the Salvadoran High Command in San Salvador, four American advisers work with
the staff, counseling on day-to-day strategy. It is often a frustrating
experience. For example, last January, the guerrillas went into action in
Morazan Province, in the north, and the Salvadoran General Staff rushed up the
army's best battalions.  The adviser, a West Point graduate with a soft-spoken
manner, tried to convince the generals that the guerrillas were engaged in a
feint. The generals would not listen. The adviser ''ranted and raved.'' It did
no good. The High Command had 6,000 troops in the barren northern reaches of
Morazan when the guerillas launched an offensive in the fertile southern
province of Usulutan and took the city of Berlin, keeping it for two days before
withdrawing in the face of a Government counteroffensive.

It took four months for the same adviser to overcome the General Staff's
opposition to the National Plan. By the time the plan was accepted - with even
something like enthusiasm in some quarters - valuable cotton-planting time was
lost.

The American advisers, whose remarkable unanimity on the nature of the
Salvadoran problem contrasts with the divisions of opinion in Washington, see
the National Plan as their last chance to show Congress that something positive
is being done with the American aid program, which is likely to amount this year
to about $60 million on the military side and $232 million for economic
projects. What are the plan's chances of success? The optimists in the advisory
mission place the odds at a little better than even. The immediate problem, as
they see it, is the Salvadoran military system.

Most of the recruits are uneducated young men from the impoverished mass of the
population. Many of them are picked up off the street and hauled off into the
army for a two-year hitch; many join up because they can't find jobs, and are
''merely there to get their three squares,'' according to one embassy official.
There is hardly any re-enlistment. This means that, at any given time, the army
is composed 25 percent of new recruits. It also speaks poorly for the soldiers'
motivation, even though the American advisers say that, under a good commander,
the soldiers are eager and perform well.

But good commanders are few. Officer material also comes mainly from the poorer
families in the countryside. For the lucky ones chosen, a military career has
traditionally been an entree to economic privilege and political power.
Favoritism and corruption are traditional; promotion on the basis of merit is
rare. Besides, as one American adviser put it, ''There is so little talent to
draw from.  You move one commander from here to there, and he is just as bad in
the new post as he was in the last post.''

One recent evening, an American adviser was having dinner at an Italian
restaurant in the fashionable section of San Salvador, behind the Sheraton
Hotel. He found himself seated with his back to the door. After a while, he
could stand it no longer and changed seats, so he could see who came in. The
advisers don't like to go out much since the Schaufelber-ger murder, and when
they do, they are particularly careful.

''Death to the enemy,'' he raised his wine glass glumly. He admitted he was in a
bad mood, and explained why.  Last month, in another action in northern Morazan,
the guerrillas had attacked a communications station. ''Have you ever seen that
place?'' he asked. ''It is so well protected. It is on the top of a hill and
there are guards stationed on all the lower hills.'' ''The G's,'' he said, using
the advisers' slang for the guerrillas, ''have to come all the way up, and pass
all the guard stations, and then get past the guys at the top. I thought it was
impossible.''

And yet the station fell.  Another thing - he had made a tour of some provincial
army cuartels. ''When I see they can't even run the cuartel, I know why they are
losing.''

Asked if the army wasn't finally starting to send out small night patrols, a
tactic the advisers had long been pressing for, he laughed. ''They send out a
small company loaded with amunition. The company meets the enemy, fires off all
its amunition and runs like hell back to the cuartel, leaving the wounded
behind.''

He shook his head and sighed.  The military shortcomings are an outgrowth of the
Salvadoran social structure. The educated strata of the population, including
the wealthy finca owners and the small middle class, could provide the country
with capable military leaders, but these groups are sheltered from the war.
Their sons do not enlist and - except for the unsettling case of Berlin -their
cities do not get hit. ''You talk about the poor not being integrated into the
economic system,'' said one American diplomat. ''The rich are not integrated
into the national crisis.'' There are those in the advisory mission and the
Western diplomatic community who say that all the military training in the world
cannot give the Salvadorans what they need most -the national will to win.

What is missing, it is widely agreed, is a popular sense of the kind of
democracy that El Salvador could have - the kind, say, that Costa Rica has, to
pick the most successful current Latin American example. The difficulty, as one
Western diplomat defined it, is that ''democracy is predicated on capitalism,
but here capitalism is so underdeveloped that the majority of the people are
completely isolated from the system.'' A Salvadoran economist, a political
liberal, gave a similar analysis: ''To the peasant, democracy is only a word,
and it means he goes to vote every year and things get worse.''

The Government has not only failed to ''win the hearts and minds'' of the people
but has been damaged by its association, in the popular mind, with the
right-wing extremists. Most civilians have been affected, at least indirectly,
by the violence of the special security forces - including the local militia and
the freelancing ''death squads'' - and the regular army. Nearly 3,000
Salvadorans have been killed by unknown assailants since the beginning of the
year. The Legal Aid Office of Archbishop Arturo Rivera y Damas, the head of the
country's Roman Catholic Church, concludes on the basis of its investigations
that most of the murders have been carried out by the ''paramilitary forces'' of
the right.

The killings have the casual brutality of nightmare. In May, a man walking out
of a church in the San Salvador suburbs was seized by uniformed troops - for no
reason that he knew of, he insisted - and placed in an army truck along with
nine other men. They were all shot and dumped on the road, he told the
International Red Cross; only two survived. That same month, a far-right group,
the Secret Anti-Communist Army, typed out a death threat to a moderate
politician who had spoken in the Constituent Assembly in favor of an amnesty
law. For dramatic effect, the communique was stuck into the pocket of a man in
his 20's slain with a bullet in the head and left in the parking lot of the
Camino Real Hotel.

Last February, according to a recent report of the Government's Human Rights
Commission, a landowner in the western province of Sonsonate told the local army
battalion of a dispute he was having with some peasants on a farm abutting his
land. The troops, in line with the military tradition of protecting the wealthy,
intervened.  Early one morning, according to the official report, they drove out
to the farm, picked up 18 farmers, took them to a nearby river bed, tied their
hands behind their backs and shot them through the head.  The officer who
ordered the operation, according to subsequent investigations by the Human
Rights Commission and the American Embassy, is now head of intelligence at the
Sonsonate army base.

The Reagan Administration had hoped that the elections for a Constituent
Assembly held by the Government at American urging in March 1982 would
strengthen the moderate Christian Democratic Party and lead to a correction of
these abuses, as well as to social reforms. But although the moderates won a
plurality, they ended up dominated by the rightist parties in a Government that
is a coalition in name only. In reality, the ideological gap between the
Christian Democrats and the far-right National Republican Alliance is so wide
that communication between the two camps barely exists.

The problem is recognized at the embassy. ''I am struck by how the people on the
right within the legitimate political spectrum regard as their first enemy the
Christian Democrats,'' said one official.  ''They seem to be less concerned with
the guerrillas. If they can't resolve the problems with the Christian Democrats,
then everything is downhill.'' And if the National Republican Alliance wins the
presidential elections scheduled for the end of the year, ''it will be,'' an
American officer said, ''a whole new ball game.'' He did not mean one with
better prospects for the country.  The day Berlin fell, a Government soldier
walked down the highway in a column of refugees, looking utterly dazed. Less
than a mile away, a young guerrilla jumped out of the underbrush to talk to the
Western journalists who had taken the mountain road to the scene of the
fighting. He introduced himself: His name was Rocky, and he was a commander.
Firing could still be heard and Berlin was still being contested, but he assured
the journalists that he could lead them safely into the city. He looked slightly
amused when the reporters fell on their stomachs at the sound of shooting
nearby.

Whereas the Salvadoran soldier looks, at best, young and earnest, the guerrillas
encountered by Western correspondents are selfconfident to the point of being
cocky. The insurgents have solidified their control over most of the northern
province of Chalatenango, and they talk of setting up a provincial government.
They have also spread out from Chalatenango and brought a good part of the
eastern half of El Salvador under their domination. The towns they hold are of
little economic importance, but their number has been growing. Together with the
surrounding areas, these towns now add up to about a quarter of the country.

Finally, the war has been moving into the capital itself. Since the
Schaufelberger murder, the guerrillas have blown up a bridge 20 miles from San
Salvador, shot and killed a far-right politician and fired on the United States
Embassy. The signs point to the establishment of a well-entrenched terrorist
network.

The American advisers watch gloomily as, out in the field, the enemy seems to do
everything they have been urging on the Salvadoran Army. Although there are five
guerrilla groups under the umbrella organization of the Farabundi Marti National
Liberation Front - the main ones being the Popular Liberation Forces and the
People's Revolutionary Army - the military command structure has been unified.
With a few recent exceptions, the guerrillas have been taking prisoners and
releasing them after interrogation. This provides them with military
intelligence, and it gives the Salvadoran soldiers less reason to fight to the
death to avoid capture - a distinct help to the insurgents' supply needs.
According to American military officials in El Salvador, 60 percent to 75
percent of the weapons now in guerrilla hands were smuggled in from Cuba, often
through Nicaragua, and the remainder were taken from captured Salvadoran troops.
According to the same officials, the help from Cuba has lately consisted mainly
of medical supplies and communications equipment.

The army, by contrast, rarely is able to take prisoners: The guerrillas don't
give up. They stand and fight, and retreat only on command, for tactical
reasons.

The guerrillas' fighting qualities reflect their ideological commitment. They
are united in their goal of overthrowing the Government and ''liberating'' the
people. ''The left is always going to be one step ahead of us,'' said one
Western diplomat, ''because they care about the revolution.'' One guerrilla
soldier, speaking to an American reporter, put it a different way. He said that
if he fought and died and his comrades won, they would name a street after him,
whereas the army soldier would die unknown.

Yet the guerrillas have failed, so far, to win a significant measure of popular
support. Except for the wealthy 5 percent of the population, who are implacably
hostile to the revolution, the people as a whole affect a studied passivity, and
this includes the middle class. In towns that change hands between the
guerrillas and the army, the usual attitude is one of prudent support for
whichever side is in control. To Western reporters visiting the countryside, the
peasants repeatedly say, ''God willing, all we want is peace.''

This muted neutrality may be based partly on fear of both sides.  While
disaffected from the Government by the right-wing excesses, most people are
unsure what a leftist victory would bring. The leaders of the Revolutionary
Democratic Front, which, in theory, acts as the political arm of the rebellion,
are Salvadorans who were active in the country's politics as left-of-center
moderates until the breakdown of constitutional government in 1980. But the
leaders of the five armed groups are dogmatic Marxists professing a Cuban brand
of Comunismo, and they are the ones in real command of the insurgency. The
degree to which people differentiate between these political doctrines may
differ in the cities and the villages, but the popular mood is one of reserve.

Another reason may be a cautious waiting to see which side is winning, before
declaring for either. ''There is still a great deal of skepticism about the
Farabundi Marti National Liberation Front,'' said a Salvadoran political
analyst. ''It has shown tremendous strength, but not enough for the people to
say that this is the time to take up arms. That is a big commitment.'' The
American advisers have not given up on El Salvador. They are blunt about the
defects of the military system, but quick to notice improvements and to see how
progress in one area can be applied to another. A good week can lift spirits, a
bad week can be disappointing, but on the whole, they say, the military picture
has improved since the beginning of the year. The National Plan is under way,
however belatedly and incompletely. The army has 7,000 men out in the field, in
prolonged operations, in San Vicente, Morazan and Usulutan provinces, a marked
increase. Some five of the 14 departmental commanders have started to use small
night patrols, however inadequately in some cases. The Salvadoran Air Force has
been keeping up raids on Guazapa volcano, a guerrilla stronghold in Cuscatlan
Province,

What the advisory mission needs, its members feel, is more time for training the
recruits and influencing the High Command - and this means a reassessment on the
part of those in Washington and the American command in Panama who have been
pressing for quick results.  Everything they learned in Vietnam tells the
advisers that in a counterinsurgency war there are no big military victories,
only slow, cumulative advances, and that economic assistance and social reform -
to rally the people to the Government's side - are just as important as
battlefield gains.

That, the advisers feel, points to a need for an increase and improvement in the
American aid program. In 1980, one American officer pointed out, ''we beat them
head and shoulders to get land reform.'' The Christian Democratic Party's
program for land redistribution was taken up by the United States Congress and
made into one of the measures for judging El Salvador's progress toward
democracy; the degree of progress was in turn made the measure for the amount of
economic assistance. Yet as the reform program got under way -against powerful
opposition from the Salvadoran oligarchy - Congress voted to bar the use of
American economic aid to pay landowners for their expropriated land.

The Salvadoran Government had little money for that purpose, and land reform,
though struggling along, has been set back. The landowners, most of whom have
not been compensated, found a legitimate reason to push, within the National
Republican Alliance, for a reversal of the land-reform law. The situation is
regarded widely as an example of Washington's shortsightedness. ''Compensating
landowners in this country,'' a Western diplomat said, ''would have stemmed the
rise of the far right.''

There is concern among the advisers that, as the guerrillas scored new gains at
the turn of the year, economic and social reforms were shunted aside in
Washington in favor of a military solution. Yet a really successful
counterinsurgency program, in the Vietnam veterans' view, depends on the
Government's ability to demonstrate to the average Salvadoran that his hopes of
a better life are being fulfilled.

Western diplomats are generally of the same opinion. One of them pointed to the
situation in the eastern province of San Miguel as another example of a project
that was pushed by some in the United States Embassy and then allowed to falter
for lack of funds. The three provinces adjoining San Miguel have been so heavily
infiltrated by guerrillas that the middle class has cut and run for the capital,
or for Miami. But in San Miguel, the middle class has been holding on.

''That is the front of the war, and that is where we should be spending money to
make sure that it doesn't fall like the rest of the region,'' one American
diplomat said. For example, he said, the province has been suffering from a
power shortage, which has led to heavy production losses and a consequent
worsening of the economy; yet ''in two and a half years, we have not been able
to get them an emergency generator.''

In addition to more time and more money, the military mission feels it needs
more advisers to cope with the assignment's demands.  Everyone recognizes that
the Administration's recent move in sending some 100 advisers to neighboring
Honduras, to train Salvadoran troops there, is a device for getting around the
unwritten rule on Capitol Hill that the number in San Salvador be kept down to
55. But many feel that Congress virtually invited some such move by insisting on
unrealistic limits. If the recent Supreme Court ruling on legislative vetoes -a
finding that Congress has been usurping some of the President's executive powers
- knocks out pending legislation to codify the 55-man rule, or invalidates
Congress's political tests for American aid, there will be little regret among
American diplomats and military men in El Salvador.  The advisers' understanding
of the social and political aspects of the problem is shared by many of the
country's leaders. Fidel Chavez Mena, the Foreign Minister, and a Christian
Democrat, said in a recent interview that victory in the civil war depends on
progress toward human rights, democracy and social and economic reform. ''The
United States must do it, must fortify them, must solidify them,'' he said.
''But it requires more aid, not the small quantities they have been giving.''

On the right, however, there is considerable criticism of the American analysis
and the programs it has engendered. Hugo Barrera, a leader of the National
Republican Alliance, spoke bitterly of what he saw as the consequences of three
years of American aid policies: soaring interest rates and a decrease in
agricultural production that has made El Salvador dependent on food imports. ''I
think many of the measures that the United States has taken have been so wrong
that they have caused the economic crisis of El Salvador,'' he said.  There is a
sullen feeling among many Salvadorans, and not only on the right, that American
influence is stifling local initiative and placing the country's future in
Washington's hands.

This basic split in attitude toward the American presence leads back to the
fundamental question: Can the United States pressure and persuade a divided
Government and a reluctant military into persevering with the kind of programs
that could undercut the insurgency politically and defeat it in the field? It
was not accomplished in South Vietnam; does it follow that it can't be done in
El Salvador?

The advisers believe that the chances for success this time are much better.
Despite the similarities to Vietnam, there are important differences. El
Salvador is smaller - Massachusetts-sized, with a population of 5 million - and
more manageable; it is closer; the insurgents don't have a political sanctuary,
as the North Vietnamese did behind the DMZ, or a major arms supplier right
across the border. Most important, notwithstanding all its political abuses, El
Salvador, as part of the Latin American civilization, is far more attuned to
Western democratic practice and ideals. And the country does have a bold
land-reform program, even if it's in trouble at the moment.

However, if these advantages are to be exploited and the odds for victory
improved, it can only be done, the advisers believe, by means of a consistent,
long-term and larger American assistance program. The advisers have been
pressing for funds to expand the Salvadoran Army by 12,000 men, but the kind of
program they envisage would give as much weight to economic and social
components as to military training and arms. And that, they agree, would require
a better understanding on the part of the American people of what the advisers
are doing in El Salvador, and a fuller measure of public support.

Without a broader sense of national commitment by the United States, without a
clear decision to fund and man the aid program at an adequate level and to stay
with the job however long it takes, many of the advisers foresee an increasing
drift toward another alternative. It is the option that was stated by Colonel
Waghelstein when, shortly before his departure, he suggested that the Pentagon
dust off whatever contingency plans it may have for sending in American combat
troops. He himself was not for it. ''There is absolutely no need for American
troops,'' he said - if Washington gives the Salvadorans what they need to do the
job themselves.

That, for the advisers, is the big ''if.'' And the danger that their mission may
run out of time, money and support - that the American Government will once
again despair of the indirect method and take over the war itself - is enough to
make them shudder. The 1960's and 1970's left many in the United States Army
with their own Vietnam syndrome - an unwillingness to be caught once again in a
strange foreign land, fighting an elusive enemy without clear support from the
American people or clear directives from the civilian leadership, and with the
specter of public disapproval, demoralization and defeat at the end of the road.
Few of the advisers would want to see the Army go through such an experience
again.  Rather than try to save El Salvador from the guerrillas that way, under
such circumstances, one adviser commented, ''it would probably be better to let
them have it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of U.S. Army Sergeant instructing photo of
advisers in their San Vicente headquarters photo of American adviser talking to
Salvadoran recruits

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE 'DISAPPEARED' AND THE JETTISONED

BYLINE: By ALAN CHEUSE; Alan Cheuse is the author of ''The Bohemians,'' a novel,
and ''Candace & Other Stories.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 925 words


WIDOWS By Ariel Dorfman.  Translated by Stephen Kessler.146 pp. New York:
Pantheon Books. $11.95.
SOUTH OF NOWHERE By Antonio Lobo Antunes.  Translated by Elizabeth Lowe.  154
pp. New York: Random House. $11.95.

''WIDOWS'' is the first work of fiction by the prolific Chilean exile Ariel
Dorfman to be published in this country, and it has a curious publishing
history. As Mr. Dorfman explains in a brief dedicatory statement, he wanted to
write a novel about the plight of the ''missing'' of Chile and the other
southern cone countries of Latin America and about the torturous life of their
distraught families. Had he written such a story with its true setting, he
explains, it would never have been published in his native land. So he invented
a Danish author named Eric Lohmann, a member of the anti-Nazi resistance in
occupied Denmark in World War II who was supposed to have written this
''masked'' novel about Denmark by setting the story in what appears to be Greece
during a similar moment of political oppresssion.

Mr. Dorfman even gives us a foreword by the ''author's son,'' Sirgud Lohmann. In
it we learn that, while the Danish writer was taken into custody by the Gestapo
a few days after the completion of his novel and was never seen again, the book
survived the ravages of the war and is only now being published.

All of this subterfuge, our real author explains, was to get the novel published
in Europe in Danish, German or French so that it could then be ''translated''
into Spanish and brought out in Chile and other Latin American countries. But
even after this intricate scheme was devised, no Latin American publisher was
willing to risk bringing the work out. And now any reader with the two or three
hours to spare for an encounter with this sharply dramatic little novel of large
passions will discover why. ''Widows'' does in fact wear a mask - the
down-turned mouth and grieving eyes of tragedy - and it pierces the body politic
of any number of suffering countries.

The plot resounds with the moral thunder of classic drama, specifically that of
''Antigone'' and ''The Trojan Women.'' Mr.  Dorfman's Antigone is a peasant
grandmother rather than an aristocratic young woman. Sofia Angelos's struggle
against the reigning military authorities in a country resembling the homeland
of Sophocles and Euripides deserves to be compared with the oldest agons we
know. First, her ancient father has been carried off by the secret police, then
her husband and sons disappear. When a faceless, multilated corpse of a man
washes up on the river bank outside her village, Sofia struggles with the local
commandant for the right to bury it as her kin. After much torment, she wins her
battle only to engage the authorities again when a new corpse appears on the
shore. Interestingly, we see all of this action from the viewpoints of various
children, the confused but doggedly determined army officers and judges and
civilian flunkies.

DESPITE the fact that Mr. Dorfman has transported his novel from his native
Chile to other places and times, it gains (in Stephen Kessler's serviceable
translation) emotional amplitude and political resonance precisely because of
the sharply observed details of the bereaved, who suffer no less painfully from
the abuses of mortal rulers than they would have from the cruelties of vengeful
or indifferent gods. The self-conscious apparatus of ''Widows'' soon drops away,
and the reader, deeply touched, moves as if in a dream of outrage among its
tombs of love.

First-rate war novels are always to a certain extent political novels. In
''South of Nowhere,'' Antonio Lobo Antunes, a young Portuguese novelist (and
veteran of 27 months of Portugal's ill-fated military campaign to subdue
Angola), succeeds in straddling the two modes as much through linguistic energy
as through any new use of the form. In fact, the form he has chosen, a monologue
in the manner of Camus's ''The Fall,'' might seem ill-suited to his material,
particularly the battlefield portions in Angola.

Imagine a Vietnam novel in which the news from the front comes in the ranting
recollections of a randy, self-hating, inebriated and almost psychotic veteran
over the course of a long night while he attempts to seduce a young woman who is
his drinking companion. If this sounds like mixing gin and Scotch, you've got it
right. But it is precisely this mood of self-destructiveness and
wrong-headedness that the novelist wants to recreate as he tells of the
abandonment of an entire generation of Portuguese youth in the lost cause of
colonialism and in the last gasps of fascism at home.

''It's strange, really, that sometimes I have to ask myself if the war is really
over or is still going on somewhere inside me,'' the narrator says to his
bar-mate as she is about to become his bedmate.  But it is just such internal
strife that forms the heart of his character. We hear it in nearly every line he
speaks, in his shifts between toughness and tenderness, bravado and boyish
desire for affection, between the present (''this endless night,'' he calls it)
and the past, between Lisbon and Angola, between the butchery of the battlefront
and the boredom of the barracks, the wretchedness of the Angolans' daily life
and the beauty of their country's landscape.

This is a desperate, daring novel of protest (in a lively translation by
Elizabeth Lowe) over which presides ''the serene, unreachable sky of Africa,''
where, above the torture, public and private, shine the remote constellations
''like ironic eyes.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SEEKS INCREASE IN COVERT ACTIVITY IN LATIN AMERICA

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1283 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 24


The Reagan Administration is preparing a major expansion of covert intelligence
operations in Central America as part of a plan to increase American military
activities in the region, senior Administration officials said today.

The plans, which the officials said are being refined but have been approved in
general by the White House, include stepped-up support for anti-Government
insurgents in Nicaragua and a campaign of sabotage directed against Cuban
installations in Nicaragua.

The expanded program of paramilitary action, the officials said, would make the
activities of the Central Intelligence Agency in Central America the most
extensive covert operations mounted by the United States since the Vietnam War.

Intelligence officials said that under the plans, the rebel forces in Nicaragua
that are supported largely by the C.I.A. would grow significantly beyond the
current total of about 10,000 men.

Reduce Readiness of U.S. Forces

Administration officials said the Defense Department, which will provide
military equipment and other supplies for use by the C.I.A.  as it increases
operations, expects that the demand for certain kinds of assistance may be great
enough to affect the combat readiness of some regular American forces.

Specifically, they said the C.I.A.'s need for air transport to carry ammunition,
weapons and other military equipment to Central America is likely to require the
diversion of Air Force cargo planes from other high-priority missions.

The C.I.A. is also expected to use large quantities of communications equipment
as well as parachutes and rigging for cargo, and to call on the Defense
Department for specialists in psychological warfare and advisers for special
projects.

A White House spokesman, Sheila Dixon, said the White House would have no
comment on reports about expanded covert operations in Central America.

House to Vote on Cutoff Bill

The planning for increased covert action comes as the House is nearing final
action on legislation that would cut off covert American support for the
Nicaraguan rebels. Debate on the bill is scheduled to begin Tuesday and a vote
is possible before the end of the week.

The Administration has not officially informed either the Senate or House
intelligence committees about its plans for expanded covert action, members of
both committees said today.

Administration officials said they had hoped to delay notifying the panels until
after the House acts on the cutoff legislation. Federal law requires executive
branch officials to keep Congress ''fully and currently informed'' about covert
intelligence operations.

Since the planned activities are an extension of covert operations approved by
President Reagan in 1981, and Congress has frequently been briefed on the
operations as they evolved, the officials said the Administration has no legal
obligation to notify the committees immediately about new developments.

Information about the plans for covert action was obtained from officials
familiar with the preparations who said they oppose expanded United States
involvement in Central America. The information was confirmed by other
Administration officials.

No Comment From C.I.A.

A spokesman for the C.I.A., Dale Peterson, said today that the agency as a
policy does not discuss intelligence operations and would have no comment about
activities in Central America.

The proposed legislation, which is named after its two chief Democratic
sponsors, Representative Edward P. Boland from Massachusetts, the chairman of
the House Intelligence Committee, and Representative Clement J. Zablocki, the
chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, would end American financial
and military support for the rebels that began in 198l.

Instead, it would allocate $80 million in overt assistance over the next 14
months to Central American nations for use in trying to block the transfer of
Soviet and Cuban arms that the Administration has repeatedly said flow through
Nicaragua to guerrillas in El Salvador.

Even if the bill is approved by the House - Congressional leaders say the vote
is too close to call - Administration officials said they will be able to
continue to support the insurgents because the Republican-controlled Senate is
unlikely to pass the same legislation.

Growing Support for Sandinistas

The Administration's plan to expand covert activities also comes at a time when
reports from Nicaragua suggest that the C.I.A-supported rebels have made little
headway against the Sandinista Government and appear to have galvanized popular
support for the Government rather than undermining it.

After more than a year of intense activity, the insurgents have failed to
achieve significant military gains or to cause a serious political threat to the
Nicaraguan Government, according to foreign diplomats and government officials
in Nicaragua.

Reagan Administration officials, however, contend that the rebels, by forcing
the Government to divert military forces and other resources into combating the
insurgents, have hurt the Sandinistas and pushed them toward joining
negotiations aimed at reducing regional tensions.

Last week, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, the coordinator of the governing Nicaraguan
junta, proposed regional negotiations on ways of easing military tensions, the
ending of military support for insurgents in El Salvador and elsewhere and the
banning of foreign military bases and training in the region.

'Serious Shortcomings'

The Reagan Administration described the proposal as a ''positive step,'' but
noted ''serious shortcomings,'' including the apparent assumption by Mr. Ortega
that the guerrillas in El Salvador should be treated on the same level as the
democratically elected government.

The planned increase in covert activities directed against Nicaragua is likely
to add to the debate in Congress about the aims of American intelligence
operations in Central America.

When the Administration began aiding the rebels in 1981, intelligence officials
told Congress that the primary purpose was to create a paramilitary force that
could interdict arms shipments from Nicaragua to El Salvador. Later, as rebel
operations grew, intelligence officials told Congress that the insurgents would
also harass the Nicaraguan Government.

Congressional opponents have argued that the true aim of the Administration's
Nicaraguan operation is to overthrow the Sandinistas, a goal that would be in
violation of a law passed in 1982 that prohibited any American support for
efforts to oust the Nicaraguan Government. The Boland-Zablocki bill grew out of
this concern.

'Modify Its Behavior'

The United States Ambassador to Nicaragua, Anthony C. Quainton, said today that
United States policy ''is not to topple the Sandinista Government.'' Speaking on
the ABC News program ''This Week,'' Mr. Quainton said, ''Our policy is to try
and modify its behavior in some substantial ways which are consistent with our
interests and out vital security concerns throughout Central America.''

Mr. Quainton said that there are ''at least 6,000 Cubans in Nicaragua today.''
He added that several thousand are ''engaged in direct training for the security
service, for the military forces of the Nicaraguan Government.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
MONDAY, JULY 25, 1983

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 923 words


International
U.S. covert intelligence operations in Central America will be substantially
expanded to accompany increased American military activities in the region,
senior Reagan Administration officials said. The plans, generally approved by
the White House include stepped up support for anti-Government insurgents in
Nicaragua and a campaign of sabotage against Cuban installations in Nicaragua.
The expanded operations authorized for the Central Intelligence Agency will be
the most extensive since the Vietnam War, Administration officials said. (Page
A1, Column 6.)
Three U.S. officials are being sued by an American landowner in Honduras, who
charges that the Reagan Administration, in its haste to open a training base for
Salvadoran soldiers, seized ranch land belonging to him and is refusing to
vacate it despite his proof of ownership. He is seeking an injunction against
the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of State and the Chief of Engineers of
the Army Corps of Engineers. (A8:3.)
Israel is sending top officials to Washington to discuss the worsening situation
in Lebanon. The Cabinet announced that Defense Minister Moshe Arens and Foreign
Minister Yitzhak Shamir would fly to Washington Monday in response to an
invitation from Mr. Reagan to Prime Minister Menachem Begin. (A1:3.)
A three-week-old cease-fire in eastern Lebanon was broken by heavy fighting
between factions of the Palestine Liberation Organization.  (A7:1.)
Western high technology goods disappear each year beyond the borders of the
Soviet Union and its allies, and sometimes the embargoed equipment is even
returned to the West for secret repairs. The technology procurement is regarded
as the current primary task of the K.G.B., the Soviet intelligence and
internal-security agency, and the G.R.U., its military counterpart. (A1:4.)
National
Fiscal stability for arts organizations is the aim of a multimulliion dollar
fund being established by three of the nation's richest foundations. The Ford
Foundation will provide $7 million for the National Arts Stablization Fund, the
Andrew W. Mellon Foundation will contribute $1.5 million and the Rockefeller
Foundation, $500,000.  Additional money from other sources will be sought.
(A1:1.)
Billions of gallons of sewage are still being pumped into the harbors of Boston
and New York 11 years after Congress passed legislation to clean up the nation's
waters. The apparent threat to health in Boston has made a a state court judge
determined to find and enforce a solution to the problem that could cost $1.5
billion.  (A1:1.)
Florida's Everglades is waterlogged, partly because of an excessively wet
winter, and environmentalists fear a disaster. By the end of the rainy season
this summer, the park will have been waterlogged for 18 months. Gov. Robert
Graham reportedly is taking steps to restore the park's ecological balance, but
residents in the area are expected to oppose them. (A10:1.)
Many Los Angeles homeowners are poised to make a run for some big money by
renting their homes to visitors for the Olympic Games next summer. Nearly 20
agencies are matching out-of-towners with southern California homes, some of
whose owners are seeking a minimum rent of $1,000 per bedroom during the Games.
(A10:1.)
Priests should be allowed to marry, nearly three-fifths of American Roman
Catholics say. According to a Gallup Poll commissioned by two Catholic groups,
58 percent of the Catholics responding were in favor of marriage for priests,
and 33 percent were against. (A11:1.)
A dispute over title to equipment used by National Public Radio snagged
negotiations for a bail-out loan to the network from the federally funded
Corporation for Public Broadcasting. The corporation proposes to make the loan
contingent on the transfer of title to the network's transmitting equipment to a
group of its user stations.  (C13:1.)
Metropolitan
The team that hit the final home run lost at Yankee Stadium, reversing baseball
tradition. Pine tar on a bat wielded by George Brett of the Kansas City Royals
against the Yankess was responsible.  Brett was called out after a protest by
Billy Martin, the Yankees' manager, that his bat was illegal because it had too
much pine tar.  Brett had hit a two-run home run that for several minutes gave
the Royals a 5-4 lead over the Yankees, who wound up with a 4-3 victory.
(A1:2.)
Tens of thousands of Salvadorans have taken refuge in the New York metropolitan
area as part of a nationwide influx since 1980. They have packed immigration
courts and put pressure on the Reagan Administration in their efforts to remain
legally in this country.  The Federal Immigration and Naturalization Service
says that 500,000 Salvadorans, equal to 10 percent of El Salvador's population,
are in the United States. Church groups estimate that 80,000 to 120,000 are in
the New York area, with 40,000 living on Long Island. (A1:6.)
Commuter-train improvements in New York City's northern suburbs are being made
on a scale not equaled for decades. Peter E. Stangl, president of the
Metro-North Commuter Railroad, which operates the Harlem, Hudson and New Haven
lines, said the ''railroad has probably not seen this level of activity since it
was built.'' (B2:4.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Michael deCourcy Hinds and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 818 words


McFarlane on the Move

N ow that Robert C. McFarlane, the deputy national security adviser, is assuming
new responsibilities as President Reagan's Middle East negotiator, there may be
a restructuring of the national security staff itself.

In any case, a senior White House official says that Mr. McFarlane will soon be
vacating his office in the basement of the White House to take over his new
duties. He will still have the title of deputy national security adviser, but
that will be all. ''He'll be out of the loop, except on the Middle East,'' the
White House official said.

The President's national security adviser, William P. Clark, does not plan to
fill Mr. McFarlane's job soon, according to a senior official, and might even do
so with two or more deputies. Mr. Clark is ''looking at the structure right
now'' and is not likely to make a decision until after Labor Day, the official
said.

Mr. Clark will also soon pick up some of Mr. McFarlane's responsibilities,
including his work as a liaison aide with Congress on Central America, nuclear
arms and other issues. White House officials emphatically deny some speculation
on Capitol Hill that differences of opinion between Mr. Clark and Mr. McFarlane
on these issues led to Mr. McFarlane's reassignment. The officials also termed
as ''mischief'' reports from the State Department that Mr.  McFarlane's
reassignment meant new White House control over an issue traditionally overseen
at the department.

Mr. McFarlane's reassignment, the White House official said, was mutually
decided upon by Mr. Clark and Secretary of State George P.  Shultz.
Parallel Wars

R obert J. Donovan, the retired newspaperman and Washington author, is
completing work on a new book called ''Undone,'' which will chronicle the
parallel involvement of President Truman with the Korean War and President
Johnson with the war in Vietnam, together with the far-reaching domestic and
political implications of both struggles.

A former Washington bureau chief for The New York Herald Tribune and The Los
Angeles Times, Mr. Donovan was impressed in the course of research on his recent
two-volume Truman biography with the extent to which Korea colored and
influenced the entire Truman Administration, the effect Vietnam was to have a
generation later. The book is scheduled for publication in September of 1984,
when the Presidential election campaign is likely to be focusing public
attention on the involvement of the Reagan Administration in Central America.
Cranston Get Together

S ome 65 of the political professionals who are trying to make Senator Alan
Cranston the Democratic Presidential candidate in 1984 spent the weekend at a
''retreat'' in Coolfont, W.Va., trying to ''work out the kinks'' in their
campaign while the Californian was off politicking in Arkansas. Coordinators
from key states got to know each other as well as campaign officials in
Washington.

It seemed like a good time for the Cranston forces to stand back and apply a
little perspective, campaign leaders said. Straw polls, on which they are
placing some emphasis, do not resume until September, and their candidate
appears to be in a transitional political posture. ''Cranston has lifted off the
ground,'' one aide observed, ''but he hasn't really soared yet.''
Better Late Than ...

A ccording to a Macedonian proverb, ''Tardy recognition is better than no
recognition at all.'' With that in mind, perhaps, 11 men who flew Mediterranean
combat missions for the Army Air Corps in World War II will be awarded the
Hellenic Republic Commemorative Medal 1941-45 by Ambassador Nicolas Karandreas
this afternoon at the Greek Embassy. The medal, a gold six-pointed star and
crown with a red, blue and green ribbon, has previously been given 55 times to
Americans who participated in attacks on Axis forces in Italy and North Africa.
Meteorites on Parade

T he Smithsonian Institution, one of the most brilliant and dramatic sets of
museums in the world, is occasionally given to awshucks references to its
cluttered past as ''the nation's attic.'' Sometimes such nostalgic
self-deprecation becomes overpowering, and a display is spotlighted that seems
to owe a good deal less to S.  Dillon Ripley, the institution's secretary, than
to Robert (Believe It Or Not) Ripley.

Last Friday, for example, the National Museum of Natural History lifted the
curtain on two meteorites whose sole distinction was that both of them had
fallen in Wethersfield, Conn., 11 years apart, a geographic coincidence that the
Smithsonian pronounced ''almost incomprehensible.'' Five to 10 meteorites are
recovered every year around the world, but no one really pays much attention to
where.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 26, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HEMINGWAY'S STATUS REVIVES AMONG SCHOLARS AND READERS

BYLINE: By EDWIN MCDOWELL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1785 words


Twenty-two years after his death, Ernest Hemingway is enjoying a comeback of the
sort so often celebrated in his novels and short stories.

Sales of his books are higher than ever, and his critical reputation, in the
words of Linda Wagner, a Hemingway scholar at Michigan State University, ''is
building toward a newer high.''

Every Hemingway title is still in print and sales of his books in the United
States total almost 750,000 copies annually, up by about 25 percent in the last
few years.

Doing Well Worldwide

Hemingway is probably the most widely translated author in the world, with his
estate said to be earning $80,000 a year in foreign royalties. And he is the
subject of a growing number of scholarly meetings, workshops, newsletters and
reviews.

But it isn't only scholars who appreciate him. ''Hemingway is one of the most
widely read authors in both secondary schools and college,'' according to Paul
Smith, a professor of English at Trinity College in Hartford.

''I used to hear when I was in England that every elevator operator and cabby
knew Dickens,'' said Carlos Baker, Hemingway's biographer.  ''Here you can talk
to any elevator operator or cabby and they've all read something by Hemingway.''


Gains From Short Stories

The critic Irving Howe added, ''Hemingway's a classic in the American short
story, and possibly he's come back because the short story seems to be thriving
more than the novel.''

But not too long ago even his skill as a short-story writer was not enough to
insulate the Hemingway reputation from criticism from many directions.

Hemingway's novels and short stories had come to be perceived as sexist and
romanticizing war, qualities that were particularly objectionable to literary
taste makers and intellectuals during and after the period of the Vietnam War.
Moreover, his image as a hard drinker, big-game hunter, bullfighter and boxer -
the image cultivated by a generation of aspiring writers - came to be regarded
as an anachronism at best.

''The feminist backlash,'' Professor Wagner recalled, ''was strong enough so
that in the early and mid-1970's, when I was doing work on Hemingway, a lot of
my colleagues would attack me.''

While sexism and glorification of war are still widely frowned upon in literary
circles, enough time apparently has passed so that Hemingway no longer seems
quite so much like a warrior, and Americans are no longer as loath to celebrate
physical courage.

Moreover, younger critics and readers are coming to realize what was often
overlooked by Hemingway's detractors in the 60's - that Hemingway, both as an
individual and as an author, had been an active, dedicated anti-Fascist at a
time when prominent Americans and even Europeans were still debating the merits
of Franco, Hitler and Mussolini.

Artistry Over Politics

Parodoxically, if Hemingway's reputation is benefiting from his ideology, it is
also profiting from the opposite tendency to examine a writer's artistry rather
than his politics.

''In a society more centrist or slightly more conservative, where we appreciate
literature as an art form and not exclusively as social comment, Hemingway has
risen to the top because it's more apparent than ever that he was a superb
craftsman,'' said James Nagel, a professor of English at Northeastern University
and author of the forthcoming ''Ernest Hemingway: The Writer in Context.''

Many scholars are taking a closer look at Hemingway through the Hemingway papers
in the John F. Kennedy Library in Boston. The papers, donated in 1972 by
Hemingway's widow, Mary, represent an estimated 95 percent of the existing
Hemingway materials, and they have attracted a substantial number of literary
detectives.

''Every scholar in the United States seems to be writing about him,'' said
Alfred Rice, Hemingway's longtime lawyer who is also the lawyer for Mary
Hemingway.

New Works Coming Out

Thus the outpouring of new works. ''The Hemingway Women'' by Bernice Kert and
''Hemingway & The Sun Also Rises: The Crafting of a Style'' by Frederic Joseph
Svoboda were published last month.  ''Hemingway in Cuba'' by Norberto Fuentes,
based in part of the Hemingway papers still in that country, will be published
early next year.

So strong is the demand for Hemingway that Scribner's recently began publishing
mass-market paperback editions of many Hemingway titles to complement its 18
trade paperback titles. Mass-market paperbacks are smaller and less expensive
than the trade paperbacks, which often resemble the hard-cover edition in size
and graphic quality.

Three months ago it reissued hard-cover editions of Hemingway's four most widely
acclaimed novels - ''The Sun Also Rises,'' originally published in 1926, ''A
Farewell to Arms'' (1929), ''For Whom the Bell Tolls'' (1940) and ''The Old Man
and the Sea'' (1952).

A.E. Hotchner's ''Papa Hemingway,'' which caused a stir when published in 1966
because of what many readers regarded as an unflattering portrait of Hemingway,
was recently reissued. And Hemingway's entry in the forthcoming ''The Cambridge
Guide to English Literature'' is the longest of any American writer.

Each of the approximately 700 stores in the B. Dalton chain carries Hemingway
titles and 400 of them carry the new Hemingway hard covers. ''How could you
claim to be a bookstore if you don't carry Hemingway?'' asked Brian Baxter,
fiction and literature buyer for the Dalton chain.

Excitement and Entertainment

Hemingway's appeal rests, his scholars say, largely on his ability to excite and
entertain readers by infusing enduring values into an interesting story. ''He
celebrates the love of a man for a woman, woman for man and the more platonic
love among men,'' said Professor Smith, president of the Hemingway Society,
whose 175 members include many of the nation's academic experts on the writer.
''His ideas were simple but enduring, like the idea of triumph in defeat of 'The
Old Man and the Sea.' ''

Hemingway's strong personality and writing style have thrust him in and out of
fashion several times since he made his mark on the American literary landscape
with ''The Sun Also Rises,'' published when he was 27 years old and living in
the expatriate world of Paris in the 20's. By the time he was 30 he had also
written ''A Farewell to Arms'' and ''Death in the Afternoon.''

His reputation probably hit its nadir with the publication in 1950 of ''Across
the River and Into the Trees,'' a novel of a frustrated American infantry
colonel who goes to Venice to philosophize, make love and die.

E.B. White Parody

Hemingway's spare, laconic style had always invited parody, but that book served
as the target for the most devastating parody of all, E.B. White's article in
The New Yorker titled ''Across the Street and Into the Grill.'' Later that year,
when many people had already begun to write him off, the portrait of Hemingway
that emerged from Lillian Ross's profile in The New Yorker was that of a coarse
braggart and bully,

But in a comeback of Hemingwayesque proportions, ''The Old Man and the Sea,''
published two years later, won its author the Pulitzer Prize in 1953. The
following year, the Swedish Academy awarded him the Nobel Prize for Literature.
At Hemingway's death, Cyril Connolly, a British critic, ranked him with James
Joyce, T.S. Eliot and W.B.  Yeats.

Then came the Vietnam War, and with it the broad social protest that threatened
Hemingway's reputation. Professor Wagner, for one, said that much of the
criticism of him by feminists at that time was unwarranted because the female
characters in much of his early writing are, in her view, much more appealing
than his male characters.

Comments Explained

''It's a pattern he uses again in 'A Farewell to Arms,' where Lieutenant Henry
learns what there is to learn from Catherine Barkley,'' she explained. ''There's
a lot wrong with Catherine in that novel, given today's female readers, but
still much that Henry learns from her. Robert Jordan in 'For Whom the Bell
Tolls' learns a lot from Pilar, the Spanish revolutionary.''

In much the same manner, more readers and critics now see extenuating
circumstances for Hemingway's unflattering ethnic and racial comments found in
''Ernest Hemingway, Selected Letters, 1917-1961,'' edited by Carlos Baker and
published in 1981.

''It is awkward for those of us sympathetic to Hemingway to read a
not-very-veiled anti-Semitism that arises from time to time,'' Professor Nagel
said, ''but you're not quite sure those feelings really ran in Hemingway.''

Anti-Semitism 'Skin Deep'

Remarking on Hemingway's use of derogatory terms for Jews, blacks, Italians and
Frenchmen, Professor Baker wrote in the foreword to the volume of Hemingway
letters that the author ''was born into a time when such epithets were
regrettably commonplace on most levels of American society.''

Hemingway's anti-Semitism, he said, ''was no more than skin deep; it was mainly
a verbal habit rather than a persistent theme like that of Pound.''

George Monteiro, professor of English at Brown University, said that readers now
were generally willing to allow Hemingway a sort of historical largesse.
''People talked that way at that time,'' he said. ''Hemingway is enough of a
historical figure for people to grant him that, the same way Mark Twain talked
about Nigger Jim. But if he were writing today they wouldn't allow it.''

A number of Hemingway partisans - among them Charles Scribner Jr., whose
family-owned company has published Hemingway since 1925 -have long maintained
that the writer was not a mere recorder of events but an imaginative writer who
skillfully blended fiction and fact. They say the publication of Hemingway's
letters and recent scholarship bear that out.

The general impact of such work, Professor Nagel said, ''is to raise the
estimate of Hemingway as dedicated artist and craftsman, and to diminish the
picture of Hemingway as an autobiographical writer who was a journalist.''

Mr. Svoboda in his recently published book ''Hemingway & The Sun Also Rises,''
maintains, for example, that the novel is not a flawed work of journalism, as
other critics and scholars have argued, but is ''superbly realized fiction.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Ernest Hemingway

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 26, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

KISSINGER ASSERTS PANEL MIGHT TAKE UNTIL NEXT YEAR

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1227 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 25


Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger conferred with President Reagan
today and said that the recently established commission on Central America was
unlikely to complete its work before next February.

At a news conference at the State Department, Mr. Kissinger said the 12-member
commission would probably take until Feb. 1 to produce its report on
''long-range and middle-range objectives in Central America.'' The original
deadline set by Mr. Reagan was Dec. 1.

Mr. Kissinger added that the commission members would have no limitations on
what they might recommend and that they would probably travel to Nicaragua and
other parts of Central America. But he said that ''under no circumstances will
the commission engage in any negotiations'' in the area.

Need for 'an Open Mind'

''I think it is quite possible that a report will come out that differs with
aspects of the Administration foreign policy,'' he said. ''We all have to engage
in this effort with an open mind and with a willingness to adjust whatever
preconceptions we may have to the briefings and to the facts to which we will be
exposed.''

''I think it is imperative that we avoid the bitter debate that characterized
the Vietnam period and also that we avoid the same kind of uncertainty about
objectives and what was attainable,'' the former Secretary of State declared.
''I think the commission will try to make its contribution to avoiding another
Vietnam type of crisis.''

Even as Mr. Kissinger spoke, Democrats in Congress increased their criticisms of
Administration policies and called on Mr. Reagan to be more forthcoming in
explaining his purposes.

Plan to Add Advisers Reported

The criticism focused on news reports of Administration plans that would include
expanding covert activities in Central America and increasing the number of
military advisers in El Salvador.

Also causing some alarm were announced plans for naval maneuvers off the coast
of Honduras, which Administration officials say are aimed at testing the United
States' ability to impose a quarantine on Nicaragua.

''I think it's awful, absolutely awful,'' said the House Speaker, Thomas P.
O'Neill Jr., commenting on the various disclosures. ''It frightens the American
people. It's frightening to Nicaragua and Honduras. It is an unneeded show of
strength. Unneeded shows of strength can cause you terrible problems.''

In the Senate, Senator Christopher J. Dodd, a Connecticut Democrat, urged that
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee summon Secretary of State George P.
Shultz to explain recent Administration actions. He said the activities
represented a ''potential escalation of fighting'' that might conflict with the
War Powers Act of 1973

The War Powers Act requires the President to notify Congress when he sends
troops into situations of potential hostility. Under the law, the President is
required to remove the troops after 60 days unless he receives the approval of
Congress. Another provision permits Congress by concurrent resolution to require
the President to withdraw the troops at any time, but the legality of this
provision is open to question in view of the recent Supreme Court decision
outlawing the legislative veto.

Democrats Offer Resolution

In addition, 17 Democratic Senators, led by Daniel K. Inouye of Hawaii and Jeff
Bingaman of New Mexico, introduced a resolution calling upon the Administration
to end its programs of assistance to anti-Government guerrillas in Nicaragua and
show a greater willingness to stop the flow of arms into Central America.

Mr. Bingaman said that the Administration was ''ignoring or dismissing real
opportunities for dialogue and negotiations while pursuing a single-minded
policy of military and paramilitary action.''

At the White House, Larry Speakes, the President's spokesman, sought to play
down the significance of the military maneuvers. He said the combined United
States-Honduran exercises would simply be an outgrowth of similar maneuvers that
had gone on since 1965.

''Such exercises pose no threat to any nation,'' he said. ''They play a crucial
role in training of troops and support personnel of our own forces and those of
the host country.''

Nicaragua a Target

Mr. Speakes acknowledged, however, that the exercises were also aimed at
persuading Nicaragua to ''modify'' its behavior in supporting revolutionary
forces in El Salvador and elsewhere in Central America.

When asked to comment about news reports of stepped up use of American troops
and covert military assistance, Mr. Speakes said no such proposals had been
submitted to the White House.

The issue of covert assistance was especially sensitive because of the debate
that is to begin this week in the House on a proposal to cut off covert
assistance to anti-Government forces in Nicaragua.  Several House members are
seeking to convert the covert aid to a program of overt assistance to countries
in the region to stop the flow of arms from Nicaragua.

Mr. Speakes emphasized at today's daily briefing that the United States was
committed to ''a political solution'' in Central America, with military
assistance providing ''a shield'' to protect the growth of democracy and
economic development.

As the attention focused on Central America seemed to increase, the White House
sought to play down the President's involvement by excluding news photographers
from the 20-minute meeting this morning between Mr. Reagan and Mr. Kissinger.

News Conference Planned

A White House official said, however, that the President could open his news
conference Tuesday night with a statement on Central America.

Mr. Kissinger, meanwhile, took pains to separate the work of the commission from
the turbulence of recent decisions and events. He said, for example, that
neither he nor other commission members had been consulted on the
Administration's recent military and diplomatic steps.

''There's nothing we can do as a commission about the immediate military
situation, or about the immediate Congressional situation for that matter,'' Mr.
Kissinger said. ''I believe that it is the responsibility of the Administration
to defend its programs before the Congress and to conduct the day-to-day foreign
policy.''

Mr. Kissinger said he did not think a three-month delay in filing a report meant
that the Administration would be locked into policies that could not be changed.

''My impression is that nothing irre@versible is likely before the commission
report,'' he said. ''But this is my impression from reading the newspapers and
from just general conversations.'' He added that he did not have the impression
that events ''between now and Feb. 1 will make our report inoperative.''

Mr. Kissinger said that the first meeting of the commission would be held in the
week of Aug. 9 and that he planned to begin consultations with Congress this
week. He dismissed suggestions that his own record as Secretary of State raised
questions about the commission's approach.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Henry Kissinger

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 26, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA SAYS VIETNAM GROWS OPIUM TO EARN FUNDS

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 817 words

DATELINE: PEKING, July 25


China has accused Vietnam of having grown opium since 1981 to earn foreign
exchange for its hard-pressed economy.  Its charge was made in the current issue
of the monthly Liaowang.  The magazine is published by the official New China
News Agency, which also circulated some details in an earlier news dispatch.

The magazine printed a picture of a document in Vietnamese that it said was
issued last October by the Dong Van district in Vietnam's Ha Tuyen Province
outlining preparations for opium poppy production in 1982 and 1983. The Chinese
authorities said they had been given the document by a Vietnamese refugee who
crossed into China.

The Dong Van district's party secretary was quoted as urging farmers to ''grow
poppies, produce opium and sell it to the state to get foreign exchange and help
solve economic difficulties.''

The magazine also published two pictures of women in ethnic minority dress whom
it said frontier guards captured after they tried to smuggle 14 ounces of opium
sewn inside their skirts from Vietnam into China's Yunnan Province. Ethnic
minorities live on both sides of China's borders with Vietnam, Laos and Burma
and were once allowed to cross freely.

One apprehended woman reportedly told her captors that 36 of 38 households in
her village grew opium poppies. The other reportedly said peasants who did not
cultivate opium were not elegible to buy cloth.

The Soviet Union made similar charges against China in November 1981. The
newspaper Sovetskaya Rossiya said China earned $15 billion a year by exporting
opium and other narcotics to Africa, Europe and America. People's Daily
denounced the allegation as a lie designed to besmirch China's reputation
abroad.

China and Vietnam have carried on a war of words in which their conflicting
charges are often hard to verify. But the latest charge has attracted some
attention here in view of Peking's new concern about narcotics.

The Chinese still remember how British colonial traders forced opium on their
country in the 19th century. Drug abuse, once widespread in China, has been
virtually eradicated since the Communist takeover in 1949.

After earlier denials, Chinese officials have acknowledged in recent months that
heroin and other drugs were being moved through China by narcotics rings because
of the country's drug-free reputation.

Customs officials in Canton and Hong Kong, the immediate destination for heroin,
have set up a telephone hot line to share information. Last month a Chinese
customs team visited Hong Kong to discuss more active cooperation to stop drug
traffic.

Golden Triangle Main Source

The heroin has come mostly from Thailand but is believed to originate in the
so-called Golden Triangle formed by the frontiers of Burma, Laos and Thailand,
just south of Yunnan.

A report from Canton in May said two foreigners, evidently Thais, had been sent
to prison for life after they were caught smuggling more than 27 pounds of
heroin. Others have drawn prison terms ranging down to five years.

The current issue of Liaowang magazine charged that ''poppy planting and opium
selling have been guided by state planning in North Vietnam since 1981'' on
orders of the Vietnamese Communist Party's Central Committee.

In Dong Ban County, it said, more than 1,000 acres were devoted to poppies, with
even Vietnamese Army units helping in their cultivation.

It quoted the purported Vietnamese document as revealing that the Government
assigned production targets, provided poppy seeds and technology and purchased
the resulting opium ''with a series of rewards.''

The magazine said that in Vietnam's Hoang Lien Son Province, every peasant was
required to sell a pound of opium to the Government. In Ha Tuyen Province, it
said, peasants who received about two pounds of poppy seeds were obliged to sell
the same weight in opium to the Government but could keep any surplus. Those who
delivered more than their quota were said to have been given priority in buying
food and scarce commodities.

Vietnam also encouraged its border residents to smuggle the opium into
neighboring countries, Liaowang charged. It said that in the second half of 1982
Chinese frontier guards intercepted about 20 pounds of opium in Yunnan's Wenshan
and Honghe prefectures. Earlier reports have indicated that some opium came
across from Burma to Yunnan, which grew its own poppies before the Communists
took power.

The magazine contended that Vietnam's opium production ''will add a new factor
to the illegal drug market in Southeast Asia and even larger areas.'' It did not
further identify the destinations of the opium.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 26, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Yankees, Bats and Nicaragua

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 731 words


As a Yankee fan, New York's Senator D'Amato has no trouble seeing why a bat with
too much pine tar cost George Brett a home run and the Kansas City Royals a
ninth-inning victory Sunday. Baseball rules 1.10(b) and 6.06(d) forbid any
foreign substance more than 18 inches above the handle. ''Sure, it was fine
print,'' says the Republican Senator, ''but a rule's a rule.''

It certainly is, in every American's congenital sense of law and fair play. So
what about the rules -Congress's rules - against undeclared war in foreign
countries like Nicaragua? Respect for the rules, and for the Constitution, is
not an empty ritual. It's as American as baseball, whose thick rulebook is the
first Constitution of most American youngsters. The book binds Yankees as well
as Royals. Slugger Reagan may not like the fine print, but who exempted him?

Congress has been willing, with misgivings, to vote for open aid to Honduras, if
that can be shown as necessary to stop Nicaragua from slipping arms to rebels in
El Salvador. But Congress has expressly forbidden a secret war to overthrow
Nicaragua's leftist regime. The President denies any such intention, but the
telltale grease is all over his bat.

The small bands of Nicaraguan exiles hitherto used to ''harass'' the alleged
weapon routes are said to be failing. So now the C.I.A.  wants a 10,000-man
invasion force. Cuba's training and aid missions inside Nicaragua are to become
targets for its sabotage and destruction. American ships and planes are to fly
in support of these operations. And Mr. Reagan, defining his objectives, says
peace is incompatible with Sandinista rule in Nicaragua.

These plans were not supposed to be revealed until after the House of
Representatives had voted this week on the new aid request for the
anti-Sandinista army of Nicaraguan ''contras.'' The plans were in any case to be
misrepresented as something other than what they are: acts of war.

Since President Reagan feels uninhibited by the law so far, it is important that
Congress now make its meaning unmistakably clear.  Representatives Boland and
Zablocki, two mainstream Democrats, propose that $80 million be allocated for
curbing any arms traffic - provided, however, that the plans are public and can
be shown to have no more devious purpose. If any of the money turned out to be
financing a secret war to overthrow the Nicaraguan junta, the money
authorization would be terminated forthwith.

This is not a case of writing rules in midgame; the proposed limitation only
takes President Reagan at his word. As freshly restated by his Ambassador to
Managua, Anthony Quainton, the word is that American policy aims not to topple
the Sandinista regime but rather ''to modify its behavior in some substantial
ways.'' Congress has already said that the only justifiable ''behavior
modification'' by force has to be confined to external behavior - the kind that
clearly threatens other nations.

Yet Administration officials already plan to use the money for the biggest
covert operation since Vietnam, for also doubling the number of American
soldier-advisers in El Salvador, for permitting them to operate ''in the field''
though not ''in combat'' (whatever that distinction means) and of an
all-American naval blockade against Nicaragua.

The United States is being taken to war not only without a declaration from
Congress but against its expressed desire.  Americans, including Congress, are
being asked to let the President and his C.I.A. be the only judges of the
national interest, irrespective of either international or domestic law.

We don't know what George Brett thinks about that, but we feel certain that a
young Illinois Congressman in 1848 would have voted for Zablocki-Boland as the
best way to affirm his sense of the nation's values.

''Allow a President to invade a neighboring nation whenever he deems it
necessary,'' he said, ''... and you allow him to make war at pleasure. Study to
see if you can fix any limit to his power in this respect after you give him so
much as you propose.''

That Congressman was Abraham Lincoln, whom you might call a homerun hitter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 27, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN DENIES AIM IS BIGGER PRESENCE IN LATIN COUNTRIES

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2087 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 26


President Reagan, asserting that the United States was ''not seeking a larger
presence'' in Central America, said tonight that his Administration's plans for
military exercises were aimed at providing ''a shield for democracy and
development'' in the region.

In a televised news conference at the White House, Mr. Reagan sought to play
down recent reports of stepped-up

Transcript of news session, page A10.
military involvement by the United States, declaring that ''we have no military
plans for intervention'' in the area.

''In my view there's been entirely too much attention to the efforts that we're
making to provide that security shield, and not nearly enough to the other
elements of our policy,'' Mr. Reagan said. He appeared to show more than a trace
of exasperation at what he characterized as a ''constant drumbeat'' of
''suspicion'' planted by recent news articles.

Display of Strength Defended

At the same time, Mr. Reagan commented several times that it was appropriate for
the United States to make a display of military strength as a warning to the
Soviet Union, Cuba and Nicaragua not to intervene in the affairs of other
countries.

He said that American forces conducting maneuvers in Honduras and in the Pacific
Ocean and the Caribbean Sea would have ''the right to defend themselves'' if
fired upon but that this was ''just a standard order'' given to such forces.

Withdrawing American forces from Central America, the President said, would be
''the wrong kind of signal to send if we want peace in that area.'' The turmoil,
he said, is coming from ''revolution exported from the Soviet Union and from
Cuba, and from others of their allies,'' not from the United States.

Ship Bound for Nicaragua

He also said that a Soviet freighter he identified as the Ulyanov was heading
toward the Nicaraguan port of Corinto on the Pacific Ocean, with helicopters and
other military equipment, ''and no one shot at them.''

''We want peace,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''But we also must recognize that you've got
to do more than just want peace. You have got to prevent what is happening there
to people who want peace also, but are not allowed to have it because of outside
forces that are seizing upon their situation and hoping to further their own
ideological aims.''

Thus the President was attempting to use his 19th news conference to assure
Americans of his peaceful intentions and, conversely, to warn the Soviet Union
and its allies of the dangers of heightening the conflict. He spoke with
caution, calm and occasional humor throughout as he sought to ease what
Presidential aides feel is undue fear spreading in the country about his
policies.

The President reiterated his support of the efforts by the socalled Contadora
Group to mediate in Central America. Ten days ago the group, consisting of
Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia and Panama, called for stepped-up negotiations to
avoid war. Mr. Reagan said he was ''heartened'' by their efforts and
''encouraged by some recent statements from Nicaragua and Cuba that seem to
indicate that they, too, now recognize the merit to regional negotiations.''

''I trust their words will be followed by positive actions to ease tension and
stop the fighting in the region,'' Mr. Reagan added.  The President was
referring to statements by Fidel Castro, the Cuban leader, supporting the
Contadora Group's proposal and to the decision by the Nicaraguan Government to
drop its earlier objections to negotiations involving all the countries in the
region, as opposed to limiting the talks to Nicaragua and Honduras.

In playing down the dangers of increased American involvement in Central
America, Mr. Reagan said he himself did not even know how many ships would
participate in the naval exercises.

He also said he had not received any proposals to increase the number of
military advisers in El Salvador. It has been reported that the Defense
Department is recommending an increase from 55 to 125, but Mr. Reagan said no
such recommendation had come to him.

The President repeatedly sought to pin the blame for the rising turbulence in
the region on Cuba, Nicaragua and the Soviet Union.  ''Yes, we want to
underscore once and for all that the United States, along with our friends,
seriously opposes the use of force by one neighbor against another in Central
America,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''But we are not seeking a larger presence in that
region, and U.S. forces have not been requested.''

Presidents 'Never Say Never'

Asked whether he could rule out an increase in American troops in the region,
Mr. Reagan reiterated his past comment that Presidents ''never say never'' when
discussing hypothetical questions. He also brushed aside a request to discuss
American clandestine activities in the area, saying that this would spoil their
covert nature.

Mr. Reagan said it would be ''a very, very grave mistake'' for Congress to cut
off United States covert assistance to insurgents committed to the overthrow of
the Nicaraguan Government. He said he could not discuss the issue in detail
because ''if you discuss covert aid, it's no longer covert.''

''I think what we're doing is well within the limits of common sense,'' the
President said. Those trying to cut off such aid in Congress, he said, are
creating ''a giant headache down the road a ways, and we're trying to prevent
such a headache from coming about.''

As for the exercises in Honduras, Mr. Reagan said these were simply a repetition
of earlier exercises in the same country last spring, and similar to exercises
that have been conducted in Latin America for nearly two decades.

''Why are maneuvers that we have performed before, and regularly, suddenly
treated with such suspicion, when only well within this year - last spring - we
had military maneuvers in Honduras?'' Mr. Reagan asked. The newest exercises
involve up to 4,000 Army and Marine troops, whereas the earlier exercises
involved a fraction of that amount.

Asked if he was bothered that Americans feared a repetition of deepening
involvement of the sort that occurred in Vietnam, Mr.  Reagan said that ''there
is no comparison with Vietnam and there's not going to be anything of that kind
in this.'' He said that, among other things, no country had asked for direct use
of United States forces in the area.

There have been some calls in Congress for a ''Marshall Plan'' for Central
America, but Mr. Reagan said he did not agree that such a program was necessary.
A better way to assist development in the area, he said, is by private
investment.

Mr. Reagan resisted one questioner's suggestion that if the Soviet Union and
Cuba were to blame for the turmoil, perhaps the United States should ''go to the
source'' of the problem. He said the United States was ''not broadening a war,
but trying to limit it'' and bring about a political settlement.

Choice of Kissinger Defended

The President also briefly defended his choice of former Secretary of State
Henry A. Kissinger, named last week to head his commission on Central America,
against criticisms that he was hostile to the third world. He said certain
''stereotypes'' of Mr. Kissinger were ''not necessarily valid'' upon
examination, but he did not elaborate.

Meanwhile, in the House of Representatives tonight, efforts to limit American
military involvement in Central America were turned back decisively as the House
considered a bill to authorize $188 billion in defense expenditures in the
coming fiscal year, beginning Oct. 1.

An amendment that was shouted down would have prevented using any of the funds
in support of United States troops assigned the mission of overthrowing the
current Nicaraguan Government. A second amendment that would have prohibited
increasing the number of United States military advisers to El Salvador beyond
the 55 already there was defeated by a vote of 247 to 170.

And finally, by a vote of 259 to 165, the House rejected an amendment that would
have required Congress to approve dispatch of any United States troops to the
area unless they were going there to rescue American citizens or in response to
''a clear and present danger of military attack upon the United States.''

The votes, coming in advance of House consideration of the more sensitive issue
of cutting off covert aid to Nicaraguan rebels, were taken quickly.

Earlier today, the White House released a copy of letters from Mr.  Reagan to
the leaders of the Contadora group expressing congratulations for their efforts
''to promote dialogue among the countries of Central America.''

''My Government has consistently expressed strong support for the Contadora
process,'' Mr. Reagan's letter said. He was referring to the negotiations that
the foreign ministers of the four Latin countries urged at their first meeting
in January on the Panamanian island of Contadora.

The President said any solution to Central America's problems must include four
principles: the establishment of democratic institutions, respect for the
principle of nonintervention, verifiable withdrawal of foreign forces from the
region, and cooperation to achieve economic growth.

The President's letter was his first formal response to the expression of
''profound concern for the rapid deterioration'' in Central America made by the
Contadora leaders in Cancun, Mexico, 10 days ago. It was there that the leaders
called for a ban on foreign military bases and advisers in the region, a freeze
on arms shipments and the establishment of international border patrols.

Nicaragua Accused on Elections

Mr. Reagan's additional insistence on the establishment of democratic
institutions was seen as aimed at Nicaragua, which he has charged repeatedly
with reneging on commitments to hold elections and permit a free press and other
institutions.

Mr. Reagan's letter was sent to Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado of Mexico, Luis
Herrera Campins of Venezuela, Belisario Betancur of Colombia and Ricardo de la
Espriella of Panama. Copies have been delivered this week by Richard B. Stone,
the special United States envoy to Central America, the White House said.

Mr. Reagan's comments tonight came amid increased debate over his Central
American policies in Congress and what appeared to be increased skepticism among
the United States' allies in the region.

House Democratic and Republican leaders agreed today that reports that the White
House intended to expand United States military involvement in Central America
have strengthened a Congressional effort to end covert aid to the rebels in
Nicaragua.

''This show of power turns off people who might be thinking of compromise,''
said Representative Robert H. Michel of Illinois, the Republican leader who is
organizing the opposition to the bill, which is scheduled to reach the House
floor on Wednesday. ''It's really gutting us and undercutting us.''

Although the outcome of the legislation remained in doubt, Speaker Thomas P.
O'Neill Jr., Democrat of Massachusetts, expressed confidence that the bill would
be approved. ''We are winning.'' he said. He added that the reports of military
involvement ''have strengthened Boland's position,'' referring to Representative
Edward P. Boland, another Massachusetts Democrat and co-author of the
legislation to end the covert aid.

The bill won support today from three former Secretaries of State, a former
Defense Secretary and a former national security adviser, all of whom served
under Democratic Presidents. ''We urge Congress to enact legislation which will
bring an end to the covert operation and which will insure that American
activities in Central America conform to domestic and international law, are
conducted openly, and are aimed at negotiating a political settlement,'' they
said in a joint statement.

The signers were former Secretaries of State Dean Rusk, Cyrus R.  Vance and
Edmund Muskie; former Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara and McGeorge Bundy,
the former national security adviser.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: maps of Central America chart of aid to Central America
(page A11) photo of President Reagan

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 27, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WHY A KISSINGER COMMISSION? THE 1964 PARALLEL

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 591 words


To the Editor:

As a secret and passionate admirer of Flora Lewis, I hate to go on record with a
criticism of her work, but one statement in her July 18 column -''The Gulf of
Tonkin Resolution, which President Johnson secretly used to launch Americans
into combat in Vietnam...'' - is so far off the mark (and the subject is so
pertinent to events today) that it must not go unchallenged.

he original purpose of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution was quite different.
President Johnson, in whose White House I was working at the time, never took an
election lightly, even when the opposition was light.  When in 1964 candidate
Goldwater started making hawkish noises about Vietnam, the President was
determined to get Vietnam out of the campaign. The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution was
his vehicle for doing this, as Senators Fulbright, Mansfield and many others
still living can verify.

As a political gambit, it was very successful; only two Senators, Morse and
Gruening, voted against the resolution, and Senator Morse subsequently lost his
seat in an election held even after the antiwar movement had been formed and as
it was growing.

It is true that when in 1965 Defense Secretary McNamara informed the Senate
leadership that the Marines were being sent to Danang, the Gulf of

Tonkin Resolution was the justification (and that was no secret).  It is also
true that Senator Fulbright's hearings on the resolution marked the beginning of
Congress's assertion of power in the formation of foreign policy.

Still, until this day none of the Senators involved have acknowledged publicly
that they voted originally not to approve any action in Vietnam but in order to
keep Vietnam out of the 1964 election campaign.

The new Kissinger commission is born in similar circumstances.  Neither the
Administration nor the Congressional leadership relishes the thought of a
political campaign in which Central American policy has an important place.
Perhaps the Kissinger commission will be used at some future date to justify
sending American troops into combat in Central America. Perhaps it will have a
different impact or none at all. But I believe there is no secret plan today,
just as there was none in 1964.

The bureaucratic infighting and inter-service rivalries in the Administration
now suggest confusion much more than policy, and the Democratic opposition is in
at least as much disarray. It is only natural then that President Reagan, like
President Johnson before him, should seek a means of keeping Central American
policy out of the coming campaign, and that the Democratic leaders should seek
the same end, perhaps in this case one step ahead of the President.

The trouble is that, now as then, policy is hostage to events over which the
United States is exerting no ef-fective control. The big difference is that now
there is a real threat to our security in the form of the military link between
the Soviet Union and Cuba. No one has dared grasp this nettle yet. Perhaps Mr.
Kissinger will.  NATHANIEL M. MCKITTERICK Washington, July 19, 1983

The writer was a White House consultant on international development.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 27, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT'S NEWS CONFERENCE ON FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC MATTERS;
OPENING STATEMENT

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 5292 words


I have an opening statement here. A while back I got a letter from a 13-year-old
and I apologize for not having answered her as yet. She wrote, ''Don't you wish
sometimes you could just stamp your feet and shout at the press or Senators to
be quiet, sit down and listen to what you're saying?'' Well, yes, Gretchen, I
sometimes do feel that way, and particularly over the past week.

On April 27 I went to Capitol Hill, addressed a joint session of the Congress on
a subject of vital importance to all Americans - I talked about our goals in
Central America and I asked for Congressional understanding and support. In
Central America as elsewhere we support democracy, reform, and human freedom; we
support economic development; we support dialogue and negotiations among and
within the countries of the region, and yes, we support a security shield for
the region's threatened nations in order to protect these other goals.

In my view, there's been entirely too much attention to the efforts that we're
making to provide that security shield, and not nearly enough to the other
elements of our policy. Yet in each of the four elements of the policy we find
that they reinforce each other, and they're being pursued simultaneously in a
carefully balanced manner.

I dispatched Ambassador Dick Stone to the region to facilitate the process of
dialogue and negotiations. He's there now with a personal message from me to
leaders of the countries in the region, the text of which I'm making public
tonight.

I am heartened by the efforts of the Contadora countries, led by Colombia,
Mexico, Panama and Venezuela, to reach a peaceful regional solution. I'm
encouraged by some recent statements from Nicaragua and Cuba that seem to
indicate that they, too, now recognize the merit to regional negotiations. I
trust their words will be followed by positive actions to ease tension and stop
the fighting in the region.

Here at home I've appointed a bipartisan commission to make recommendations on
the long-term measures, including economic assistance, that we should undertake
to help these struggling nations. And I hope soon to be signing the legislation
on the Caribbean Basin initiative passed by an overwhelming bipartisan majority
in both Houses. The program will bolster the economic independence of the
region.

We continue to promote elections as the best way to guarantee peace, human
freedom and responsive government.

Greatest Part of Aid

The greatest portion of our aid goes toward humanitarian and economic
assistance. For every one dollar we provide for security assistance to that
region we provide three dollars for economic and human development. But we
recognize that democracy and development can hardly flourish when threatened by
violence. Dialogue and negotiations can best succeed when the parties are
convinced that their goals cannot be achieved through the barrel of the gun.

It's especially important in our own hemisphere that the United States continue
to be the foremost protector of peace. As part of this mission, as a way to
provide a shield for democracy and development, we together with our friends are
now planning joint training exercises in the Caribbean and Central America. And
let me set the record straight on what these exercises are and what they are
not. Essentially there will be two sets of practice training in coming months:
One, a series of ground exercises in Honduras with the combined forces of
Honduras and the United States; second, a series of ocean exercises with our own
fleet.

We have conducted joint exercises with Latin American countries on a regular
basis since 1965. The latest exercises with Honduras took place earlier this
year. Much larger scale exercises have taken place in Europe, Asia and Latin
America. Moreover, these training exercises are limited in purpose.

Yes, we want to underscore, once and for all, that the United States, along with
our friends, seriously opposes the use of force by one neighbor against another
in Central America. But we are not seeking a larger presence in that region, and
U.S. forces have not been requested. The United States stands firmly on the side
of peace. As a nation we've remained steadfast in policy and purpose. We want to
see an end to violence and bloodshed, to the export of revolution. We want to
help our neighbors lift themselves up to prosperity. We want to usher in a new
era of peace and social justice.

Now these are great goals worthy of a great and generous people, and we shall
continue to keep faith with ourselves in the days ahead.  Now, Ellen?

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

U.S. Military Plans

Q. Mr. President, you complain of too much tension. How can the people ignore
two battleship groups, thousands of combat troops going to Honduras, you defend
the covert funding of 10,000 rebels - Nicaraguan rebels. My question, and all
these things have happened since April 27, the question, sir, is in seeking
solutions, how far will you go militarily? And I'd like to follow up.

A. Well I have told you. We have no military plans for intervention of that
kind. We have 55 mainly noncommissioned officers helping to train the Salvadoran
Army. We know that Cuba has somewhere in the neighborhood, has thousands of
military personnel in Nicaragua. It does seem a little overbalanced with regard
to the attention that is being paid to 55 as against attention that's being paid
to the thousands. The - I suppose what my question is, Helen, back - answer to
the question is - why are maneuvers that we have performed before and regularly
suddenly treated with such suspicion when only - well within this year, last
spring we had military maneuvers in Honduras.  And last year we had naval
maneuvers in the Caribbean, and no one seemed to be excited about them at all.
So, it's just that there's no confidence in the fact that when I say these are
maneuvers of the kind we've been holding regularly and for years.

Q. But they're unprecedented to last six month. The polls show of the American
people are not for them and they fear it may lead to war and my question is
remembering the lessons of Vietnam, does this bother you and do they have any
say?

A. First of all there is no comparison with Vietnam and there's not going to be
anything of that kind in this, and maybe the people are disturbed because of the
confused pattern that's been presented to them and the constant drumbeat with
regard to the fact of suspicion that somehow there is an ulterior purpose in
this. It hardly seems to me that those ships are going there - and I don't know
that they're going to be there six months. I don't know what the length of time
for the training is. I don't know the number of ships involved. But I didn't
know the number that were involved in the Caribbean exercises. But if they were
there for some kind of a hostile purpose - we happen to know that right now a
Soviet freighter, the Ulianov, is approaching the port of Corinto in the vicity
of Nicaragua. That port is in Nicaragua. And it is carrying a load of military
equipment - helicopters, transport helicopters for military purposes and so
forth, and no one shot at them.

Number of U.S. Soldiers

Q. Mr. President, you've mentioned your interest in easing the tensions and
you've said that you hope the Nicaraguan proposals will have that effect. Now,
your spokesmen have said that the 4,000 troops that you're planning to send down
there will --A. Between three and four. Q. Between 3,000 and 4,000 troops that
you're planning to send down there will have standing orders to defend
themselves if they're fired upon. How does that help to ease tensions?

A. Well, wait a minute. That is something that has been true for a long time, as
far as I'm concerned, with our troops and our forces anywhere they may be. We
went through a period some years ago when American forces were pretty much fair
game. Look back at some of our aircraft that were shot down on the charge that
they had ventured over international water or out of international waters into
the air space of a Communist-bloc country and shot down and we protested
diplomatically. It seems to me that young men and women who are going to defend
this country of ours and who join the military, should know that they have the
right to defend themselves if we have placed them in a position where they could
come under fire. And this is just a standard order. We don't want war, but I
don't think that you prevent war by letting your personnel out there become the
victims.

Q. But doesn't this simply increase the chances of war?  A. No, I don't think
so. All of the ships that are down in that area and that are going there are
outside the 12-mile limit. They're out in international waters, where they have
a right to be.

Now, wait a minute. Before all of your hands go up here, you change personnel
every once in a while and new people come into the White House press corps and
it's only been recently that an effort has been made that I have an opportunity
to meet them and get acquainted. And so recently I met five newcomers to the
press corps but only three of them are here tonight. And when I met them I told
them that in this, the first press conference that if I knew they were here I
was going to call on them if they had a question and Candy, do you have a
question?

Heightening of Tensions

Q. How can I turn that down? A little earlier you said yes that the military
exercises, that you did want to underscore that the U.S. is opposed to the use
of force in the region. Is sending down our military might to the region a way
to show that we oppose force? Isn't there some sort of contradiction there?
Wouldn't it be better to say, if we do these things regularly, isn't this the
time now, not to do it, not to heighten the tensions and to say, we oppose the
use of force? How can you oppose it by sending down all these ships and men?

A. Since the trouble that is going on down there comes from outside the area is
revolution exported from the Soviet Union and from Cuba and from others of their
allies, then wouldn't there perhaps be a risk if we changed our pattern and
withdrew. Wouldn't we be sending some kind of a signal that might be the wrong
kind of signal to send if we want peace in that area? The simple truth is, no
one asked for American forces to come to their aid. In fact, they've gone quite
the contrary and said the reverse, that they don't. And yet, they do acknowledge
that they need the material assistance that we're giving them, both economic and
to provide a shield or help them provide their own shield against the attacks
that are preventing them from making the economic progress that they want to
make now that they have installed a democratic type of government there. But, as
I say, we've done this regularly. I don't that it's destabilizing, nor should it
be.

Q. I understand that you said in your letter to the four Contadora nations that
you want to take this out of the realm of an East-West confrontation, but
doesn't somebody have to begin to take it out of that realm and couldn't the
U.S. be the leader in that way, and not make it that kind of an atmosphere of
complication?

A. We think we are. We have tried to make contact with the guerrillas in El
Salvador to see if they would not meet with the peace commission that was
created by the El Salvadoran Government to discuss participating in the
democratic process in the elections that are coming up before the year is out.
In the entire area I have just sent letters which have been made public now, but
letters to the Contadora Four of our approval of what they're doing and our
recognition of what they are and that we stand ready to support them in what
they're trying to accomplish. We want a political and peaceful solution.

Now wait a minute, there are two more here, Bob Raleigh?

Support for a War

Q. Mr. President, military leaders in the Pentagon have stated recently that
they never want to be involved in another war without the support of the
American people. Do you have any sense or feeling now for whether the American
people are ready to support a war to defend our interests in Central America?

A. Well, in the first place, I don't think the American people have ever wanted
a war. I think we're probably the most peace-loving people in the world. And
maybe this has been part of what has lured us into wars in the past, because we
haven't been ready for them.  But, no, I don't think the American people, and I
don't think that they - frankly I don't think they're as aware as perhaps they
should be - we've tried to make them aware - that this does constitute something
of a threat in this hemisphere to peace in the entire hemisphere, if those who
are exporting the revolution here are successful. But no, we're not planning a
war, and we don't think that that's going to happen at all.

I've seen four wars in my lifetime. I have sons and I have a grandson. And I
agree with General Eisenhower, that war is man's greatest stupidity. And I don't
want to see such a thing. We want peace. But we also must recognize that you've
got to do more than just want peace. You have got to prevent what is happening
down there to people who want peace also, but are not allowed to have it because
of outside forces that are seizing upon their situation and hoping to further
their own ideological aims.

Q. Sir, do you feel that people support your policies in Central America?  A.
Those that have been informed and understand it do. I just met with some today
who made it evident that they did. Now if we all get together and explain what's
happening down there, perhaps that'll resolve the situation in that regard.

Now, Ben Taylor?

Possible Hostile Incident

Q. Mr. President, if there is an incident where the American forces down there
that are engaging in the military exercises are fired upon and they are forced
to fire back, do you see any contingency where such an incident might lead to
deeper American involvement in Central America?

A. No, I don't, really, because I don't foresee - first of all those maneuvers
that are going to be held in Honduras are not going to put Americans in any
reasonable proximity to the border. It would have to be something in the nature
of a terrorist attack, something of that kind. And I think that any of us - that
could happen in a base here in America. And again I believe that those people
who have taken it upon themselves to be our defenders and protectors have a
right to defend and protect their own lives.

Q. To follow up, sir, if Nicaragua attacks Honduras, would the United States
assist Honduras militarily under the terms of the Rio Mutual Defense Pact
Treaty?

A. Well, we haven't considered that but a great many people should know that
since 1947 - and so obviously our Administration didn't have anything to do with
it - there is a pact, the Rio Pact, that says that any attack, or an attack on
any American state shall be considered as an attack on all American states. Now
that would require, of course, actual outside visible attack on a state, and I
suppose by a country flying under its own flag instead of under surrogate
troops. So we would have to deal with that problem when it arose and deal with
it with all of our neighbors and friends in the Organization of American States.

Q. Thank you, Mr. President. I'd like to give you a chance to silence this
drumbeat of confusion that you were talking about. Why not say categorically
that Central America will not be another Vietnam, that under no circumstances
will you impose U.S. troops in a combat situation in Central America?

A. Well, I said the last time we gathered that there is something - I can make
every assurance in the world that we have no such plans, we have no desire, nor
do the countries down there want us involved in that way. But I used an
expression that has been used by Presidents like Franklin Delano Roosevelt and
others, and that is that a President should never say ''never.'' Because that's
a hypothetical question that then asks you to try to predict what could possibly
take place in the future, and I just don't believe you can answer a hypothetical
question.

Q. Can I follow up? What about increasing the number of U.S.  advisers in El
Salvador - are you planning to at all?  A. No one has presented a proposal to me
about increasing the number. There's no question that 55 of them -if there was
an increase - probably we could train the Salvadoran Army and its new recruits
that are coming in actually requiring basic training a little faster than we're
doing it. But there's been no proposal for such an increase.

Aid to Latin America

Q. Mr. President, since you yourself have identified massive social problems as
one of the root causes of the troubles in Central America, are you prepared to
make a commitment to substantial U.S.  aid on the order of the Marshall Plan if
the hostilities down there can be calmed?

A. Well, what we've appointed a commission for - the Kissingerchaired commission
- is for the purpose of coming up and recommending a long-range plan that would
particularly deal with the things that you mention. There's no question that our
neighbors to the south have for too many years suffered revolutions in which one
set of rulers simply were exchanged for another set of rulers. And there's no
question but their economic and social policies have left much to be desired as
far as the opportunity for the great mass of their people.

And what we want is a long-range policy - and this is what I discussed when I
visited there and in South America, and discussed with them how we can have the
kind of development that will make these countries economically self-sufficient,
that will give them a standard of living in which there isn't the fertile soil
that is presently there for subversion, for people offering promises of pie in
the sky and then arouse them to revolution. And to, in other words, have a
program that makes all of the nations here in the Americas equal partners in the
development of this Western Hemisphere; and what a great power for good that we
could be if we were so organized. And we want - this is my dream and it's what I
hope that the commission will come back with.

Q. Sir, is the United States prepared to make the kind of massive dollar
commitment that that would undoubtedly entail?  A. It does not follow that it
has to undoubtedly entail that. For example, many of those countries are
considered too high a risk for private investment. If, together, we could agree
upon guarantees that investment would not be confiscated, taken over by
governments and in changes of government and so forth, there is far more in the
private investment pool, far more for there than any government could possibly
do. And, it is to find out what is practical and what can be done. And we're not
completely alone in this, because our allies, the other industrial nations in
the world, have made it plain to us, and again at Williamsburg, that not only
here in our Hemisphere, but in their own, we want to come up and find ways that
can help the developing part of the world, and help them to faster development
and a better way of life.

Sam?

Withdrawal in Lebanon

Q. Sir, the Lebanese President said this past week that the Israeli partial
withdrawal in Lebanon amounted to de facto partition of that country. Do you
agree?

A. No, I am very hopeful that if this partial withdrawal takes place that it
will be recognized and admitted to be by the Israelis as one phase of their
agreement to withdraw. If they withdraw in a phased withdrawal it certainly will
give us a better case for breaking the roadblock that has been established by
Syria and pursuading them to keep their original promise that when others
withdrew, they would withdraw.

I can't answer as to whether that is the way that this is going to perceived, or
whether the Israelis will admit to it or not, but I will be talking in a couple
of days with the two ministers who are here from Israel and about this very
thing. But if this is a phased withdrawal, I think there is fear if there's
simply a withdrawal to another line and then a digging-in and fortifying along
that line, that this would be what it looks like Syria is doing, and that is
simply trying to partition Lebanon, reduce Lebanon and grab off some territory
for themselves. But with the agreement that's been signed between Lebanon and
Israel, I don't think Israel has that in mind.

Q. Sir, what would happen if Lebanon is partitioned? Would it be that awful?  A.
I just believe that the people of a country have a right to determine their own
destiny, choose their own government and, if it was petitioned, it would be
occupation by other countries, and yes, I think that is awful. We set out to
help Lebanon after all these years of strife, regain sovereignty of its own
land, protection of its own borders, and we're helping in every way we can to
bring that about.

I have to turn in some other direction here. Chris?

Kissinger Role on Panel

Q. Mr. President, I'd like to ask you about the chairman of your new commission
on Central America, Dr. Henry Kissinger. There have been, as you know, a number
of charges over the years that Mr.  Kissinger, during the Nixon years, tried to
destabilize the duly elected Government of Chile, and that he also once told a
Chilean official that whatever happens in the south is of no importance. Did you
check into Mr. Kissinger's record on Latin America before you appointed him?

A. I know what his position was prior to my taking over this office and how
seriously he considered the problems that are going on.  Remember, Salvador
didn't start with us - it was already in turmoil before we got here. And I know
how he feels about that and I know also that there is no hard and fast - well,
let me put it this way - I think there are some stereotypes about Mr. Kissinger
that a little actual reading and rereading of the history would indicate that
those stereotypes are not necessarily valid.

No Women on Commission

Q. Let me follow up with another question about the commission. You talk a lot
here, and your aides do, about the ''gender gap,'' and yet that commission was
appointed 12 men, no women. Doesn't that add to the perception that you're
insensitive to women?

A. It might add to the perception and that's all it is, is a perception, because
if anyone really wants to dig into the facts, I will match our record against
any other Administration that has ever been here with regard to what we have
accomplished for women in the field of economics, our tax policies that reduced
and hopefully will in the near future eliminate the marriage penalty tax, the
measures that we passed on the I.R.A.'s that not only working women, but
housewives, can have these tax-free savings accounts. We have almost doubled the
tax credit for child care.

But in addition to that, I noticed the other night that someone on the air was
comparing our record to that of the previous Administration, and we came out a
little behind with regard to the appointment of women to positions in
Government, except that it turned out that without their acknowledging it, they
were comparing the four-year record of the previous Administration with our
first two years, and when you compare our first two years with their first two
years, well, we're quite a ways out ahead.

Q. Why are there no women on this commission?  A. On this particular commission,
maybe it's because that we're doing so much and appointing so many that we're no
longer seeking a token or something. It just came out that these were the 12 we
selected. We wanted six opponents and we wanted six on our side. But we've
appointed over a thousand women in executive positions here in Government -
three members of the Cabinet - never before in history - and one member of the
Supreme Court. So I think our record - it's just a case of our record isn't
known.

Jerry?

Source of Salvador Arms

Q. Mr. President, since Cuba has repeatedly been labeled as the fountainhead of
most of the violence in Central America, why has your Administration elected to
go to the recipients of the arms and the equipment that comes in instead of
going to the source?

A. Well, we have interdicted some of the supplies that are going from Nicaragua
over to El Salvador. If you go to the source, I think you're talking about the
Soviet Union. They know, and we have communicated to them, how we feel about
this, and we have also to our friends in Cuba and told them how we feel about
it. We are trying to bring about the very thing that all of you seem to think
we're shying away from, and that is not broadening a war but trying to limit it
and trying to bring about a peaceful and political settlement in Central
America.

Confusion About Aims

Q. Mr. President, in reply to Helen's question, you spoke of confusion, but
isn't this Administration to blame for much of that confusion. Some of our own
ambassadors in Central America were taken by surprise by the maneuvers. Some of
the friendly governments, especially in the Contadora group were puzzled by your
latest actions. My question is, why was there not more prior consultation, and
what can you do now to reassure any of those friendly governments that we're not
today closer to war down there than we were last week?

A. Well, as I told you, I've sent letters to all four leaders of the Contadora
countries. And I don't think that there is that much disturbance among our
friends and allies about this. Sometimes there's a slip-up and an ambassador
doesn't find out something they should find out soon enough in advance. As a
matter of fact I received a cable from one about that. My most recent appointee
is to the Ambassador of Austria and Helene let me know that something had taken
place and she hadn't been told about it in advance, and when Helene speaks, I
listen.

Q. Who do you think it is to blame

Q. Who do you think it is to blame for this confusion you spoke of now?  A. I
don't think there is as much confusion as they're trying to point out about
this. The training feature with Honduras - this has been well advertised and
known for a long, long time, that is going to take place. And as I say we
regularly conduct joint maneuvers with, very often not only on land, but with
the navies of our friends and allies in Central and South America. And so I just
don't think that there's great confusion about this.

Expansion of Covert Aid

Q. Mr. President, is it true that you're planning a vast expansion of covert aid
to the anti-Sandinista rebels in Nicaragua? And what would Congressional action
to cut off such aid mean to your efforts in Central America?

A. Well I think it would be a very, very grave mistake if the Legislature
interfered with what we're trying to do and we're trying to keep them aprised of
our actions. I can't answer your question about covert aid. I think this is like
discussing intelligence matters. If you discuss covert aid, it's no longer
covert. So I can only tell you that we're continuing on a policy that we believe
is aimed at, first of all, bringing about peace in El Salvador, hopefully
through negotiations with those who are presently radicals and fighting as
guerrillas. And in Nicaragua, hoping that we can persuade the Nicaraguan, the
Sandinista Government, to return to the principles of the revolution and which
they in writing guaranteed to the Organization of American States, what's going
to be the policy of their government.

Q. About the covert aid, Mr. President, given the fact that these covert
operations are not so covert anymore, haven't we reached a point where it really
might make more sense to do things on an overt basis and, in other words, hasn't
the thing really become counterproductive?

A. No. No, I don't think so. And I think what we're doing is well within the
limits of common sense and those who are attempting to make it impossible for us
to bring aid down in that area, I think are the ones who are building up, if
they have their way, to a giant headache down the road aways. And we're trying
to prevent such a headache from coming about.

Carter Briefing Book Issue

Q. Could you tell us what possible crime could be involved in the Carter
briefing book caper to justify calling out the F.B.I.?  A. There you go again. I
just couldn't help that. I thought we were going to set a record, and I was
going to go upstairs and be able to say how about that, not a single question on
it. I can't think of - this is why when this charge was made - allegation was
made - this is why I said there's only one answer to this. Certainly the best
investigative force in the United States is the Federal Bureau of Investigation
and I have told them to go completely to the bottom of this to see if there was
any wrongdoing, to see if there was anything unethical in what had taken place
and I have told all of our people to make themselves available - anyone who
knows anything about this, and that includes me, and I didn't know anything
about it until I read it in the paper - that to get to the bottom of this so
that everyone in this country can be reassured that we know the truth.

Q. Yes sir, but my question was what crime, or would you deny the possibility
that all of this is little more than Washington Post, National Inquirer-style
summer theater.

A. Oh, you're tempting me. We'll find out when the investigation is completed.
There are any number of things contained in the allegations and the wild flurry
that immediately followed this. There could have been a break-in.

Q. In the White House? A. That's what was alleged. That was what some of them
said that this they suspected. I would have to tell you after having lived here
for awhile that I don't think it's possible either. But also there could be the
element of were these things actually stolen by someone in the White House? Was
there involvement of White House staff in campaign activities who were supposed
to be performing other government positions? There are any number of things that
should be looked at.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan and Sarah McClendon

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 28, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CUBA DIRECTS SALVADOR INSURGENCY, FORMER GUERRILLA LIEUTENANT SAYS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1427 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 27


A former Salvadoran guerrilla who played a key role in anti-Government raids in
San Salvador has told United States officials that Cuba has ''directed the
activities'' of the insurgency since 1980 and that the guerrilla leadership is
now operating from bases in Nicaragua.

The former rebel, Arquimedes Canadas, also known as Comandante Alejandro
Montenegro, said in an interview here that before 1980 the guerrilla movement
was largely ''nationalistic,'' made up of a multitude of political and armed
groups. But he said it gradually moved under Havana's influence to the point
that Cuban military aides specifically advised Salvadoran guerrillas on tactics
to cripple Government forces.

Mr. Canadas, who has been sentenced to death by guerrilla forces and is under
United States Government protection here, said he and four other leaders of the
People's Revolutionary Army met four Cuban military officials, three men and a
woman, in Havana and Managua in July and October 1981. At that point Mr.
Canadas, the 28-year-old son of a civil servant, was an underground leader in
the ''central front,'' which includes San Salvador, the capital.

''As far as the central front was concerned,'' Mr. Canadas said, ''they said the
principal activity should be the sabotage of electric power and telephone lines
to prevent the national army from using the telephone as a principal means of
communication and force them to use only radio.''

Report Has 'Checked Out'

Two State Department officials said Mr. Canadas's background and the details of
his report had been checked in recent months by the State Department and the
Central Intelligence Agency. ''His bona fides have been established,'' an
official said. ''We have checked what he's said with other sources and it's
checked out.''

The official said there was special concern in validating the report, given the
embarrassment last March when a Nicaraguan publicly recanted statements given to
the State Department and the C.I.A. about Nicaraguan and Cuban involvement in El
Salvador.

Mr. Canadas was seized last Aug. 22 by Honduran security forces at a cafe in
Tegucigalpa while on his way to a meeting of Salvadoran rebel leaders in
Managua. Since then he has told his story to United States officials, ranging
from a teen-ager who abhorred what he called the Salvadoran Government's
''military repression'' to an underground leader who directed one of the
guerrilla movement's major propaganda triumphs, the destruction of seven
American-made helicopters and eight planes at the Ilopango Air Base near San
Salvador in January 1982.

''The seven soldiers that carried out the operation were trained for six months
in Havana,'' Mr. Canadas said. ''In October, when I was in Managua, Villalobas
had put me in charge of the mission.'' Joaquin Villalobas leads the People's
Revolutionary Army.

Opposed Cuban Involvement

Although several other guerrilla leaders have been seized and accepted amnesty -
and quietly fled to other Latin American countries after privately yielding
intelligence information - Mr. Canadas said he had decided to speak publicly for
several reasons.

At the time that he drifted into the underground in 1974, after 30 people died
when the military opened fire on a peaceful demonstration by students,
anti-Government activity was ''nationalistic,'' he said.

''We wanted an end to oppression in our homeland,'' Mr. Canadas said. ''We did
not want Communists and Cubans.'' Even before his arrest, he said, he had made
known his dissatisfaction ''that the process was being transformed and
manipulated by other interests, the Cubans and Nicaraguans.''

''At the moment,'' he continued, ''we should fight for peaceful political
alternatives so that the bloodshed will be stopped. I want to take that message
and direct it to my ex-companions.''

The Salvadoran spoke in Spanish in the interview, held at the Institute on
Religion and Democracy, a foundation and churchsupported group.

'A Major Political Error'

According to Mr. Canadas, the guerrillas made a crucial mistake in March 1980
when the highly popular Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero, who had advocated
social change, was murdered. ''There could have been the insurrection then and
there,'' he said. ''The people were waiting for the call.'' But ''the Communists
in the movement said wait,'' he said, adding, ''It was a major political
error.''

By June 1980, Mr. Canadas said, after guerrilla leaders, not including him, went
to Havana, ''arms began coming in and the commanders after that meeting did not
return to Salvador.'' He said that was when the leaders moved their operations
to Nicaragua.

''They never returned,'' he said, ''with the exception of Villalobas, who was
the last one to leave Salvador in February '81.'' ''Before that we did not have
much arms coming in,'' he said.  ''After that the majority of arms was given by
Vietnam, American M-16's. The arms came from Vietnam to Havana. Havana to
Managua.  Managua to Salvador.''

Mr. Canadas said that although the guerrillas' umbrella group, the Farabundo
Marti National Liberation Front, includes several factions of either nationalist
or Communist grouping, it moved into closer alignment with Cuba ''because they
thought they were going to win militarily; they felt with Cuban aid the success
would come more quickly.''

Mr. Canadas said he initially grew aware of Cuba's involvement in mid-1980 when
the umbrella organization was set up. One of its main factions is the People's
Revolutionary Army. Overseeing the front was a supreme executive body, the
Unified Revolutionary Directorate, or D.R.U., that was formed, he said, at a
secret meeting in Havana.

''From the political and military point of view, all the decisions that the
D.R.U. took - from the strategic sense, from the military sense - were done in
coordination with the Cubans,'' he said.

For example, in November 1980, when guerrilla leaders met in Havana, ''the
military plan for the final offensive in January '81 was authorized by the
Cubans,'' he said.

That offensive, in which guerrilla forces attacked key points in hopes of a
general uprising, fizzled. ''There was no popular backing for an insurrection,''
Mr. Canadas said, adding that the umbrella guerrilla group had ''never agreed on
a common strategy; there were ideological differences.''

He said he was in Soyapango, just east of San Salvador, on Jan. 10 and ''the
people closed their doors on us.'' Mr. Canadas, a hefty man with an engaging
smile, said he now lives in Costa Rica and Panama. He is in Washington for
several days and declined to discuss further details about his whereabouts.

On his first visit to Cuba in July 1981, he recalled, he and three other
People's Revolutionary Army leaders - Jorge Melendez of the Morazan area, Juan
Ramon Medrano of the ''southern front'' and Miguel Ramirez of the ''western
front'' - met the four Cubans.

The Cubans ''told us what had to be done in the interior of the country,'' Mr.
Canadas said. ''They directed the activities. In the case of Morazan, they said
the principal activities should be to take the fight from the mountain to the
city because we had to get the city population on our side.'' Morazan Province,
northeast of San Salvador on the Honduran border, is a key battleground.

Three months later, in October, he said, the same group of Salvadorans and
Cubans met in Managua. ''We examined everything that had been done since July,''
he said. ''We analyzed the taking of Villa el Rosario in Morazan. It was a
village occupied by the guerrillas. It showed how much we had advanced. As far
as the central front, they indicated that the sabotage of the electric power and
telephone lines was not enough, not sufficient. We had to make greater efforts
in these activities.''

Mr. Canadas said he hoped the United States would back away from any military
solution in El Salvador and press the Salvadoran Government for ''a political
agreement among all sectors.''

''You have to take into account the guerrilla forces in any settlement,'' he
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Arquimedes Canadas

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE VOTE BACKS HALT IN COVERT AID TO SANDINISTA FOES

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1442 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 28


The House of Representatives voted tonight to cancel all secret aid to rebels
fighting the Government of Nicaragua by Sept. 30. The vote was 228 to 195.

The bill now goes to the Republican-controlled Senate, where it faces an
uncertain future. But Democratic sponsors of the legislation contend that it
could still have a significant impact on Administration policies.

''It will put pressure on Republican senators running for reelection,'' said
Representative Bill Alexander, Democrat of Arkansas. ''And they in turn will put
pressure on the Administration to moderate their hard-line policies.''

Debate Is Angry

The final vote came after a long day of angry debate over those policies, which
have jumped to the top of the Congressional agenda as President Reagan has vowed
to increase the American military presence in Central America. The President's
critics charged that he was leading the country closer to war while his
supporters maintained he was defending the hemisphere against Communist
expansionism.

Representative Trent Lott of Mississippi, the Republican whip, said the
President's decision to send troops to the region for extended maneuvers had
troubled members of Congress and hurt the Administration's cause.

''The timing of events this week certainly didn't help,'' he said.

'Will of the American People'

House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. also touched on the growing public
uneasiness over Latin American when he issued a statement after the vote tonight
that read, ''Congress responds to the will of the American people.''

During a series of complex maneuvers, supporters of the Administration tried
repeatedly to introduce amendments that would make it easier for the
Administration to continue covert aid to the Nicaraguan insurgents. At one
point, Administration critics doubted whether they had enough votes to enact a
total ban and accepted an amendment that would have given the President the
right to appeal for new aid after a 30-day pause.

But as the day wore on, critics of the Administration increased their strength.
And at the last moment, they succeeded in pushing through their original bill,
which was co-sponsored by Representative Edward P. Boland, Democrat of
Massachusetts, and Representative Clement J. Zablocki, Democrat of Wisconsin.

O.A.S. Role Is Urged

The final version also contained a proposal by Representative Jim Wright of
Texas, the majority leader, that urges President Reagan to work through the
Organization of American States to seek a negotiated settlement to the turmoil
in Latin America.

The Wright rider also includes a sharply worded indictment of the Sandinista
Government in Nicaragua and states as a finding of Congress that Nicaragua ''has
failed to keep solemn promises'' made to the Organization of American States in
1979 to respect human rights and hold early elections.

Another section of the bill would authorize the expenditure of $80 million in
overt aid to friendly governments in Latin America who want to halt the flow of
arms through the region.

New Legislation Planned

The legislation adopted today is officially an amendment to the act authorizing
funds for intelligence activities during the current fiscal year, which ends
Sept. 30. But sponsors are already drafting similar legislation that would be
attached to the bill authorizing intelligence funds for the next fiscal year,
which begins Oct. 1.

But to many members of Congress the legislation's importance goes far beyond the
actual impact on covert funds. Congress usually exerts influence on foreign
policy through indirect means, voicing opinions and sending messages to the
Administration, which retains the final right to make foreign policy on most
issues.

Accordingly, the message sent to the White House by tonight's vote was
considered critical. Representative Norman Y. Mineta, a California Democrat who
sits on the Intelligence Committee, said: ''It's an uncomplicated messgae. We
don't like what's going on.''

Representative Alexander, the Democratic whip, insisted that tonight's vote
would mark ''the beginning of a change of direction away from gunboat diplomacy
and toward a political solution to these problems.''

'A Very Dangerous Message'

Representative Lott also said he believed the vote would send a message, but of
a different sort. ''This sends a very dangerous message to Latin America,'' he
said. ''We're losing the will to stand up to Communism in Central America.''

As the debate began, both sides estimated the vote to be extremely close and
advanced moderating amendments designed to bring defectors from the other camp.
The fluid situation on the House floor reflected the deep uncertainties
troubling many members, who do not like the situation in Central America but do
not want to use American force to correct it.

''People are trying to find a way to be on both sides of the issue,'' said
Representative Michael D. Barnes, Democrat of Maryland. And Representative Dan
Mica, Democrat of Florida, said, ''Many of us believe the President is acting
illegally under United States laws, but we also think the Nicaragua thing will
eventually become a major problem for this hemipshere.''

Mr. Mica advanced a proposal that would delay the aid cutoff to Oct. 1 and
require the President to draft a new plan for dealing with arms traffic and
insurgent movements in Latin America. The covert aid would continue unless the
President or the Organization of American States certified that Nicaragua had
ceased to aid insurgents battling the Salvadoran Government. But the proposal
was defeated twice by an increasing margin.

Strong Feelings Demonstrated

At one point, Democrats agreed to an amendment that would have given the
President a chance to request a resumption of aid if he could prove that
Nicaragua was still aiding guerrillas in El Salvador. The aid would resume if
both houses of Congress agreed with him. But that amendment was wiped out by a
final substitute that restored the original Boland-Zablocki bill, plus the
Wright language on the Organization of American States.

While both camps felt compelled to moderate their positions somewhat, the day's
debate demonstrated the strong feelings over the issue. Representative William
S. Broomfield of Michigan, the ranking Republican on the Foreign Affairs
Committee, stated the issue this way: ''You're either for or against the policy
of the United States.''

''We are seeing a conflict over how to approach Central America,'' said
Representative Alexander, the Arkansas Democrat. ''This debate raises a central
question about the use of force. Are we in a battle of guns and tanks or in a
battle of ideas?''

Those advocating an end to covert aid feel the President's decision to increase
the United States military presence in the region demonstrates a ''cowboy
mentality,'' in the words of Representative Ronald V. Dellums, Democrat of
California, and adds to America's image as a ''gun-wielding, insensitive
gringo''.

Vietnam Is Recalled

Representative Robert J. Mrazek, a freshman Democrat from Long Island, recalled
the experience of Vietnam and told the House that the United States could
gradually be drawn into deeper involvement in Latin America. ''We are literally
playing with dynamite,'' he said in an emotional speech, ''when it comes to the
lives of another generation of Americans.''

Covert aid to Nicaraguan rebels, asserted Representative Lee H.  Hamilton,
Democrat of Indiana, ''is not in America's national interest.'' The result of
continuing such a course, he said, would be to diminish chances for a negotiated
settlement and ''hold the United States up to ridicule.''

But supporters of the aid maintained that America's vital interests were
directly connected to events in Latin America and depended on a vigorous effort
to deter the spread of Communism.  Representative Phil Gramm, Republican of
Texas, also drew an analogy to Vietnam, saying that Congress was repeating the
same mistakes in Latin America that it did in Southeast Asia.

''We are following the same pattern of holding back our effort and letting
Communism succeed,'' he said. ''It is a policy of retreat, a policy of
surrender.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Reps. Wright and Zablocki (Page A4)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR GUERRILLA UNITS ABANDON A USEFUL TACTIC

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 812 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, July 28


One of the most miltarily useful and innovative tactics to emerge from the
guerrilla war in El Salvador has involved not pulling triggers.

From last October until recently, many of the leftist guerrilla units had
adopted a policy of using sizable forces to overrun small Government garrisons
and then releasing captured soldiers unharmed within 24 to 48 hours.

The tactic often eliminated soldiers from the war as effectively as would a
bullet.  ''After they had surrendered and been released, they tended to lose
their will to fight,'' an American adviser said. ''And their officers didn't
trust them or want them any more.''

In addition, as word of the policy spread among Government army and paramilitary
units, some soldiers who came under attack seemed disinclined to put up
determined resistance. To do so seemed to risk death, whereas to surrender
seemed to carry high odds that they would not only live but also be home within
hours or days.

'Absolutely Devastating'

''It was an absolutely devastating policy for the El Salvador Army,'' a United
States military expert said. A Salvadoran infantry colonel agreed that it was
''an extremely effective tactic for the guerrillas.''

However, in recent weeks there have been reports that some guerrillas have
abandoned this effective policy for one that may inspire more stubborn
resistance by Government soldiers: They have reportedly shot some prisoners.

At least some of the reports are believed to be authentic, although journalists
sometimes have limited and difficult access to combat zones and United States
military advisers are forbidden access by orders from Washington.

A military analyst here attributed the change in policy to ''a loony, fringe
group.''

5 Semiautonomous Groups

The guerrilla army is a coalition of five groups, each of which is
semiautonomous militarily, although since last year the Government side has
noted an increased degree of coordination and cooperation among the five forces.

The group that is believed to have begun to put captured Government soldiers to
death is the Popular Liberation Forces, also known by the Spanish-language
abbreviation of F.P.L.

The F.P.L. was formed in the early 1970's as a protest against the Salvadoran
Communist Party's policy then of seeking a nonviolent and political path to
power. It is considered one of the most militant and leftist of the five
guerrilla groups.

Policy disputes within the group and a debate over tactics that may still be
unresolved apparently led to the murder of one leader and the death, reportedly
by suicide, of another this year.

Concern From Within

A Western military expert said he believed that another important guerrilla
force, the People's Revolutionary Army, was angry and concerned over the
F.P.L.'s behavior in executing some prisoners.

The commander of the People's Revolutiony Army, Joaquin Villalobos, is described
by several Western experts as the ''best military commander on either side in
this war.''

''Villalobos has reportedly threatened to take action if the F.P.L. doesn't stop
shooting prisoners,'' an American official said. But it is not clear what he
could do to force another member of the coalition to follow his preferred
policy.

In the meantime, some other military factors have, in any case, tended to blunt
the effectiveness of the prisoner release policy.  The policy, naturally,
requires the capture of prisoners. But, especially since early June, when the
Government forces began using more aggressive tactics and keeping large numbers
of soldiers in the field, the guerrilla units have reportedly spent much of
their time moving to avoid combat with the Salvadoran troops.

Military experts here believe that the guerrillas have found it difficult to
concentrate in the numbers needed to overrun small outposts with ease.

Ambushing the Rescuers

Other insurgent tactics here were widely used in the Vietnam War - and for
decades before that conflict. One such tactic that has been somewhat successful
is that of attacking an outpost and then ambushing the reaction or rescue force
sent to help out.

In such incidents the major damage inflicted on Government troops is usually
done at the ambush sites. Because the Government has too few helicopters, it
must send the rescue troops by road in vehicles; and that makes ambush easier
and more dangerous.

In what a military expert called a ''classic'' example, the guerrillas recently
used a small force against an outpost to set off a military alarm and then set
up sizable highway ambushes both east and west of the outpost.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Condemns U.S.-Thai Maneuvers

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 104 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 28


Vietnam today condemned the joint American-Thai military exercise under way in
the Gulf of Siam as a bid by the Reagan Administration to strengthen a ''new
military presence'' in Southeast Asia.

The Communist Party daily, Nhan Dan, did not elaborate on this charge in a
commentary monitored here. But it noted that the exercises, named Cobra Gold 83,
took place after a visit to Thailand by Secretary of State George P. Shultz and
before that of the Chinese Foreign Minister, Wu Xueqian. Mr. Shultz was in
Bangkok last month and Mr. Wu is due to arrive on Saturday for a three-day
visit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WEINBERGER AND SENATE ARMS PANEL POLITELY TRADE CHARGES OVER BUDGET

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 921 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 28


Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger gently scolded Congress today for not
acting promptly on the military budget and then strongly urged that those
budgets be prepared for two years instead of one.

At the same time, Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, said he would propose
legislation to provide for two-year military budgets plus other radical steps to
consolidate and speed preparation of military budgets.

The proposals seem certain to generate vigorous debate, especially since they
would strengthen the hand of the executive branch of the Government and would
undermine the ability of many members of Congress to protect special interests
in their districts.

Mr. Weinberger testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee, which is
headed by Senator John Tower, Republican of Texas, in the first of 15 hearings
on how the Defense Department enhances national security.

Mr. Weinberger defended his management of the department and attributed most of
the ills in the budget process to Congress. In response, most of the Senators
were cordial but pointed fingers at the Pentagon.

Current System Held Unworkable

On the military budgets, the Defense Secretary said: ''The current system has
simply not worked. All too often, defense authorization and appropriation
legislation has not been completed by the time the fiscal year begins.''

Mr. Weinberger said, ''In the last 10 years, we have had our appropriations
signed into law before the fiscal year began only twice.'' In other years, he
continued, the Pentagon has operated under a Congressional resolution continuing
spending at about the same level as the year before. He asserted, ''There is
nothing more disruptive to sound management.''

Therefore, he said, ''I strongly urge that more certainty be introduced into the
system'' by revising the budget schedule to cover two years. Neither the bill
that authorizes Defense Department programs nor the appropriation bill providing
the money for the fiscal year 1984, beginning Oct. 1, appears likely to be
passed on time.

In addition, Mr. Weinberger also asked that Congress give the Secretary of
Defense more flexibility by refraining from telling him how to organize his
staff, by cutting down on ''time-consuming reviews'' and by permitting the
Pentagon to close more military bases.

In recent years the Pentagon has tried to consolidate bases to save money but
has often been stopped by local interests who enlist their Congressmen to block
the effort. The issue has usually been fear of losing jobs.

Tower Critical of Pentagon

In response, Senator Tower said Mr. Weinberger had ''properly identified
Congress as part of the problem'' but went on to assert the Pentagon was ''a
vast, multilayered bureaucracy that is not as responsive as we would like it to
be.''

Senator William S. Cohen, Republican of Maine, charged that the Defense
Department was ''unblinking, unshakable, and unmoveable even in the face of
constructive criticism'' and that too many officials there thought ''we are the
enemy on this side of the Potomac.''

Senator Henry M. Jackson of Washington, the senior Democrat on the committee,
said the public viewed the department as wasteful and thought ''we're not doing
anything about it.''

In a different vein, Senator Barry Goldwater questioned civilian management of
military affairs. Referring to the wars in Korea and Vietnam, he contended,
''We've lost the last two wars we've fought because they have been run by
civilians in Washington.''

Goldwater Takes Different Tack

Asserting that the United States had no military strategy, the Arizona
Republican added, ''Americans don't understand why wars start and they don't
understand what we're going to do.''

Senator Goldwater appeared to allude to the coming deployment of American forces
to Central America ordered by President Reagan.  Mr. Weinberger reasserted the
constitutional prerogative of civilian control over the military but said
civilians in Washington would not try to act as field commanders in running wars
abroad.  ''There will never be that kind of activity while I'm around,'' he
said.

Senator Nunn, a Georgia Democrat, said that his staff was preparing legislation
that would provide for two-year budgets. The measure would also call for cutting
Congressional consideration of the military budget from three processes to two.

Currently, military budgets are considered by the House and Senate Budget
Committees, by the House and Senate Armed Services Committees, and by the House
and Senate Appropriations Committees. The budgets are debated again on the floor
and then voted.

Mr. Nunn said he would propose that the Budget and Appropriations Committees be
merged to consider the overall economic effects of the budget and military
spending, while the Armed Services Committees handled both the authorizing and
appropriating functions of the budget.

He asserted that the processes today were too time-consuming and that the
Congress could no longer afford them. But he conceded later that having the
legislation adopted would be difficult because too many vested interests would
be at stake.

Mr. Weinberger, however, said he ''absolutely, enthusiastically, and
unreservedly'' supported Mr. Nunn's proposal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Caspar Weinberger

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

INCREASING EVIDENCE SAID TO LINK DIOXIN TO HUMAN CANCERS

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHABECOFF, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 353 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 28


Increasing evidence links dioxin to cancer in humans, three top Reagan
Administration public health officials testified today at a House subcommittee
hearing.

Dr. Edward N. Brandt Jr., the Assistant Secretary for Health of the Department
of Health and Human Services, said, ''There is an increasing body of evidence
that there may be an association in workers between exposure to products
containing dioxin and softtissue sarcomas.''

However, the public health officials said that the evidence of linkages between
dioxin exposure and cancer was not conclusive and that more research was needed.

''Results thus far do not establish a cause-and-effect relationship,'' said Dr.
Brandt.

More Deaths Than Expected

Dr. Philip J. Landrigan, director of the division of surveillance for the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, said studies by his
division had found evidence of four deaths from softtissue sarcomas among 5,000
workers, substantially more than expected.

Dr. Vernon N. Houk, director of the Centers for Disease Control's Center for
Environmental Health, said, ''No study we have seen suggests we should not be
concerned.''

The possible link between dioxin and human health problems is under debate in
scientific, medical, industrial and governmental policymaking circles. It is
also at issue in litigation over dioxin, including lawsuits by veterans of the
Vietnam War who were exposed to Agent Orange, a herbicide contaminated by
dioxin.

The hearing on dioxin research was held by the House Science and Technology
Committee's subcommittee on the environment. Its chairman, Representative James
H. Scheuer, Democrat of Queens, said he was holding the hearings on dioxin
because of ''the likelihood that it represents a very real danger to public
health.''

After listening to the views of the Administration's officials, Mr. Scheuer said
he was disappointed in what he characterized as ''weak'' testimony.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 29, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

'CRADLE' CAST REVIVES THE SPIRIT OF THE 30'S

BYLINE: By NAN ROBERTSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 956 words


All three were born long after that historic opening night in 1937. The oldest,
Randle Mell, is only 31. He dances and sings and shouts his exuberant way
through the role of Larry Foreman, the union organizer in ''The Cradle Will
Rock,'' Marc Blitzstein's labor opera now in revival at the Douglas Fairbanks
Theater. He also plays the corrupt artist Dauber.

The other two are Lisa Banes, 28, who plays Moll, the prostitute, and
Michele-Denise Woods, 25, as the sister of a man injured by antiunion goons, who
sings ''Joe Worker Gets Gypped'' with passionate conviction. Only Miss Woods,
who is black and grew up on the Lower East Side, heard repeatedly and at an
early age from her elders about the Great Depression. She alone has known
discrimination in her career.

The three gathered the other day in the sky-high apartment overlooking Central
Park of John Houseman, who is almost 81 years old, was producer of the original
''Cradle'' and who has assisted at the birth of countless landmark events in
theater, movies and television. Mr. Houseman directed this revival with 17
alumni from the Acting Company, which he founded at the Juilliard School in
1972.

'What Life Was Like'

Settling his huge bulk into a chair he instantly overflowed, the white-haired
Mr. Houseman gazed benignly on his three proteges.  ''The first day of
rehearsal, I told the cast the story of that night and amplified what life was
like in those days,'' he said. In the early weeks of this run, he did the same
before each performance, reading a 10-minute prologue. Mr. Mell has now taken
over.

Briefly, those who put on the original opera defied a Government ban on the
''dangerous'' work, opening in a theater found at the last minute, while the
cast sang from seats in the audience and Marc Blitzstein played an upright piano
on stage.

It was impossible, Mr. Houseman said at rehearsals, to convey to his young cast
''the throat-catching, sickeningly exciting quality of that moment'' in 1937. He
called in Howard Da Silva, who played the original Larry Foreman, to watch a
run-through.

''What Howard Da Silva said changed my whole attitude toward the role,'' Mr.
Mell said. ''He said we were very energetic, but what we lacked was a sense of
humor. He said that in the 1930's, amidst all the misery, there was a
lighthearted optimism, a belief that things would get better, that people
banding together could make a difference. I saw that his generation didn't have
the pessimism and cynicism that prevail today. 'Don't take it so seriously,' he
told us. 'We used to laugh a lot.' ''

Miss Banes broke in to say, ''Although I was a bit too young to take part in the
Vietnam protests, I don't feel removed from the Depression point of view.'' Last
year, she said, ''I was caught up in the struggle for nuclear disarmament, and I
learned that people could come together to try and change things.''

Basic Concern: Enough to Eat

''The point of the opera is simple,'' Miss Woods said. ''People weren't getting
enough to eat. Everybody can relate to that. I've spent a great deal of time
wondering where my next meal was coming from.''

The others turned toward her, astonished. ''Unemployment may be endemic among
actors, but 85 percent of the members of the Acting Company are working,'' Mr.
Houseman said, looking pained.

''I didn't work for a year,'' Miss Woods said. ''I wanted to do black theater,
but whenever I auditioned, with my classic training in voice and diction, they
said, 'That's white man's stuff.' Then, with white companies, they've got to
have a 'black concept' for a role before they'll take you. I've had such a hard
time. I studied opera and was in the children's chorus of the New York City
Opera for four years. Now, after 'Cradle,' thank God - I think I can do
musicals.''

The others nodded vigorously as she added, ''I think the style of 'Cradle' may
seem simplistic and dated to some, but the issues aren't.''

Mr. Mell said that he liked the way Blitzstein had ''taken a whack at big
capitalists, the press, society people, doctors, the clergy.'' ''There is no
more reason for me to feel removed from this piece of theater than I do from the
Greeks or Shakespeare,'' he said.

The Stage as a Soapbox

The actor, son of a wandering newspaperman who ''never spent more than five
years in one place,'' was born in Fresno, Calif., and ranged the country from
the West to Ridgewood, N.J. ''I'm not what you'd call an activist,'' he said.
''I never marched on Washington.  My politics extend to my work. I won't work in
something I don't believe in.'' Miss Woods said she hoped to make her mark by
voting ''and using the stage as my soapbox.''

Miss Banes, who grew up in Colorado Springs in a ''middle-class, Republican
family,'' said she became politically and socially aware only when she came to
New York at the age of 20. ''I learned that not everyone is white, goes to the
Congregational Church, mountain climbs and skis to school,'' she said.

Performances at the Douglas Fairbanks Theater, 432 West 42d Street, are Tuesdays
through Fridays at 8 P.M., Saturdays at 7 and 10 P.M., Sundays at 3 and 7 P.M.
The engagement runs through Sept. 4. As of Aug. 6, Saturday performances will be
at 2 and 8 P.M. Tickets are $20 for Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Sunday
evenings, and $22 for Friday and Saturday evenings and Sunday matinees. The box
office number is 239-4321; Chargit, 944-9300; Ticketron, 977-9020, and Teletron,
947-5850.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Michele-Denise Woods

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 30, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

VOTE ON AID CUTOFF: A HOUSE DIVIDED AND CONFUSED;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 910 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 29


On Thursday night, as the House of Representatives debated whether to halt
secret aid to Nicaraguan insurgents, Representative Bill Alexander said to a
reporter, ''This is the most bizarre political situation I've ever seen in 15
years here.''

The Arkansas Democrat was expressing the confusion and uncertainty that buffeted
the lawmakers in three days of debate on the legislation, one of them devoted to
a rare secret session to discuss classified information. But by the end of the
debate, that turmoil had been distilled into a determination by the majority of
the House to send a message to the White House, voicing unhappiness with the
Administration's policies in Latin America.

The Democratic leadership finally won, despite vigorous White House lobbying,
because it used adroit parliamentary maneuvering and intense lobbying to
solidify party sentiment against the Administration and attract a handful of
Republican defectors. But there was broad agreement on Capitol Hill today that
these tactics might not have succeeded without several critical mistakes by the
White House.

Military Moves in Region

By planning major military exercises in Central America and not consulting
Congressional leaders about its plans, the Administration weakened confidence on
Capitol Hill in its policies and leadership.  When President Reagan and his
aides tried to defend those policies, even Republicans found their explanations
''wholly inadequate,'' in the words of a Republican staff aide.

The aide added that the White House ''took the air out of our balloon'' and
undermined Republican efforts to defeat the cutoff of secret aid. Representative
Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, added, ''To a certain extent, in the
process of scaring the Sandinistas, the President scared Congress.''

As the final day of debate began, both sides believed that the vote was very
close, with an unusually large number of members still undecided.

With a partisan margin of 100 votes in the House, Democratic leaders
concentrated on keeping their troops in line. They engineered a test vote early
in the day that forced members to go on record for the first time. The Democrats
were thus able to identify potential defectors and apply pressure.

Worries About a Wider War

The Republicans, of course, could read the same list and identify the same swing
votes. But the credibility of the Administration had apparently been undermined
by its inability to articulate a clear set of goals in the region and by a
growing suspicion that President Reagan might touch off a wider war.

''Americans want you to be macho,'' Representative Tony Coelho, a California
Democrat, said, ''but they don't want you to get into a fight.''

Even so, the Democrats were worried about an amendment offered by Representative
Daniel A. Mica, Democrat of Florida, who was trying to find a middle ground
between outright rejection of covert aid and total support for the
Administration. As Representative Michael D.  Barnes, Democrat of Maryland,
noted, lawmakers were so unsure that they looked for a way to vote on ''both
sides of the issue,'' and the Mica proposal seemed to offer that chance.

So in an effort to head off the Mica plan, the Democratic leadership offered its
own compromise, which would make it somewhat easier for President Reagan to
resume aid if Nicaragua continued to aid rebels in El Salvador.

Momentum for Democrats

Because the Democrats control the House, they were able to force a vote on their
compromise as a substitute for the Mica proposal, and they won, 221 to 205. The
importance of this maneuver was that it put a majority of the House on record as
favoring a tough stand against covert action and gave the Democratic leadership
the momentum.

The debate grew increasingly heated and partisan. Democrats consistently called
up the specter of Vietnam and accused the Administration of leading the country
into another war. Republicans retorted that the Democrats were following a
''policy of paralysis'' in the face of Communist aggression.

Representative Henry J. Hyde, Republican of Illinois, said this polarization
worked in favor of the Democrats by fostering ''team spirit.'' He said, ''As the
day wore on, the issue became less serious and more political.''

When the end of the debate approached, the Democrats realized they could now
command enough votes to approve their original proposal ending aid indefinitely
and could reject all compromise. So Representative Jim Wright of Texas, the
majority leader, proposed a substitute for the entire bill containing two parts:
the original aid cutoff and a proposal of his own that urged the President to
work through the Organization of American States to find a peaceful solution.
That substitute passed, 228 to 195, with 18 Republicans joining the majority and
50 Democrats defecting to the losing side.

Debate continued today in Congress over what message was sent by that vote, but
Representative Hyde summed it up when he said: ''The message sent is that the
House is divided, largely along partisan lines. There still exists a great deal
of confusion and uncertainty about what we're doing in Latin America and where
we're headed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 30, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Michael deCourcy Hinds and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 624 words


Charity Unites Presidents

President Reagan and former Presidents Jimmy Carter, Gerald R.  Ford and Richard
M. Nixon have agreed on something. They recently endorsed a private charity's
efforts to ship medicine to Afghan refugees in Pakistan and ''freedom fighters''
in neighboring Afghanistan.

Their letters of endorsement to Zbigniew Brzezinski, the honorary chairman of
the fund drive who solicited their support, were brief and unequivocal. Mr.
Carter, in a hand-written note to his former national security adviser, said
shipping medical supplies to the Afghans ''epitomized the benevolent spirit of
our nation.''

Robert C. Macauley, president of the charity, the Americares Foundation, said,
''Companies must choose between charities, and they are more likely to give to
one that has all this support.''

On Aug. 16 the foundation will ship about $4 million worth of donated medical
supplies to Peshawar, Pakistan, where 3.5 million refugees live in camps. It
will be up to the refugees to share the supplies with their comrades in
Afghanistan. Tuberculosis is epidemic in the camps, but Americares has not been
able to persuade manufacturers to donate the most effective drug, rifampin.

The Americares Foundation, with one paid employee and a one-room office in New
Canaan, Conn., has helped orphans in Vietnam and runaway children in Times
Square, and it sent planeloads of medical supplies to Poland and Lebanon.

Satisfaction at Last

Congressmen, seeking to leaven the weighty debate on matters of state, have been
known to share a recipe for blueberry jam, tell an Abbott and Costello joke or
sing a baseball song way off key. Some members have a more scholarly sense of
humor.

Representative James M. Jeffords, a Vermont Republican, recently couched his
support for a bill in colonial history. The legislation, which the House
approved, would transfer 13,500 federally owned acres of upstate New York to the
National Park Service, incorporating the Hector Land Use Area in Seneca and
Schuyler counties into the Green Mountain National Forest, which is in
neighboring Vermont. The change in status is technical, but important, because
Park Service land cannot be sold without Congressional approval.

Mr. Jeffords, however, preferred to view the title change as ''a tardy but
magnanimous reparation for the wrongs of the past.'' ''Though few New Yorkers
remember,'' he continued, ''few Vermonters can forget that the Republic of
Vermont was forced to pay blackmail to the State of New York before it could
enter the Union as the 14th state.''

He referred to a $90,000 payment Vermont made to New York 220 years ago,
settling New York's claim, based on King Charles II's gift to the Duke of York,
to the Granite State. Until then colonial New Yorkers treated the Vermonters as
evaders of New York State taxes.

''It is a bitter legacy,'' Mr. Jeffords continued, without much conviction,
''but one that is sweetened somewhat by the noble gesture of the New York
delegation here today.''

Original Spelling

Let the record show that Secretary of State George P. Shultz did personally sign
a letter to Congress, urging that body to increase the appropriation for the
International Monetary Fund.

Alan Romberg, a spokesman for the department, said the Secretary ''cares about
this issue'' and would not have permitted an assistant to sign his name on the
originals.

Nevertheless, as reported in yesterday's Briefing column, copies of the original
letter that were distributed to reporters were not signed by the Secretary, but
by an anonymous secretary who signed Mr. Shultz's name with an added ''c'' -
Schultz -thereby giving official encouragement to Washingtonians who have
spelled his name in many creative ways.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 30, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Donna Anderson

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 564 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.  Answers appear on
page 12.

Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.  Answers appear on
page 12.  1. Ninety Russians have been expelled for illegal intelligence
gathering so far this year, as against 49 in all of 1982 and 27 in 1981. To what
is the increase attributed?

2. ''We are sitting on a time bomb, not only in my district but in every
Congressional district and every locality in this country,'' said Representative
Mike Synar, Democrat of Oklahoma. To what was he referring?

3. After eight months, Federal investigators said they had uncovered a
conspiracy to sell over $2 billion in illegal arms to what two countries?

4. Laurent Fignon returned to Paris in triumph as winner of the Tour de France
bicycle race. Why was his performance memorable?  5. What decision was called
''shortsighted'' and the result of ''a general anti-Washington bias?'' 6. China
has said Vietnam has encouraged illegal activities to strengthen its economy. Of
what is Vietnam accused?

7. This familiar face doesn't look much like its usual self. What is it and why
is it in the news?  8. The Federal Communications Commission has agreed to start
licensing an unusual communication system. What is it?  9. Fifteen Jewish men
met in England to pay homage to the person who helped them escape the Nazis as
boys in 1939. Who was their benefactor?

10. A prominent crusader against monopolies, imperialism and warmongering and
for civil liberties and the rights of blacks, women and Indians is imperiled by
financial problems. Identify the crusader.

11. The largest default in municipal bond history has occurred.  What was it,
and why?  12. Israel's Foreign and Defense Ministers met with the Reagan
Administration, and Administration officials pressed Israel on what point?

13. ''Another wet winter would be devastating to wildlife and probably fatal to
trees, shrubs, and other plant life in the park,''said an Audubon Society
official. To what park was she referring?

14. What were the critical dimensions relevant to the controversy created by
this ''much coveted'' piece of wood, and explain?  15. Mayor Jeanine Gros of the
tiny Burgundian town of Vosne-Romanee wants her town declared a disaster area.
Why?  16. Second-quarter earnings brought good news for what struggling industry
and bad news for what previously booming industry?  17. The Missouri Valley
Construction Company received an unusual sentence after pleading guilty to bid
rigging. What is it?  18. In all, 2.5 million acres of land has been pulled from
the Reagan Administration's program to reduce the national debt by selling
Federal property. Who did it and why?

19. Temis Ramirez de Arellano, an American landowner in Honduras, has filed suit
against three United States officials. Why?  20. It took only 10 minutes for New
York City to raise $13.15 million. Explain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of face in question 7., and George Brett's bat

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 30, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FLEET COMING AT TIME WHEN NEW YORK PORT FORTUNES HAVE BEEN EBBED

BYLINE: BY MARTIN GOTTLIEB

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 723 words


The news that New York City will be the home port for the battleship Iowa and
her six support ships comes at a time when the once proud local shipbuilding
industry is at perhaps its lowest point.

The problem was symbolized by the closing May 27 of the Todd Shipyard
Corporation's Brooklyn operation, where many of the nation's most important
ships, including the Civil War ironclad Monitor, were built, outfitted or
repaired. Todd has owned the facility since 1916.

The shipyard employed tens of thousands during World War II and was a fixture in
Brooklyn since before the Civil War.  But the yard, at the foot of Dwight Street
in the Red Hook section, did not attract a single repair contract in its last
year and employed only 71 people when its gates shut, according to a Todd
spokesman, Roy McMillan.

Forty years ago, the Navy maintained three major yards in New York Harbor,
including the Brooklyn Navy Yard. As many as 70,000 workers were employed there
during World War II.

In addition, 25 private shipyards were active, including eight with drydocks
capable of handling large ocean-going vessels, according to Michael J.
Gallagher, president of the New York-New Jersey Drydock Association, an industry
group.

No Ships Being Built

Today, there is no Government shipbuilding operation in the harbor, although
some small pleasure craft are built privately.  According to Mr. Gallagher, only
eight repair companies maintain operations. Just two companies -Coastal Dry Dock
and Repair, at the former Brooklyn Navy Yard, and Hoboken Shipyards - have the
capability to drydock ocean-going vessels.

About 2,400 people were employed in building and repairing ships here last year,
according to Samuel M. Ehrenhalt, regional commissioner of the Federal Bureau of
Labor Statistics.

''This has been a declining sector during the whole post-World War II period,''
Mr. Ehrenhalt said. ''At the same time other declines in manufacturing were
hitting us so hard, we also were losing our role in the defense picture.''

Mr. Ehrenhalt said the decline mirrored a drop in Federal employment in the
city, from 118,000 civilian workers in 1958 to 77,000 last year.

Observers say the decline in shipbuilding and repair here stems from declines on
other fronts - the naval presence in the city, commercial activity in the port,
the shipbuilding industry at large, and the competitive position of the New York
area.

The transfer of naval operations from New York to such ports as Jacksonville,
Fla.; Norfolk, Va., and Charleston, S.C., had left New York as a home port for
five ships up to now, according to Mr.  Gallagher. Norfolk is home port to 120
ships, he said.

Every 16 to 24 months, each ship requires general repair or a more extensive
overhaul usually carried out by private companies.  Repairs to engines, redesign
work and upgrading of weapons add more work, as does a support fleet of
tugboats, barges and small vessels that all require repairs.

Commercial Shipping Down

Repair companies have also suffered from a reduction in Americanoperated
commercial vessels, Mr. Gallagher said. There were 2,700 such vessels after
World War II, compared with 370 today.

And fewer of the remaining ships have been coming to New York with their cargo.
According to the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the port handled
nearly a third less cargo last year than it did 10 years ago.

Finally, the booms in New York port operations have come in times of war or
increased defense spending, observers say.  ''In the late 1970's, the military
had less and less of a role in the nation's economy,'' said Vincent J. Montanti,
vice president of Coastal Dry Dock and Repair.

''You had the backlash of Vietnam impacting on everything. The Navy and the
military are coming back right now,'' he added.  This month Coastal, the largest
of New York's repair companies, began refitting the antisubmarine destroyer
Stump, the first modern warship to be overhauled at the old Brooklyn Navy Yard
in 20 years.

Basing the Iowa battle group in New York ''will probably provide at least 500
more jobs in our facility,'' Mr. Montanti said. And he said it could mean an
additional 1,000 jobs for the rest of New York's ship-repair industry.

''This will mean a lot to everyone,'' Mr. Montanti said. ''We're happy for
everyone in New York.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FRANCIS T.P. PLIMPTON, 82, DIES

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1077 words


Francis T.P. Plimpton, the diplomat, lawyer, civic leader and former president
of the City Bar Association, died yesterday at Huntington Hospital on Long
Island. He was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.

During his 60 years in public life, Mr. Plimpton undertook a variety of tasks,
from serving as deputy United States Representative to the United Nations in the
Administrations of John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson to representing New
York City as its official greeter.

He also founded one of Manhattan's largest law firms, now known as Debevoise &
Plimpton. As the Bar Association's leader from 1968 to 1970, he helped the
organization not only to survive but also to come of age in an era of political
upheaval.

Before his tenure at the Bar Association, most of its presidents had taken
studiously apolitical stances on the issues of the day. Mr. Plimpton changed all
that by taking an early and energetic role in helping to defeat the nomination
of G. Harrold Carswell to the United States Supreme Court in 1970 and by
spearheading protests against the Vietnam War.

''As president, Francis courageously led the young lawyers who were concerned
about injustice at home and abroad into the mainstream of association life,''
said Oscar M. Ruebhausen, another former president of the association and Mr.
Plimpton's law partner.  ''His presidency was a watershed in the democratization
of the association.''

Last March, Mr. Plimpton received the La Guardia Medal from Mayor Koch in
recognition of his 10 years as chairman of the city's Board of Ethics and of his
service as the city's official greeter. Mr. Koch yesterday called him ''the soul
of integrity.''

Mr. Plimpton joined Eli Whitney Debevoise and William E. Stevenson in 1933 to
form a law firm that became one of New York's most successful, numbering about
200 lawyers and representing such clients as the Chrysler Corporation, American
Airlines and the Ford Foundation.

Mr. Plimpton himself became known as the consummate legal draftsman, leading the
late William L. Cary, former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission,
to call him ''the only person who can write an indenture in iambic pentameter.''

In 1961, President Kennedy named Mr. Plimpton to the United Nations post, where
he served under Adlai E. Stevenson, his friend and former roommate at Harvard
Law School. During the next four years, he tackled such issues as the rights of
Palestinian refugees, apartheid and the financial problems of the organization,
particularly the failure of the Soviet Union to pay its annual assessments.

'Exhilirating, Exhausting'

He also assumed many of the social responsibilities shirked by Mr.  Stevenson,
who dismissed such activities as ''protocol, alcohol and Geritol.'' Mr. Plimpton
later called his service at the United Nations ''exhilarating, exhausting,
exacerbating, exciting and all the other 'exes' you can think of.''

Mr. Plimpton was never one to duck controversy. Once, during an audience at
Castel Gandolfo, he tried to convince Pope Paul VI of the need for population
control. Similarly, from the outset of his presidency of the City Bar
Association, he rejected the notion that he ''inherited a muzzle with his
nonexistent mantle.''

After the American invasion of Cambodia in 1970, he traveled to Washington as
part of a ''Lawyers' Peace March'' and met with Solicitor General Erwin
Griswold, Attorney General John N. Mitchell and Under Secretary of State Elliot
L. Richardson.

At a meeting held about the same time at the association's headquarters, Mr.
Plimpton declared: ''We cannot begin to end poverty, pollution, racial
prejudice, inflation and decaying slums until we end our Southeast Asian folly.
Let us get ahead with that ending.''

Mr. Plimpton was named chairman of the Mayor's Committee for Distinguished
Guests - the city greeter - in 1976, succeeding such personalities as Grover
Whalen and Bud Palmer. A tall and slender figure, with round, silver-rimmed
glasses and an aristocratic mien, it was a task for which he was well-suited.

At the same time, both from his poetry and the countless afterdinner speeches
that he delivered over the years, Mr. Plimpton became well known for his
pungent, occasionally ribald, wit.

Perhaps the best-known example was a speech he gave to Amherst College
undergraduates in 1957 entitled ''In Praise of Polygamy,'' in which he called
going steady ''a clear violation not only of English grammar, but also of the
most elementary principles of biology.''

''I have nothing against matrimony,'' he told the students, ''but what is to
become of the spirit of scientific inquiry?'' Francis Taylor Pearson Plimpton
was born in the Murray Hill section of Manhattan on Dec. 7, 1900. His mother
died during his birth and he was raised by his father, head of Ginn & Company, a
publishing house.

Magna Cum Laude

He was educated at the Browning School, Phillips Exeter Academy and Amherst
College, from which he graduated magna cum laude in 1922, with letters in
football, hockey and tennis. Three years later, he received his law degree at
Harvard and went to work at the New York law firm of Root, Clark, Buckner &
Ballantine.

He also served in the Reconstruction Finance Corporation during the final months
of the Hoover Administration and the early days of the New Deal.

Among his many activities, Mr. Plimpton was at various times a trustee of
Phillips Exeter, Amherst, Barnard College and Union Theological Seminary, as
well as an overseer of Harvard College. He was a director of the New York
Philharmonic Symphony Society and the Metropolitan Museum, and played a key role
in helping the museum acquire the Temple of Dendur.

He is survived by his wife of 57 years, the former Pauline Ames; a sister, Emily
Smith of Berkeley, Calif.; a brother, Calvin, of the Riverdale section of the
Bronx; four children, George, of New York, the author and editor; Francis T.P.
Jr., of North Kingstown, R.I.; Oakes A., of West Somerville, Mass., and Sarah
G., of New York, and five grandchildren.

Funeral arrangements were incomplete last night. A memorial service will be held
in the fall.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Francis T.P. Plimpton

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHAVEZ AND FARM WORKERS ADAPT TACTICS TO THE TIMES

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1309 words

DATELINE: SALINAS, Calif., July 30


More than 20 years after he began his struggle to unionize the fields of the
Southwest, Cesar Chavez is trying to restore the momentum of the United Farm
Workers.

Growers and California Republican leaders are trying to reduce the power of the
union, which is suffering from internal dissent and a growth rate that has
leveled off. In the face of all this, Mr. Chavez is reverting to his earliest
and most successful tactic, the consumer boycott, updated with tools of the
modern political campaign. He is also seeking to consolidate the union's role as
the most influential Hispanic political force in this state.

What union officers call their new ''high-tech consumer boycott'' is directed
against Lucky Stores Inc., the nation's third-largest supermarket chain, in an
effort to force it to stop selling a brand of lettuce produced in the Salinas
Valley by nonunion workers employed by Bruce Church Inc.

Store Chain Resists Boycott

Officials of Lucky Stores say they have been resisting efforts by Mr. Chavez
since November 1979 to persuade them to stop selling the lettuce, because they
believe it is inappropriate to take sides in such a labor-management dispute.

''If you give in to one, you have to ask a serious question: where does it
end?'' James W. Koerlin, an executive of the company, said in an interview. He
said the boycott had had no appreciable effect on sales.

The boycott campaign is headed by Richard Ross, 33 years old, the son of migrant
farm workers. Mr. Ross said in an interview that 13 years ago he was dismissed
as a field hand by Bruce Church Inc. After finishing college, he became a
successful political consultant to Democrats in Sacramento.

''Cesar told me, 'I can't afford to pay you,' '' Mr. Ross said in an interview.
Remembering the day he was dismissed, Mr. Ross said he answered: ''You don't
have to. I just want to be in the room on the day they sign a contract.''

Computerized Analyses Used

Mr. Ross said the campaign was initially directed at 13 Lucky outlets but was
being expanded to 45.  The heart of the current campaign, he said, is the use of
computerized demographic analyses to choose consumers whose ethnic background
and other characteristics make them likely to participate in a boycott. They are
sent carefully written appeals, and the mailings are followed by opinion polls
to determine if they are having the desired effect. If necessary, the appeals
are then rewritten.

''I told Cesar the old days of Xeroxed leaflets were over,'' Mr.  Ross said.
''The kids that used to march in parades against the Vietnam war are now driving
BMW's and going out for Sunday brunch.  You've got to do something different.''

Grower Cites Union's Politics

Michael Payne, an executive at Bruce Church here, said his company's dispute
''has nothing to do with economics - it's over who will control the work
force.''

He said his company paid field workers a minimum of $6.69 an hour, based on
piecework rates, and an average of $9.50 hourly.  Along with other growers, he
said the company objected to a standard provision in U.F.W. contracts allowing
the union to take a job away from any worker not in ''good standing'' with the
union. He said such workers in the past had refused to pay into the union's
political action fund or otherwise opposed union directives.

''The U.F.W. is not a union,'' Mr. Payne said. ''It's a political movement in
which Chavez has latched on to the workers of the 'ag' community and confiscated
their resources to get political power.''

A Family With Power

Mr. Chavez denies such allegations, but he and his family remain a potent
political force.  Last weekend Mr. Chavez's eldest son, Fernando, a 33-year-old
San Jose lawyer, was elected president of the Mexican-American Political
Association. The defeated incumbents said his victory was engineered by the
United Farm Workers. The incumbents had been seeking to reduce the association's
traditional alliance with the Democratic Party and make it more bipartisan at a
time when politicians were paying increasing attention to the state's growing
Hispanic population.

Julio Calderon, who lost the presidency by 22 votes, said in an interview that a
few weeks before the convention union checks were used to pay dues for more than
440 new members of the 2,200-member organization.

Fernando Chavez denied he was a ''front man'' for his father or the United Farm
Workers. Friends confirmed that he had a reputation for being independent of his
father.

21-Year Organizing Effort

Cesar Chavez claims credit for substantially improving the lot of farm workers
since he began trying to organize them in 1962. He started out in this state,
but he has also made efforts, with limited success, in Texas and Arizona. In
1975 the union was granted official sanction when the California Legislature
passed the country's first collective bargaining act for farm laborers.

Since then, the average hourly wage of those covered by U.F.W.  contracts has
increased to more than $6 from about $2.  Last month, in the agricultural San
Joaquin Valley, the union established the first of what it says will be a
network of radio stations to carry its message to Spanish-speaking farm workers
in the state and, if necessary, to arouse support for U.F.W. strikes and
boycotts and for the candidates it favors.

Despite its gains, the union has failed to make inroads into the many parts of
California's vast agricultural industry where workers barely average $3.50 an
hour, industry and union sources agree. The union has had other problems as
well.

Asian Refugees Cause Tension

In the San Joaquin Valley, long an organizing goal of the union, refugees from
Southeast Asia are causing new tensions by offering to work for less than the
immigrants from Mexico who for years have worked in the California fields.

Many of the stronger leaders of the union from its early days have left after
breaking with Mr. Chavez. Nine elected officials here have sued Mr. Chavez,
charging he dismissed them unlawfully after they resisted his policies.

After the union responded by filing a slander and libel suit against these
dissidents, 361 U.F.W. members filed a countersuit in Federal District Court,
charging that the union had violated the officers' rights to free speech.

Meanwhile, the rising cost of farm labor that the union has brought about has
accelerated development of mechanical harvesting equipment and caused the loss
of hundreds of thousands of farm jobs over the last decade.

New Legislative Alliances

Since the departure from government last January of Gov. Edmund G.  Brown Jr., a
staunch supporter of the union, Mr. Chavez has formed an alliance with
Democratic leaders of the State Legislature, to whom the union last year
contributed more than $700,000. The money came from a fund raised by deducting
one day's pay annually from each of its 100,000 members, according to the union.

Fulfilling a campaign promise, Gov. George Deukmejian, the Republican who
succeeded Mr. Brown, took 25 percent out of the budget of the board that
enforces the agricultural collective bargaining act.

It was a setback for the union. But because of the alliance formed by Mr. Chavez
with Democrats Willie Brown Jr., the Speaker of the Assembly, and David Roberti,
president pro tem of the Senate, few politicians expect legislation to be passed
that would trim the union's power.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BOSTON BLACKS LOOK TO VOTING AND ECONOMIC GAINS

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1733 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, July 30


The reminder is there whenever Melvin H. King walks out the door of his house in
Boston's battered old South End.  Looming over him, a few blocks away, are the
shining towers, luxury hotels and expensive stores of Copley Place, the largest
commercial development project in the country. Only a concrete ditch for both a
new subway line and railroad tracks separates Mr. King's predominantly black and
poor neighborhood, with its abandoned buildings, from the $500 million
development.

For Mr. King, a black who is one of nine candidates for Mayor this fall, the gap
represents both how disenfranchised Boston's blacks have been and how close they
may be to real political power.

Blacks in Boston have lagged far behind blacks in virtually all other major
cities in influencing elections and in obtaining better jobs, housing and
government posts. Now, spurred by the election of Mayor Harold Washington in
Chicago and the victory of Wilson Goode in Philadelphia's mayoral primary,
blacks here have begun an intensive voter registration drive.

Minority Voters Increasing

Where blacks accounted for only about 18 percent of the city's 211,000 voters
last year, blacks and Hispanic people together now make up close to 25 percent
of the total, and if the present trend continues, they may reach 30 percent by
primary time, said Everette T. Sheppard, a member of the city election
commission.

The 1980 census showed that while many white residents fled to the suburbs,
Boston's black population increased 21 percent over the decade and blacks now
account for more than one in five of the city's 562,994 residents. Increased by
a rapidly growing Hispanic community, minorities now constitute almost a third
of Boston's population.

''Looking at it historically, Boston is just crossing a threshold of black
political development,'' said Meldon S. Hollis, who served as an Education
Department official in the Carter Administration and is now a consultant on
affirmative action to Derek Bok, the president of Harvard University.

''When black voting power becomes concentrated to the point where it reaches 20
percent, things start to happen and blacks must be taken seriously,'' Mr. Hollis
said. ''Normally, a kind of energy is released and more blacks become involved
in politics as they find it a good investment in time and energy.''

Primary Will Have 2 Winners

For Mr. King, the black candidate for mayor, the rise in registration of
minority voters provides a chance of winning one of the two places in the
mayoral primary election. The two winners will face each other in the general
election in November or December.

The date for the election became uncertain after a Federal district judge ruled
this week that newly created districts for the City Council and School Committee
violated the constitutional principle of one man, one vote. Mr. King was one of
the plaintiffs who sued to force the city to redraw the district map, giving
Boston's minorities more representation.

If Mr. King gets 75 percent of the black vote in the primary and the eight other
candidates split the white vote, he would be assured of a place on the general
election ballot.  Mr. Washington got 90 percent of the black vote in Chicago.

Mr. King, a 54-year-old former mathematics teacher and former State
Representative, is running third in public opinion polls, with 14 percent, one
percentage point below City Councillor Raymond L.  Flynn. The acknowledged
leader is David I. Finnegan, a radio talk show host and former president of the
School Committee, with 24 percent.

Little Benefit From 60's and 70's

In the past, the percentage of blacks in Boston was much smaller than in other
Northern cities, and some civil rights activists believed that would encourage
smoother integration than in cities with higher proportions of blacks. But
blacks here, contrary to those expectations, benefited little from the progress
of the 1960's and 1970's.

From 1971 to 1981, while Boston was torn by a crisis over courtordered busing to
achieve school desegregation, not a single black won a seat on the nine-member
City Council.

Boston's racial troubles are especially strange when they are set against the
city's reputation as a center of learning, leadership in the abolititionist
movement and liberal voting record in recent years on other issues, from Vietnam
to the nuclear freeze. In his 1972 campaign for President, Senator George
McGovern carried only Massachusetts and the District of Columbia.

Nevertheless, Boston is ''the toughest city in America for a black to get a
job,'' said Thomas Saltonstall, regional director of the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission. Mr. Saltonstall said data filed with the commission by
employers showed the ''disparity between the availability of minorities in the
civilian labor force and the actuality of employment'' was greater in Boston
than in any other major metropolitan area.

Few Blacks in Corporate Roles

Boston has fewer blacks in corporate policymaking positions than any other city,
less than three out of every 100. There are no blacks among the 20 members of
the Coordinating Committee, a group of Boston's most powerful business leaders
who meet to plan their companies' involvement in city issues.

Although the state's economy has been transformed by growth of high-technology
factories west and north of Boston, where nearly 250,000 people are now
employed, only 3.6 percent of those factories' workers are black, according to
Federal figures. Not one of the five biggest high-technology companies in
Massachusetts has a black vice president or director, and only one, the Digital
Equipment Corporation, has a black plant manager.

At Harvard, only 15, or 1.8 percent, of the 832 tenured professors are black,
according to Jacqueline Matthews of the president's office.

16% of City Government Force

In Boston itself, although 22 percent of the residents are black, they account
for 16 percent of the city government's work force, most of them in menial jobs
in the city hospital, according to James Jennings, dean of the College of Public
and Community Services at the University of Massachusetts in Boston.

Of the 30 department heads in City Hall, one is black.  Mr. Jennings contrasted
the situation here with that of New York City, which has a 25 percent black
population but a city payroll that is 30 percent black.

Boston has been under court order to hire more black police officers, but there
are still no black lieutenants or captains on the force.

The Red Sox have only one black player in their starting lineup, the left
fielder Jim Rice, and the Celtics' most popular player, Larry Bird, is white.
Because of this and fear of racial incidents, it is possible to go to a baseball
game at Fenway Park and not see a black fan.

Since whites and blacks do not work or play side by side, the tensions fostered
by the city's segregated neighborhoods have been reinforced.

While some other Northern cities have begun to show a more balanced residential
pattern, several of Boston's predominantly white sections have fewer blacks than
in 1970, the 1980 census shows. ''For someone who grew up where I did, Boston is
a shock,'' said Mr. Hollis, who comes from Columbus, Ga.

Minorities' Effect on Politics

Mr. Hollis, a graduate of Harvard Law School, worked in Washington and Houston
after earning his degree, and returned to Boston only because his wife wanted to
go to Harvard's Kennedy School to study politics. ''If I was concerned about
raising children or my profession, I would much rather live in Houston, Atlanta
or Chicago,'' he said, adding that those cities were more congenial to blacks.

But the Bureau of the Census projects that blacks and Hispanic people will make
up 40 percent of the city's population by 1990.  Unlike the past, when some
politicians made openly racist appeals, all the white candidates for Mayor are
campaigning among blacks.

Mr. Finnegan has Listo Fisher, a black, as his press spokesman.  Although Mr.
Finnegan is regarded as the most conservative candidate, Mr. Fisher says he is
working for Mr. Finnegan because ''he has the ability to put together the first
power-sharing administration in Boston.''

Mr. Finnegan has also been endorsed by Melvin Miller, publisher of The Bay State
Banner, the main black newspaper. In an article that aroused bitter criticism
from other blacks, Mr. Miller argued that there were simply too few blacks in
Boston to elect Mr. King; that he might win one of the two places in the primary
but could not beat the mathematics in the general election against a white.

'I'm Flexible,' King Says

Some middle-class blacks are also uncomfortable with Mr. King, who has a
reputation as an abrasive, radical protester for black causes.  Mr. King, who is
6 feet 5 inches tall, with a bushy black beard but a shaved head, seemed to
cultivate this image by wearing dashikis when he was in the Statehouse. This
spring he began appearing in a suit and tie. ''I'm flexible,'' he explained.

But the question remains: Will blacks and white liberals decide a vote for Mr.
King is wasted? In the 1979 mayoral primary, Mr. King won only 55 percent of the
black vote. This year several unions and the Boston Tenants' Organization that
had supported him in the past have endorsed other candidates.

But the Rev. Charles Stith of the Union United Methodist Church says there is a
growing sense of excitement about Mr. King among blacks that will translate into
votes.

In reponse to the argument that he cannot win in the general election because
whites will not vote for a black man, Mr. King replies, ''That isn't saying very
much for the white people in Boston.'' He insists that the voters are trying to
rise above the racism that has tarnished Boston's reputation.

''If I get elected,'' he said, ''imagine how people will be able to say, 'See,
we're not like that.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Melvin H. King talking with supporters

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Katherine Woodard Marries J.G. Bell

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 56, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 195 words


The marriage of Katherine Manly Woodard, assistant director of the Edward Thorp
Gallery, to Jeffrey Graham Bell, president of Morgan Research Inc., an executive
recruiting concern, took place in the Chapel of St. Bartholomew's Episcopal
Church in Manhattan yesterday.  The Rev. Thomas D. Bowers performed the
ceremony.

The parents of the couple are Dr. and Mrs. Isaac V. Manly of Raleigh and
Atlantic Beach, N.C., and Mrs. Graham Bell of Chatham, Mass., and the late Mr.
Bell.

The bride, an alumna of the St. Mary's Junior College Preparatory School in
Raleigh, attended Wellesley College and received B.A. and M.A. degrees in art
history from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Her previous
marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's. Her father is a surgeon.

Mr. Bell, a graduate of the Lawrenceville School and Wesleyan University,
received an M.B.A. degree from the Wharton School of the University of
Pennsylvania and served as a Marine Corps captain in Vietnam. His father was a
partner of Auchincloss, Parker & Redpath, stockbrokers in New York.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE REAGAN DOCTRINE

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1460 words


WASHINGTON ''T HE Democrats can't get their act together,'' Senator Paul E.
Tsongas complained last week in frustration over the difficulty of mobilizing a
party opposition to President Reagan's Central America policies. The
Massachusetts Senator needn't have limited his remarks to Democrats. The entire
Congress was having trouble dealing with Mr. Reagan's plans to escalate the
American military presence and not-so-covert operations in Central America.

The House, after long and impassioned debate, voted 228 to 195 to cut off
American secret aid to rebels in Nicaragua. The vote was an unmistakable
expression of opposition to one aspect of Mr. Reagan's policy, namely the
financing and arming of 10,000 insurgents in Nicaragua. But the practical effect
of the vote was uncertain. Senior Administration officials, confident that the
Republican-controlled Senate will not approve the cutoff, dismissed the House
action as partisan politics and insisted it would not affect plans to continue
and increase support for the insurgents. Since the House bill covers only
funding in the current fiscal year, which ends in two months, the House itself
will have to repeat the entire process this fall if it hopes to make the cutoff
stick in the next fiscal year.

Mr. Reagan thus held the controlling hand over American policy.  Unless his
opponents can somehow galvanize their forces, Congress may modify aspects of the
Reagan approach but cannot take decisive action to change it. The vote reflected
the many difficulties Congress faces as it tries to influence foreign policy in
general and Central American strategy in particular. Congress, as a deliberative
body, has always had trouble keeping pace with the President in foreign affairs.
He can shift policy, conduct military maneuvers and run secret intelligence
operations for months or years before the machinery of Congress can crank up
sufficient momentum and consensus to act as a counterweight. The more Mr. Reagan
moves policy into the arena of military action, the harder it becomes for
Congress to control.

The budget process, where Congressional power is strongest, moves with glacial
speed. Even when Congress has completed action on the foreign aid or defense
budget, setting overall spending limits and approving precise amounts for
specific programs, executive agencies can manipulate the money by financing
operations out of contingency funds or diverting resources from one account to
another. The only Congressional approval required for such prestidigitation is
the consent of the relevant subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee.

Because of the frustration of trying and failing to revise the course of
American policy in Vietnam, Congress passed the War Powers Act in 1973. It
requires the President to notify Congress when he sends American forces into
areas of potential hostility and stipulates that the troops be withdrawn if
Congress does not take action, such as a formal declaration of war, to endorse
the President's decision. But the added right to pass legislation requiring such
withdrawal has probably been invalidated by the Supreme Court's recent ban on
Congressional vetoes, according to legal experts. In any case, the act leaves to
the President the crucial judgment whether American forces are entering a place
where hostilities are possible - a loophole that appears particularly relevant
to the extensive military exercises that Mr. Reagan has scheduled in Central
America and the Caribbean.

In the case of Central America, Washington's institutional frictions are
compounded by more immediate considerations. The key factor is that Congress is
simply divided about what to do in the region. There are strong currents of
opposition to the President's policy, especially to the extensive use of
''covert'' force in Nicaragua and plans to increase the American military
presence in the area with large air, sea and land exercises, preparations for a
possible partial blockade of Nicaragua, construction of an American military
base in Honduras and expanded security assistance to friendly governments.
Democratic confusion and division were illustrated by the presence of such
people as Robert S. Strauss, the former party chairman, on the President's
commission on Central America while Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. was calling
Mr. Reagan's military initiatives ''awful, absolutely awful.''

Many members of Congress, Democrats and Republicans, argue that Mr. Reagan has
placed too little emphasis on diplomatic initiatives or long-range planning for
the region. They say the appointment in April of Richard B. Stone as special
envoy for Central America was a positive step but one that should have been made
long ago. They contend that the military actions and undercover operations
recently endorsed by Mr. Reagan have narrowed the options and could make it
impossible for Mr. Reagan to accept recommendations for policy changes from the
bipartisan commission headed by former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger.

Yet there is equally strong support for Mr. Reagan's argument that vital United
States interests are threatened by Soviet and Cuban interference in the region
and that any hope for the long-term growth of democratic institutions and
economic development depends on the maintenance of an American security shield.

Mr. Reagan has cited the Soviet and Cuban threat frequently and has used it
skillfully with Congress. In a televised news conference last week, he reminded
listeners that he is convinced the Soviet Union and Cuba are the real source of
violence and unrest in Central America.  In his speech to a joint session of
Congress in April, Mr. Reagan pointedly cast the debate over Central America in
terms that gave many politicians pause before opposing him. ''I do not
believe,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''that a majority of the Congress or the country is
prepared to stand by passively while the people of Central America are delivered
to totalitarianism and we ourselves are left vulnerable to new dangers.''

Senate minority leader Robert C. Byrd recently said it was ''politically callous
to frame the turmoil in Central America in terms of 'who might lose this or who
might lose that.' '' But Mr.  Byrd and his Democratic colleagues in the Senate
and House have, as Mr. Tsongas suggested, been less than organized or effective
in their opposition. One reason, of course, is that the Senate is controlled by
Republicans. For example, under the leadership of Senator Barry M. Goldwater,
Republican of Arizona, the Senate Intelligence Committee has not mounted a
serious challenge to the operations in Nicaragua.

But even in the House, where the Democrats hold a 100-vote advantage and control
the legislative machinery, they have failed to agree on Central America. Fifty
Democrats, nearly 20 percent of the House membership, voted against cutting off
aid to the Nicaraguan insurgents.

The opposition hasn't been helped by the fact that no single House or Senate
member has emerged as a leader and spokesman against Mr.  Reagan's policies.
Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat from Connecticut, has tried to take the
lead, but many fellow Democrats have accused him of being too strident in his
attacks on Mr. Reagan.  ''Until Democrats can take a united position,'' Mr.
Tsongas said, ''you can introduce resolutions and amendments but we still can't
get them passed.''

Despite all, Congress cannot be written off as a force in the Central America
debate. In some ways, a divided Congress can become a drag on policy if
legislation, particularly budget bills, get bogged down in bickering. Supporters
of the covert aid cutoff hope that if the House approves a similar bill for the
1984 fiscal year, funding can be stalled when the budget bill goes to conference
between the House and Senate to resolve differences. It was also significant
that many members of Congress, including Senate majority leader Howard H. Baker
Jr., were angered by the Administration's failure to notify them in advance of
the plans for increased military activity in the region. It was a sure sign that
as the stakes of American involvement increase, so will Congressional anxiety.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing table comparing planned military exercises,
recent maneuvers

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE ALLIES HOLD THEIR BREATH AS FLEET MOVES TO HONDURAS

BYLINE: By JAMES M. MARKHAM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1233 words

DATELINE: WEST BERLIN


Across Western Europe a mood of unease began to take hold last week, a fear that
the Reagan Administration was moving toward a military confrontation in Central
America.

There is not yet a crystallization of alarm or protest - nothing resembling the
sustained outcry that accompanied the American intervention in Indochina - but
in some Western European capitals, officials are worried that a military flareup
in Central America could put new strains on the Atlantic alliance. Gunboat
diplomacy that went from bluffing to shooting would likely draw new
demonstrators into the streets and bring into sharper focus the lingering issue
of the Reagan Administration's reliability in managing world affairs.

These anxieties probably run deepest in West Germany, where Chancellor Helmut
Kohl's conservative Government is already bracing for a ''hot autumn'' of
protest against the deployment of American medium range missiles. Mr. Kohl is
almost desperately eager for a Soviet-American accord in the Geneva arms talks
that might defuse the planned demonstrations. But a shooting war in Central
America would severely undercut the Chancellor's uphill defense of Washington as
being interested in negotiated, not military, solutions. ''The missile business
is not going to be immune from what's happening in Central America,'' an
American diplomat noted.

At last month's West German-hosted summit in Stuttgart, the 10 nations of the
European Community took their distance from the Reagan Administration by
declaring that Central America's problems ''cannot be solved by military means,
but only by a solution springing from the region and respecting the principles
of noninterference and the inviolability of frontiers.'' This, broadly, holds as
an omnibus Western European position, but the distance from Washington has grown
since the dispatch of an American flotilla to Central America's Pacific coast.
So far, though, most governments have preferred to express their qualms
privately to Washington, and not embarrass President Reagan at a delicate moment
of brinksmanship.

While governments bite their tongues, opposition figures have voiced sharp
criticisms. The left-wing Italian daily La Repubblica said the Reagan
Administration ''is distractedly slipping into the quagmire of a Vietnam.'' In
West Germany, former Social Democratic Chancellor Willy Brandt declared that war
could explode in Central America ''within days or weeks'' and Karsten Voigt, the
party's foreign policy spokesman, called upon the Kohl government to speak out
as forthrightly against American interference there as it does against Soviet
involvement in Afghanistan and Eastern Europe.

The Government rebuffed the Social Democrat's suggestion, but, overall, there is
little stomach in West Germany for the use of force to solve problems, as the
country's queasy and wavering response to Britain's retaking of the Falkland
Islands demonstrated last year. The feelings of Mr. Kohl's Christian Democrats
about Latin America are conditioned, too, by their intimate ties to beleaguered
sister parties there. The Chancellor is personally close to Jose Napoleon
Duarte, the former Christian Democratic President of El Salvador, who was in
Bonn earlier this month. To keep pressure on El Salvador's behind-the-scenes
military leaders, Bonn is withholding sending an ambassador back until a firm
date for new elections is set.

Reaction elsewhere runs from supportive in Britain, where Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher remembers Washington's critical support over the Falklands, to
something close to suppressed outrage in Spain. In the House of Commons, Mrs.
Thatcher defended President Reagan's policies and insisted that the United
States was free to hold military exercises in Latin America without informing
its allies. The opposition Labor Party, by contrast, issued an ''emergency
resolution'' that condemned Washington's latest moves as a threat to peace.

French Criticism Muted

The British press split along predictable lines, too. ''The barrage of criticism
descending on President Reagan's head over Nicaragua is undeserved,'' commented
the Daily Express, a popular tabloid. ''He has an appallingly difficult task. If
he allows Nicaragua to subvert El Salvador, where will the rot stop? This is
America's back-yard.'' The liberal Guardian, however, took issue with the
designation of Henry A. Kissinger, the former Secretary of State, to head a
bipartisan commission on Central America. ''He has always viewed the hungry and
despairing as pawns in a global chess game,'' said the Guardian.

France's Socialist Government has retreated somewhat from its earlier, militant
criticisms of the Reagan Administration's Central American policies. In Rio de
Janeiro last week, Foreign Minister Claude Cheysson confined himself to the
suggestion that Central America should be ''demilitarized.'' One cause for
France's muted position is its own military support for the Chad Government of
President Hissen Habre, which confronts a Libyan-supported rebellion. Even so,
Jacques Huntzinger, the Socialist Party's foreign relations spokesman, condemned
the Reagan Administration's ''destabilization plan'' aimed at Nicaragua and
said, ''one cannot have a different position on Afghanistan and Nicaragua.''

The thrust of much Western European criticism is that the Reagan Administration
has superimposed a simpleminded, anticommunist world view onto the shifting and
complicated realities of Central America.  El Pais, the left-of-center Madrid
daily, observed that limiting the Central American problem ''to only a vision of
East versus West, to attribute everything that does not suit the North Americans
to Cuban and Soviet intrigues, prevents true understanding and permits the use
of military escalation as a search for a way out.''

Felipe Gonzalez, Spain's Socialist Prime Minister, made it clear on a visit to
the Contadora nations last month that he considers the United States as playing
a negative role in the region. But his Government has refrained from specific
criticism of Washington's latest steps.

Falling in the midst of vacation time - an almost sacred disengagement from
politics - the building crisis in Central America has not yet seized popular
attention or panicked chanceries in Europe. But the Reagan Administration has
embarked on its Latin American course without the reassurance of reliable
support in Western Europe for its dealings with the Soviet Union, which is
almost certain to exploit any misstep in Washington's backyard. And,
particularly in West Germany, there is a sharpening realization that the Reagan
Administration could hand the free-floating anti-missile constituency a new,
galvanizing issue if it moves into a showdown with Nicaragua or Cuba. The
hard-core anti-American demonstrators who hurled paving stones and paint-filled
balloons at Vice President Bush in West Germany last month marched under a
banner that proclaimed, ''Hands Off Nicaragua.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of U.S. military adviser training Salvadoran
troops

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
ON CREATIVE LOAFING

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 913 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 30


This is the time of year to consider the advantages of creative loafing, and the
Congress of the United States, by unanimous consent, is taking the month of
August off to consider them.

President Reagan is in full agreement. Nothing makes him happier than the
prospect of the Congress's going on a long vacation, and there's a lot to be
said in favor of his doing the same.

For it's when the President is least active, leaving his problems to his
Cabinet, his staff and outside commissions, that he's most effective. It's when
he is most active and occasionally takes charge that even his old buddies in the
Administration begin to get a little edgy.

He was doing just fine a few weeks ago. His economic policy was picking up. Even
the skeptics were beginning to say that maybe the old boy had something after
all. The stock market was zipping along and the Garth Poll - up 10 points in two
months - was saying 58 percent of the people thought he was doing a good job.

Whereupon instead of taking ''ranch time,'' as his wife, Nancy, is always
suggesting, and getting away from the struggle like the Congress, he ordered a
task force of thousands of troops, aircraft carriers and even a battleship into
the Caribbean and Pacific waters of Central America.

In the process, he diverted attention from the economy, where he was getting
good marks, to the military, where Newsweek was condemning his ''gunboat
diplomacy'' and even The Wall Street Journal was complaining about his
''uncertain trumpet.''

He was very bad in his last television press conference because he tried to
pretend that he was sending the Navy and the marines into Central America on a
''routine mission.'' Nothing new. Just the same old thing done many times
before. He seemed very nervous in his argument, and no wonder.

For he had decided on this naval and military demonstration without careful and
prior consultation with the Congress or even with his own Secretary of State, or
his allies, or his ambassadors in Central America. In this he took a chance, as
President Carter did when he sent the rescue mission into Iran without the
knowledge of Secretary of State Vance, who resigned in protest.

Maybe Secretary of State Shultz will accept this experiment in gunboat
diplomacy, though it's not his style. He defended the President's policy when he
went to Capitol Hill but not the hypocrisy that this was just another
''routine'' exercise.

President Reagan gets into trouble mainly when he forgets to be faithful to
himself, and pretends that he knows better than his colleagues. For example, he
was criticized recently, right and left, for tossing hot potatoes like the MX
missile, Social Security and Central America to commissions of distinguished
private citizens. But this was a good idea, and his natural way of doing things.

He came to Washington promising to get the government off our backs and was
merely trying to get the government off his back. This was a logical extension
of his political philosophy. It's a brilliant political technique and the
Democrats don't quite know how to handle it. They agree he needs help in the
conduct of foreign affairs but denounce him for getting it.

It's when occasionally he tries to go it alone that he stumbles.  Unlike
Presidents Carter, Nixon and Johnson, he usually doesn't pretend that he's
running everything.

An argument could be made that Messrs. Carter, Johnson and Nixon came a cropper
because they worked too hard. Mr. Johnson wouldn't listen to his Cabinet on
Vietnam. Mr. Nixon intimidated his staff on Watergate. Mr. Carter memorized
every memo and tried to decide every issue, cook every meal and wash every dish
in the White House.

Mr. Reagan has seldom made this mistake; except when he's accused of delegating
Presidential responsibility, he tends to go it alone, forgetting the advice of
old conservatives of the past.

Rudyard Kipling recommended that the leaders of nations study the art of
''judicious leaving alone.'' Chief Justice Burger has a little warning sign on
his desk: ''L.I.S. - let it simmer.''

Pascal thought that most of the evils of life arose from ''man's being unable to
sit still in a room.'' And that old Tory, Walter Bagehot, argued a hundred years
ago when he was editor of The Economist in London that ''overactivity is a very
great evil.''

This impulse for sudden action, for ''doing something,'' Bagehot believed, was
inherited from primitive days when life was simple and quick action led to
desirable results. The problem was plain: If A kills B before B kills A, then A
survives.

''But the issues of life are plain no longer,'' Bagehot insisted, even in the
last century. ''To act rightly in modern society requires a great deal of
previous study, a great deal of assimilated information, a great deal of
sharpened imagination ... and much lying in the sun.''

He ended his sermon with a verse for August:

Old things need not be therefore true, O brother men, nor yet the new; Ah, still
awhile the old thought retain, And yet consider it again.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
William Safire is on vacation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Topics;
Heavy Losses

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 208 words


Francis Plimpton

Even among the lawyers who do well by doing good, Francis T.P. Plimpton stood
out.

He headed the major bar groups, served on the right boards, did time as a United
Nations delegate and even as New York City's official greeter. But it was the
venturesome nature of his leadership that set him apart.

In 1970, when President Nixon sought to appoint G. Harrold Carswell, a
segregationist nonentity, to the Supreme Court, Mr. Plimpton rallied the bar's
elite. The nomination was offensive on many grounds, but the Plimpton forces
invoked the proper complaint of qualified lawyers - professional competence -
and the opponents won.

Later, believing that lawyers were being insensitive about the undeclared
Vietnam War, Mr. Plimpton persuaded the American Bar Association to devote part
of its 1971 convention to airing charges that the conflict was illegal.
Conventions are not usu- ally that serious - or challenging to those in power.
Mr. Plimpton, who died Sunday at the age of 82, was the second pillar of New
York's bar to fall in two months, following Whitney North Seymour Sr., who died
at the same age in May.  It's a wealthy bar, in talent and achievement, but not
so affluent that it can absorb such losses easily.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 3, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S PATH TO WAR

BYLINE: By John B. Oakes; John Oakes is former Senior Editor of The New York
Times.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 797 words


Unless he is stopped by Congress - and only Congress and the force of public
opinion can stop him - Ronald Reagan could plunge this country into the most
unwanted, unconscionable, unnecessary and unwinnable war in its history, not
excepting Vietnam.

Mr. Reagan sees ''the trouble'' in Central America as coming ''from outside the
area,'' as ''revolution exported from the Soviet Union and Cuba.'' His response
is to dispatch huge naval and air armadas to the waters off the Nicaraguan
coasts and thousands of American troops to the ranchlands and jungles of
neighboring Honduras.

If the revolutionists in Nicaragua and the guerrillas in El Salvador whom they
support do not capitulate before this display of American might - as they almost
certainly will not - President Reagan has left himself little choice between
reversing his Central America policy and moving in with American guns, planes
and men.

Since the premises of Mr. Reagan's policy are wrong, his actions stemming from
that policy are wrong. Latin America's revolutions, including Mexico's, Cuba's,
El Salvador's and Nicaragua's, are home-grown, not ''exported'' from anywhere
else. The undoubted Communist influence on these revolutions - always strong and
always inevitable - cannot be nullified by external military force, as even Mr.
Reagan should have learned from the Bay of Pigs and the events that followed.

These revolutions and revolutionists can be a threat to our security (a minor
one at that) only if we force them completely into the Soviet corner and isolate
them there. Neither the Russians nor their agents nor their disciples can do as
much harm to the long-term interests of the United States as we are doing to
ourselves by imitating them in trying to impose our style of democracy on people
who may be totally unready or unsuited for it.

Because of the brutal purge of Central American experts as soon as he took
office, President Reagan had no one around to tell him that the Sandinista arms
buildup in Nicaragua might just possibly not have been impelled by the desire to
conquer all the rest of Central America for Castro and Marx. It might have
stemmed from genuine fear, founded on history, of direct American military
intervention, fantastic as that may have seemed to Mr. Reagan at the time. It
doesn't seem so fantastic today -

certainly no more fantastic than what he is doing right now to Honduras.  He is
remilitarizing this pathetically poor and helpless country just as it is
emerging from years of military rule. He is undermining its fragile democracy
and indirectly inciting open warfare between Honduras and its neighbors. He is
using Honduras not only as a springboard for Nicaraguan ''contras'' but also as
a training ground - on the cheap - for Salvadoran Government troops.  Perhaps no
one in the Reagan entourage knew that the last Central American war - a brief
but savage one just a few years ago - was between El Salvador and Honduras. The
two countries have had a historically unfriendly relationship. The presence of
Salvadoran troops on Honduran soil is a prescription for trouble - for which Mr.
Reagan again will have to bear the responsibility.  The record in Guatemala is
no better. Guerrilla warfare has been smoldering there for at least 20 years.
Even less than El Salvador, less than Nicaragua, did Guatemala need Castro or
Marx or Communist propaganda to pit rich against poor, oligarchy against
peasantry, army against guerrillas. While gross national product has gone up,
the living standard of 80 percent of the population has gone down as large-scale
agriculture has pushed the Indian peasants into ever less fertile and ever less
productive areas in which to grow their own scanty food.  Guatemala's born-again
President, who was catapulted into power after a post-election coup last year,
may be somewhat less bloodthirsty than his infamous predecessors, but they at
least did not have the temerity to claim, as he does, that they were in direct
personal contact with the Almighty. Because President Efrain Rios Montt talks to
God and not to Marx, the Reagan Administration can think of nothing better to do
with American power and money than to resume the military support that was cut
off several years ago because of Guatemala's abominable human rights record.
American military supplies have no purpose in Guatemala but continued repression
of the Guatemalan people, particularly its large Indian segment.  The growing
military involvement of the United States in Nicaragua, Honduras and Guatemala -
as well as in El Salvador - may stimulate Mr. Reagan's ego and self-image as
''standing up to Communism''; but it is painfully clear that it does nothing to
enhance our national security or the welfare of the people of Central America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 3, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 910 words


LEAD TIME: A Journalist's Education.  By Garry Wills. 389 pages. Doubleday &
Company. $18.95.

WITH his talent for the new journalism and his taste for the new politics, Garry
Wills fitted naturally among the writers who enlivened the pages of Esquire in
the late 1960's and into the 70's. A few of his articles from those years are
reprinted in ''Lead Time'' along with later contributions to The New York Review
of Books, New York magazine, The New York Times Magazine, Playboy and other
publications.

Two of his early pieces, on the brief jailing of a clutch of anti-Vietnam War
celebrities in 1972 and the response of striking sanitation workers in Memphis
to the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in 1968 are
reminders of the weaknesses and strengths of the presumptuously labeled new
journalism at its higher level.

The first finds Mr. Wills going to jail as a protest with Dr. Benjamin Spock,
Noam Chomsky, Joseph Papp, Judy Collins and other ''beautiful people'' and
''literary heavies.'' Mr. Wills is a touch abashed by his involvement in the
episode: ''Not that it was not chic, our advertised (and mercifully brief)
incarceration. I have never been so applauded in my life,'' yet his report is in
the spirit of the look-at-me magazine writing of the period. He would have done
better to stick by his resolution: ''I wouldn't write anything about this. It
wasn't worth it.''

By contrast, the article on Memphis retains its power. As a sometime teacher of
magazine writing, I have used the lead to ''Dr. King on the Case'' as an example
of how to pack mood and promise into an opening paragraph without giving too
much away: '' 'Nigger territory, eh?' He was a cab driver, speculative; eyed the
pistol incongruous beside him on the seat, this quiet spring night; studied me,
my two small bags, my raincoat.'' The opening goes on: '' 'Well, get in.' He
snapped down every lock with quick slaps of his palm; then rolled up his window;
we had begun our safari into darkest Memphis.''

In the nature of such a collection, some of the pieces are dated; the reports on
political conventions and on Watergate, although well-wrought, seem worn. Does
anybody, for example, still care about H. R. Haldeman? Mr. Wills's analyses of
the styles of public personalities are fresher. He observes that Daniel Patrick
Moynihan's prose ''is so arch that his grammar founders by the third or fourth
parenthesis. He learned to float before he could walk.'' Not that Mr. Wills's
judgment is always sure. He confesses in ''afterwords'' to pieces on President
Carter and Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. that he was carried away at first meetings.
(''Brown not only means to soar but has begun to,'' he announced to readers of
The New York Review of Books in 1976.)

Mr. Wills is emphatically a new journalist in his scorn for any gesture toward
objectivity or evenhandedness. Probably the most tendentious piece he ever wrote
was his introduction to ''Scoundrel Time,'' Lillian Hellman's version of the
anti-Communist campaigns of the 1940's and 50's. His essay, which scourged anti-
Communist liberals of the era, served Miss Hellman much better than it served
history. We may take it as a sign of grace on Mr. Wills's part or of the common
sense of his editor that it is represented here by only a brief and relatively
innocuous excerpt.

His performance in Miss Hellman's behalf was uncharacteristic of a writer who
specializes in demolishing images. Mr. Wills separates himself decisively, for
example, from those who cling to the image of Alger Hiss as innocent victim. He
also does an exemplary job on the image of Harry S. Truman as the little guy
full of earthy wisdom taking on the big guys. He draws a portrait of President
Eisenhower as a disciple of Machiavelli: ''Duplicity of method, where the aim
was clear, seemed nature's obvious blessing to him, no more odd than breathing
through two nostrils.'' He writes of President Carter that his ''intelligence
always promised more breadth than he managed to acquire.'' And he is predictably
tough on President Reagan: ''Reagan croons, in love accents, his permission to
indulge a functional hatred of poor people and blacks.''

This former Roman Catholic seminarian remains dedicated to religion in action -
his models being the Berrigan brothers and Dorothy Day. On the other hand, he is
no admirer of Pope John Paul II. Included here is a virtuoso account of the
froth churned up by the press on the occasion of the Pope's 1979 visit to
America. Disdainful of pretenders to religious enlightenment, in his encounters
with Jimmy Carter and Jerry Brown he pits his knowledge against theirs, to their
disadvantage. But his erudition sometimes works against his journalism. What can
the readers of New York magazine have made of this: ''The Pope's principal
scholarly work, 'The Acting Person,' is an attempt to reconcile the anthropology
of Max Scheler with Aristotle and Aquinas - a tricky maneuver, since Scheler
tried to reconcile Plato and phenomenology''? Well, a bit of showing off is a
tolerable side effect of a mind that likes to range beyond the usual boundaries
of periodical journalism.

In recent years, Garry Wills, now Henry R. Luce Professor of American Culture
and Public Policy at Northwestern University, has gone from reporting to
reinterpreting American history. Whether that is a gain for sound history
remains in dispute; it is certainly a loss for spirited journalism.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Garry Wills

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 4, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Soldier for War Memorial Takes Shape

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Frederick Hart working on one of three 8-foot-tall soldiers for a
statue to be placed at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington. The trio of
clay figures will be used to cast the piece in bronze in November. The statue is
expected to be put in place next summer. The New York Times/Paul Hosefros

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 4, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DIOXIN LEAVES MARK ON A CITY CALLED NITRO, BUT EXTENT OF IMPACT IS AT ISSUE

BYLINE: By WILLIAM ROBBINS

SECTION: Section B; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1947 words

DATELINE: NITRO, W.Va., July 29


The toxic chemical dioxin has left its mark on this city of 8,500 people, but
just how deeply or extensively is at issue.

It marks men like E. W. Miller, who dropped in the other day at Diehl's
Restaurant on Main Street. Mr. Miller, 74 years old, retired for health reasons
from his job at a chemical plant several years ago. He stopped to talk with a
younger man who continues to work at the plant, although he says he does not
feel like doing so.

Both men are marked with the scars of chloracne, a skin condition resembling
common acne but often far more severe and persistent. Chloracne is the first and
most visible effect of exposure to dioxin, a contaminant formed in some chemical
manufacturing processes. But the younger man and 176 present and former
employees at the plant assert in a lawsuit scheduled for trial in October that
dioxin has also left a heritage of suffering, debilitation and death.

In reply, the Monsanto Company of St. Louis, operator of one of several chemical
companies that form Nitro's principal economic foundation, acknowledges the link
between dioxin and chloracne, but says its studies have found no evidence that
exposure to dioxin produces long-term health problems.  The case is but one of a
growing number that are focusing attention on dioxin's hazards and its unknowns.
Millions of dollars is being spent to clean up dioxin deposits that have been
found in Missouri and New Jersey; millions more is at stake in a joint lawsuit
in which Vietnam veterans claim damages for being exposed to the defoliant Agent
Orange, which was contaminated by traces of dioxin.

Suit Involves a Herbicide

In the Nitro case, the lawsuit is based on the medical records and recent
examinations of several current workers, others such as Donald B. Stover, James
R. Phillips, and William C. Wilson, who are retired workers, or the heirs of
others such as Cleo Smith, who died recently after joining the litigants in the
lawsuit.

The litigants contend that they are suffering varied health problems resulting
from exposure to a dioxin contaminant in a herbicide named 2,4,5-T, which
Monsanto produced at its plant here from 1948 to 1969, and exposure to some
other chemicals.

The contaminant in the herbicide goes by the scientific name
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, or TCDD, which has been described as the
most toxic poison ever produced by man. It is the most potent of the 75
compounds known as dioxins.

''I felt pretty good about producing a weed killer,'' said Mr. Stover, visibly
agitated, sitting with his wife and a 36- year-old daughter in the gloomy
interior of one of hundreds of homes built here in World War I for workers
producing nitrocellulose, an ingredient in the making of gunpowder and the
source of the town's name. ''I didn't know it was a man-killer, too.''

The Principal Complaints

The litigants say their conditions contradict repeated scientific reports of
failure to prove links between dioxin and long-term organic damage in humans,
though cancer and damage to kidneys, liver and nerves have been produced in
laboratory animals in experiments using dioxin.

The complaint charged that health problems resulting from exposure to the
chemicals had included, besides chloracne, various forms of cancer, heart
disease, mental illness and nerve and kidney damage.

In a response filed in 1981 the company denied allegations of damages. In its
latest filing, the company asked that the suit be dismissed, asserting that its
claims were barred by a statute of limitations. Trial is to begin Oct. 24.

''The Monsanto employee group has been one of the most medically studied
populations in the world,'' Dan Bishop, a company spokesman, said today. ''At
least three separate health studies have been conducted on employees at this
location, and other than the skin condition chloracne no long-term health
problems that could be associated with exposure to dioxin have ever been found
there.''

Part of the literature on effects of dioxin exposure is based on studies that
were begun after an industrial accident in 1949 at the Monsanto plant here that
resulted in the exposure of hundreds of workers to the dioxin.

Exposure 30 Years Ago Cited

Both the wife and the daughter of Mr. Stover, a 72-year-old retired Monsanto
employee, suffer health problems that they attribute to exposure 30 years ago to
Mr. Stover's work clothing.

Mr. Stover complains of aches, pains, organic damage and nervous tension, and he
says he often breaks into tears without apparent reason. Mr.  Phillips has had
several operations for skin tumors and lives in an artificial environment to aid
his breathing. Mr. Wilson, whose thickened and corrugated skin, deeply pitted
with chloracne scars, hangs in folds on his face and arms, attributes a
diagnosis of brain damage to dioxin exposure. All say they rarely feel able to
leave home long enough to visit places like Diehl's Restaurant.

The suit against Monsanto was first filed in 1981 by 32 current and former
employees and members of their family or heirs in Federal District Court in
Charleston, the state capital, about 15 miles from here. It has since been
amended as others have joined the suit, and subsequent revisions have simplified
the complaint, which originally asked for $2.65 billion in damages.

''Monsanto is terribly disappointed that these employees saw fit to take this
action,'' Mr. Bishop, the company spokesman, said. ''We will vigorously protect
our interests and reputation as the litigation proceeds.''

First Study Financed by Monsanto

The first findings of the studies of the plant came in the 1950's from one
financed by Monsanto and conducted by Judith Zack, a company epidemiologist, and
Dr. Raymond Suskind of the University of Cincinnati. They said they had found no
abnormal number of deaths as a result of cancer or heart disease among the
workers exposed in the accident.

A later and wider study conducted for the company in 1980 confirmed the earlier
results, though it found a high rate of bladder cancer among Monsanto employees.
''This finding,'' it said, ''reflects the established and previously documented
association between exposure to paraaminobyphenyl (PAB) and cancer in man. PAB
was used at Nitro from 1941 to 1952. It was discontinued when its cancer-causing
potential was confirmed.''

The most recent study of Monsanto's work force here, conducted by Dr. Suskind,
produced no evidence of long- term health effects other than chloracne among
workers who had produced 2,4,5-T, according to a preliminary report released by
Monsanto in 1982.

Reached at his office in Cincinnati, Dr. Suskind declined to discuss the results
of that study, saying he was still assembling his data in preparation for
publication.

Another Study Is Different

One study, however, by Robert W. Baughman in preparation for a 1975 Harvard
University doctoral dissertation, produced results differing with those studies.
That study, conducted among workers exposed in the 1949 accident, found
resulting symptoms including ''severe pains in skeletal muscles, shortness of
breath, intolerance to cold, palpable and tender liver, loss of sensation in the
extremities, demyelination of peripheral nerves, fatigue, nervousness,
irritability, insomnia, loss of libido and vertigo.''

A study by a Chicago physician commissioned by lawyers for the plaintiffs has
produced results similar to those of Mr. Baughman, according some of those
interviewed.

A large number of documents in a voluminous file in the Nitro case have
accumulated in the Charleston court, but an order by a Federal judge has sealed
sensitive papers from public scrutiny.

But an idea of the kind of medical claims the case may produce came this week in
interviews with six of the litigants, a former worker who suffers from problems
similar to theirs but has not sued and reviews of published reports on problems
suffered by others. In many instances they reported symptoms similar to those
reported in Mr. Baughman's dissertation.

''As long as Monsanto pays my pension and my medical bills I'm satisfied,'' said
Mr. Miller, whose problems, he said, have included cancer of the bladder and
muscular tension. ''I'd never sue them.''

Fears of Losing Plant

Many workers worry that an effect of the suit may be to drive Monsanto out of
Nitro, according to Larry Ratliff, regional sub-director of the United
Steelworkers of America, the union that represents the company employees.

Mr. Stover, his face pitted with scars of chloracne pustules that continue to
erupt 30 years after his last exposure, seemed in constant motion, leaning
forward, settling back and shifting his position as he sat on a sofa discussing
his experiences at the Monsanto plant and what he said had been the results.

''I don't have any nerves at all,'' he said. After snapping at his wife,
Virginia, over an interruption, he added: ''You see how irritable I get.''

He was unable to sleep more than a few hours at night and cried frequently over
''any news, or no news at all,'' he said, and medical diagnoses had confirmed
heart disease and a lesion in a lung.

Meanwhile, he said, he has suffered cramps and aches and pains in his legs and a
numbness in his fingers, toes and the bottoms of his feet.

Since 1953, his wife complained, he had shown no interest in sexual relations.
''I just have had no sex drive,'' he said.

He had dug 2,4,5-T with a trowel from a production vessel and some of the
substance had often contaminated his clothing, which he wore home, he said.

One Family's Complaints

His daughter, Ramona, who sat beside him, had dark rings dotted with pimples
under her eyes, and she turned her head to display scars and large pustules
behind her ears.

''She was always one to climb up in her daddy's lap before he could change his
clothes,'' Mrs. Stover said.

''She cries at night like her daddy,'' Mrs. Stover said. ''She has sleeping
trouble, too, and it seems like she's always expecting something bad to
happen.''

Mrs. Stover, who said she had undergone operations for cancer of the bladder,
said she attributed her own problem to contact with her husband's work clothes.

Mr. Phillips, 70, who complains of extreme sensitivity to cold and of breathing
difficulties, has had to live in a house with automatic controls that regulate
heat and humidity.

''They were here, here, here, here and here,'' he said, pointing to places on
his face, in one ear and on an arm where he said tumors had been removed.

Mr. Wilson, 76, who bears some of the worst scars attributed to chloracne, said
he also suffered from nervousness, shortness of breath and pains in his legs.
But the worst discomfort, he said, pointing to the chloracne marks, came from
''these things.'' Sometimes, he said, ''they feel like pins and needles.''

Among the litigants with the most serious complaints was Cleo Smith, who died at
the age of 55 before the suit was filed. The cause of death was said to be
bladder cancer and heart disease. Mr. Smith had told reporters of at least 17
operations to cut cancerous cysts from his skin. Some were ''as big as an egg,''
he said.

Those interviewed included three current workers, all in their late 50's but all
three, each of whom complained of aches, pains and numbness in their legs, asked
not to be identified.

One of them, describing a production process, said he had spread 2,4,5-T on
trays in preparation for drying, smoothing the layers with his bare hands.

For working with the herbicide, he said, employees received extra pay of 4 cents
an hour under a contract negotiated by their union. ''We called it the T-rate,''
he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of West Virginia; photo of Monsanto chemical plant; photo of Donald
Stover; photo of James Phillips

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 4, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 927 words


CHICKENHAWK. By Robert Mason. 339 pages. Viking. $17.75.

NEAR the end of his remarkable journal based on a year spent flying assault
helicopters for the First Cavalry in Vietnam from August 1965 through July 1966,
Robert Mason describes stopping over in Honolulu on his way back to the States
and buying some sundries at an airport gift shop: ''The clerk, a young woman,
took my money and asked if I was returning from Vietnam. I said yes, proudly.
She suddenly glared at me and said, 'Murderer.' I stared at her for a long
minute, feeling confused. Then I smiled. I realized that she was talking about
someone else.''

That Mr. Mason should have reacted so is understandable in the light of the
experiences he has just finished describing. What is surprising is that the
reader too takes the clerk's remark as a slap in the face. Nearly 20 years after
the event, when the majority of Americans still look upon their country's role
in Vietnam with feelings ranging from chagrin to outright shame, one finds
oneself surprised for a moment by this outburst of disapproval.


Why are we shocked by the clerk's accusation, particularly after having
re-experienced, almost at first-hand, the hopelessness and sheer insanity of the
war in Vietnam? The boringly obvious answer is that we have identified with Mr.
Mason's point of view. Yet how can this be, we wonder, when we have read at
least a dozen previous first-hand accounts with a steadily diminishing sense of
identification, and when, at the same time, our sense of the war's futility has
grown in inverse proportion?

The answer lies in the remarkably concrete detail with which Mr. Mason has
reconstructed his experience. ''As a child I had dreams of levitation,'' he
begins the first entry of his diary. ''In these dreams I could float off the
ground only when no one watched. The ability would leave me just when someone
looked.'' This evocative fantasy makes it easy to understand why he would want
to become a helicopter pilot, and so it is with perfect logic that we follow him
through the intricacies of learning something approximately as difficult as
patting one's head and rubbing one's stomach and waltzing all at the same time,
except that one has to coordinate one's incompatible movements with a machine
that weighs many tons, and with other people's lives depending on one's
proficiency.

Before too long, we are marveling at Mr. Mason's ability to hover mere feet
above the ground with tracer bullets winging in like so many homicidal
fireflies; or to coax his ship gently out of the muck of rice paddies; or
literally to bore his way through foliage (which is why these machines are
appropriately known as ''choppers''); or to fly on group missions in such close
formation that the rotors of the various crafts are actually overlapping. What
we have here, then, is a bird's-eye view of the war, and if we forget its horror
for a while, it is only because the fulfillment of the fantasy of flight is
rendered in such brilliant colors.

Not that Mr. Mason has stinted the horror. But so compelling are his technical
details - down to elaborate frontispieces diagramming the parts of the machine
he flew - that only by subliminal degrees do we become aware of his mounting
battle fatigue and consequent psychological disintegration. Where he ends up
inside his head is barely removed from the dilemma of Yossarian in Joseph
Heller's ''Catch-22.'' Mr. Mason knows that he has gone dangerously far around
the bend. But where Yossarian, when he complains to the doctor that he's afraid
to fly any more, is told that his fear only proves that he is sane enough to go
on flying, Mr. Mason can't take the necessary step of admitting aloud that he is
afraid.

Thus he goes on acting out the role of a hero long after he realizes that the
conduct of the war is insane. In scene after telling scene he penetrates the
fabric of Vietnamese life and is then forced to ask himself which country is the
civilized one and which the barbarian. But he still can't keep himself from
acting out his childhood fantasy of omnipotence. And we can't stop ourselves
from identifying with it.

I wish I could close by quoting in full one of the scenes in which Mr. Mason
demonstrates his use of detail - perhaps the prophetic incident in which a group
of soldiers attack an innocent-looking green snake, not knowing that like most
varieties in Vietnam it is poisonous; or the scene in which the author gets his
first discouraging picture of the war from a pilot meticulously brewing coffee
from a C-ration; or the comic account of how supply sergeants throughout the
battalion balance their books by retroactively placing five tons' worth of their
missing equipment on a helicopter that has mysteriously disappeared. (''One hell
of a helicopter, don'cha think?'' ''Maybe that's why it went down. Slightly
overloaded. By eight thousand pounds, I'd say.'' ''Yep. We'll never see another
like that one.'')

But each of these scenes is too long to be quoted in full. Besides, it is the
even longer combat scenes that catch the real flavor of ''Chickenhawk.'' It is
to combat that Bob Mason is always drawn, no matter how frightened he feels
(which is why he is both ''chicken'' and a ''hawk,'' therefore a
''chickenhawk''). And in that paradox lies the terror of his hypnotic narrative.
It is combat that becomes his natural environment. Combat becomes the only
habitat in which he feels alive. Combat possesses his dreams long after he has
left the war. And in realizing this, he discovers that he has gone quite mad.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Robert Mason

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BONN CONTRITE OVER ACTIVIST WHO SPILLED BLOOD ON GENERAL

BYLINE: By JAMES M. MARKHAM

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 425 words

DATELINE: BONN, Aug. 4


Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher apologized to Secretary of State George
P. Shultz today for the behavior Wednesday of a Green Party regional deputy who
spilled blood on an American general.

In a protest against the projected stationing of American medium-range missiles
in West Germany and the Reagan Administration's Central American policies, the
regional deputy, Frank Schwalba-Hoth, a member of the Hesse legislature, poured
a glass of his blood on the chest of Lieut. Gen. Paul S. Williams Jr. at a
reception for American commanders.

The action drew a storm of condemnation from newspapers and mainstream
politicians today. In a telegram to his American counterpart, Mr. Genscher
asserted that President Reagan's firm commitment to disarmament ''should put to
shame those involved in this inexcusable and unworthy behavior toward General
Williams.''

'The Blood Army'

The general, 53 years old, who commands the United States V Corps, was
responding to words of welcome from other members of the Hesse legislature when
he was surprised by Mr. Schwalba-Hoth. Shouting in English ''Blood for the
bloody army!'' the 30- year-old legislator emptied the glass of blood on the
general's chest and was immediately wrestled to the floor by another American
officer.

The action was planned and supported by the Hesse Greens, who are among the most
militant in West Germany. In a statement issued today, the Hesse organization
said the deputy's gesture was meant to protest ''the buildup in Honduras as a
springboard for a U.S. war in its front garden of Central America and the
preparation of a war in Central Europe through the stationing of Pershing 2 and
cruise missiles.''

The national Green organization also defended the Hesse protest, insisting that
it was not directed ''against the American people, but against the insane
armament of the American Government and Reagan's aggressive behavior in Latin
America.''

The Greens recalled that Daniel and Philip Berrigan made similar protests during
the Vietnam War.

Statement by Social Democrat

The Social Democratic premier of North Rhine-Westphalia, Johannes Rau, issued a
statement today in his capacity as president of the upper chamber of Parliament
on behalf of President Karl Carstens, who was out of the country.

''The behavior of Greens deputies toward American soldiers in the Hesse
legislature has made me and the great majority of the German deeply dismayed and
ashamed,'' Mr. Rau said. ''I ask the pardon of those affected and of the
American people.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Paul S. Williams Jr. and Jochen Lengemann

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

C.I.A.;
INTRA-AGENCY RIFTS LAID TO NICARAGUAN OPERATION

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1236 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 4


United States covert operations in Nicaragua have proved to be a mixed blessing
for the Central Intelligence Agency, the organization is responsible for
financing and managing 10,000 Nicaraguan rebels.

In a profession dominated by the often tedious work of collecting and analyzing
information, the operations in Central America have given intelligence officials
a chance to plan military strikes, coordinate airlifts of supplies, create a
sophisticated field communications network and, most important, serve as the
front line of President Reagan's policy on Central America.

But the Nicaraguan operation, which is expected to become the largest
paramilitary effort mounted by the C.I.A. since the Vietnam War, has, according
to agency officials, produced divisions within the agency that are significant
and growing.

The problem is that covert activities, which often involve propaganda campaigns,
secret donations to pro- American political parties or attempts to overthrow a
hostile government, tend to produce divisions within the C.I.A. In addition,
they dominate the public image of the agency, often unfavorably; create
frictions with Congress and inject intelligence officials into command roles
that can conflict with the obligation of producing neutral intelligence reports.


A Natural Split

The Nicaraguan campaign has placed the proponents of covert action, including
William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, at the fulcrum of
American foreign policy. Some Defense Department officials noted recently that,
with the operations in Nicaragua, Mr. Casey is directing more troops in combat
than the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines combined. No regular American forces
are currently engaged in combat anywhere in the world. And Mr. Reagan, despite
plans for extensive military maneuvers in Central America and the Caribbean,
including preparations for a posssible partial blockade of Nicaragua, has said
no thought is being given to sending American forces into combat in the region.

But the Nicaraguan operation has also created several rifts within the agency.
One, expected by many, is between the operations directorate, which handles the
collection of intelligence and runs covert activities, and the intelligence
division, which analyzes raw intelligence information and produces finished
reports for the President and other policymakers. The intelligence division,
filled with scholars and researchers, looks at covert operations the same way a
college faculty views the varsity football team: with a mixture of suspicion,
condescension and contempt.

The operations staff, not surprisingly, is primarily populated by
action-oriented people, cloak-and-dagger specialists who fancy a Holmesian
deduction over a computer printout any day. Traditionally, the operations staff,
particulary those devoted to managing covert activities as opposed to the
clandestine collection of intelligence, view the intelligence division about the
way a varsity football team views the faculty: with a mixture of suspicion,
condescension and contempt.

Downward Sprial of the 1970's

These traditional strains have been exacerbated by the large covert operation in
Nicaragua, according to agency employees. Many in the intelligence division
contend that the Nicaraguan venture, as a highly visible and widely criticized
operation, has once again thrown the C.I.A. into controversy. Only recently,
they say, the agency pulled out of the decline that started in the mid-1970's
with disclosures about intelligence abuses, including the attempted
assassination of foreign leaders, illegal spying on American citizens and drug
testing on unwitting human subjects.

It hurt, these employees say, to see the C.I.A,'s activities debated for weeks
in Congress, culminating in the vote by the House last month to end covert
American aid to the Nicaraguan rebels on the ground that the support violated
American law and, if anything, was helping the Nicaraguan Government consolidate
power. Reagan Administration officials defended the operation, contending that
its goals, the interdiction of arms shipments from Nicaragua to El Salvador and
the harrassment of the Nicaraguan Government, were both legal and effective.

The image problem, which officials say may hamper the C.I.A.'s ability to
attract young talent is compounded by an internal rivalry over resources. Under
the stewardship of Mr. Casey, the agency's budget has been growing nearly 25
percent a year, not taking inflation into account, making it one of the
fastest-growing agencies in the Government.

No Comment From Casey

As covert activities have grown, more and more money has been required to pay
for them. Intelligence officials have asked Congress for $80 million to finance
the Nicaraguan operation in the fiscal year that begins in October. That is
money that many in the agency think should go to other objectives, such as the
improvement of intelligence reports.

But there are other, less predictable tensions. Mr. Casey, who has taken a keen
personal interest in the Nicaraguan operation, has reportedly bypassed some of
his senior aides in running it. Agecy officials report that he has often dealt
directly with the head of Central American operations, sometimes leaving the
chief of the operations directorate, John Stein, and other top aides out of the
decision-making process. A spokesman for the agency, Dale Peterson, said Mr.
Casey would not comment on the reports.

Mr. Stein is not known among agency employees as an enthusiastic advocate of
covert operations and was reportedly among some senior officials who raised
objections before Mr. Casey recently decided to expand the Nicaraguan operation.
These officials feared it would escalate the combat and could bring Cuban forces
more directly into the fighting. Like most agency officials, Mr. Stein was not
available for comment. Mr. Peterson said Mr. Casey would not comment on this
matter either.

400 Experts Rehired

Because C.I.A. manpower, particularly in the somewhat arcane areas of covert
action and paramilitary operations, was sharply reduced in the 1970's, the
Nicaraguan venture has stretched - some would say overextended - the agency's
capabilities. The need for specialized talent has been so great that the agency
has been forced to hire back more than 400 operations experts who retired in
recent years. This influx of old hands has disturbed younger officials who
question the buccaneering style of some of the recycled recruits.

Some agency officials also fear that management of the Nicaraguan rebels, and
all the institutional effort that has been mobilized to support them, could
color Mr. Casey's reports to the President on political and military
developments in Nicaragua. ''How can you run an invasion and at the same time
provide objective reports about the country you're invading?'' one official
asked.

All these problems have revived talk about splitting the C.I.A. into two
agencies, one to handle the collection and handling of intelligence information,
the other to conduct covert operations. The proposal, which has been suggested
and rejected several times since the agency was formed in 1947, almost always
founders on the issue of whether the Government really wants an agency whose
sole mission is covert activity, adding even more bureaucratic momentum to calls
for more secret operations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 7, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MUSIC NOTES;
AT 80, A MUSICIAN LOOKS BACK

BYLINE: By EDWARD ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 6; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1349 words


Abram Chasins will be celebrating his 80th birthday on Aug. 17. The former music
director of WQXR, author of ''Speaking of Pianists,'' ''Stokowski'' and other
books, commentator on music, performing pianist, student of Josef Hofmann,
composer, raconteur and educator, is eager to share some of his musical
impressions - many of which he is now putting into his memoirs.

''Now That I Think of It'' is the title of his reminiscences, being written from
his retirement in California. His conversation follows the title, moving quickly
from one recollection to another. ''My life, '' he says, ''is far more
interesting not for the things I myself have done but for the associations with
people who have changed the face of the earth.''

In a few moments, he mentions his piano studies with Ernest Hutcheson and his
composition studies with Rubin Goldmark; he mentions the ''gifted and charming
young man,'' George Gershwin, with whom he played four-hand music - including
the earliest manuscript version of ''Rhapsody in Blue.'' He recalls his own
popular piano composition ''Rush Hour in Hong Kong'' from the early 1920's and
his studies with Josef Hofmann, who asked him to join the faculty of the Curtis
Institute of Music.

Also remembered: Arturo Toscanini's request that the young pianist- composer
orchestrate two of his piano compositions (''Parade'' and ''Flirtation in a
Chinese Garden'') for performance with the New York Philharmonic in 1931, the
first contemporary American works performed by the conductor; his friendship
with Leopold Stokowski; his chamber music performances with Albert Einstein in
Princeton (''He played as passionately as he played poorly.''); and his
four-and-a-half hour lunch in Vienna with Sigmund Freud, with whom he played a
game of ''20 questions,'' challenging the psychoanalyst to guess which of his
pupils had given Mr. Chasins his own ''half-analysis.''

Mr. Chasins also explains why he left behind his composing career (''Too many
are too full of perishable elements.'') and why he left behind piano
performance: Having had a close association with both Josef Hofmann and
Rachmaninoff and hearing their performances so often, he felt that his own could
not compare (''And it was hell to travel in the 30's and 40's'').

The real focus of his career, he explains, became his contribution to radio.
During the Second World War, he organized series of concerts for the radio
station WQXR to sell War Bonds for the Treasury Department. He later became
music director of the station, the first to broadcast all- classical music.

Radio, he now says, is the ''most significant'' factor in the average listener's
musical life. ''It is the ideal medium of communication. It does not demand the
physical attention of television. You can be reading, walking or working and
radio can be with you.''

He dismisses the idea that there is too much music being broadcast on 24-hour
classical radio stations, or that it carries any danger of turning music into
just background sound. ''Now, more people listen well to music than any time
before in history.''

He actively promoted the cause of radio: after his mandatory retirement from
WQXR in 1965, he became Musician in Residence at the University of Southern
California in Los Angeles and helped make KUSC, the student-run, part-time radio
station, into a major station of the National Public Radio network.

Mr. Chasins has also been active as an educator. He began a program in 1946 to
improve music education in New York, and together with The New York Times,
initiated a program called ''Musical Talent in our Schools,'' auditioning high
school instrumentalists, and presenting the winners in concert on WQXR.

Now, says Mr. Chasins, ''There are very, very few fine teachers,'' a statement
he qualifies by adding: ''There are too few great teachers for the amount of
talent available.''

Yet, he adds, ''Today I would say the world around us is a technological world
and the poetic values are not there to the extent they were in the Romantic
era.''

All About Opera

The Pierpont Morgan Library will present ''Four Centuries of Opera,'' an
exhibition of music manuscripts, rare printed editions, and operatic stage
designs of 100 operas - among them ''La Nozze di Figaro,'' ''Die Meistersinger
von N"urnberg,'' ''Pelleas et Melisande'' and ''Wozzeck.'' The exhibition, which
will open on Sept. 1 and will continue through Nov. 6, will mark both the
centennials of Richard Wagner's death and of the opening of the first
Metropolitan Opera House. The exhibit has been selected from the Morgan Library
collections by J. Rigbie Turner, Curator of Music Manuscripts and Books.

The books and manuscripts span 380 years, including a rare early edition of the
libretto for ''L'Arianna,'' Monteverdi's second opera, the complete manuscript
of Mozart's ''Der Schauspieldirektor,'' sketch material for Bellini's ''La
Sonnambula,'' Wagner's handwritten libretto for ''Die Meistersinger,'' and the
autograph manuscript of Gilbert and Sullivan's ''The Pirates of Penzance.''
Twentieth-century works represented will include the first draft of Act I of
Schoenberg's ''Moses und Aron.'' About 40 theater drawings will include sketches
of works ranging from ''Porgy and Bess'' to ''Parsifal.''

Ethnomusicology

The 27th biennial conference of the International Council of Traditional Music
begins tomorrow at Columbia University. Musicians and ethnomusicologists from
around the world will gather at the University's School of International and
Public Affairs (420 West 118th Street) through Aug. 15, for performances,
workshops, films and discussions. More than 400 people are expected to attend.
Central themes of the conference are ''Music in an Urban Environment'' and ''The
Ethnomusicology of the Americas.''

Traditional festival music of Japan will be presented at noon on Tuesday on the
plaza of the School of International and Public Affairs. Other concerts, to take
place at 8 P.M. daily in the school's Altschul Auditorium, include: Grupo Aymara
of Bolivia performing music and dance of the Andes on Tuesday; four East Asian
musicians performing on zithers of China, Japan, Korea and Vietnam on Wednesday;
the music and dance of Haitian voodoo presented by the New York based La Troupe
Makandal on Thursday; musicians from the Middle East performing on lutes of
Turkey, Iran and the Arab world on Friday; and the Chancel Choir of the Greater
Refuge Temple of New York, performing gospel music on Aug. 13.

Films and videotapes shown during the week will include: ''Anastenaria: A
Fire-walking Ritual in Northern Greece,'' and ''Shadow Master: The Life of a
Balinese Puppeteer.'' Panels and discussion groups will focus on topics
including ''Music and Dance in Prehistoric Cultures,'' and ''Traditional Music
in the Modern World: The Longevity of Tradition.'' On Wednesday at 1 P.M. in the
Stetten Lounge, a workshop will focus on digital recording in the field; another
workshop on Thursday at 1 P.M. in the Hammarskjold Lounge will discuss the role
of computers in ethnomusicology.

Registration is open to the public for the entire week for $45, $25 for
students. Single-day admission is $10. For information call (212)-280-5439 or
280-3826.

HEMIDEMISEMIQUAVERS: The Lyric Opera of Chicago will establish a
young-composer-in-residence program as part of its 30th birthday celebration in
1984. The program, which is funded for an initial three years by Brenda D.
Freeman and Lee A. Freeman Sr., will permit a young opera composer to be in
residence with the company and have compositions presented in workshop
performances. No public competition is being held for the post, which will be
filled by recommendations from established composers. . . . The soprano Dorothy
Kirsten has established a foundation in the name of her husband, John Douglas
French, to raise funds to cure Alzheimer's Disease, the debilitating
degenerative disorder. Mr. French, formerly the director of the brain research
clinic at the University of California at Los Angeles, is suffering from the
neurological ailment.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 7, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AFTER INVADING NICARAGUA

BYLINE: By John W. Douglas; John W. Douglas, chairman of the Board of Trustees
of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, practices law.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 758 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The current debate on Central America has surfaced a school of thought that
favors a full- scale invasion of Nicaragua by tens of thousands of United States
troops, if that is what it takes to overthrow the leftist Sandinista regime. Let
us imagine that this view prevails and that, in the months to come, the United
States does launch an open military invasion of Nicaragua. What then?

In the short run, a United States military success, not a Vietnam stalemate,
appears to be in the cards. Unlike North Vietnam, no Central American nation
shares a common border with another major power. Nicaragua is relatively close
to the United States. It has a population of less than three million, and its
manpower reserves do not approach those of North Vietnam. Its territory is much
smaller than Vietnam's, and its terrain less formidable.

United States ships and planes can control all major sea lanes and air
corridors. Our military forces would avoid any gradual escalation and aim for a
quick triumph. Early United States casualties probably would be modest.

Thus, a large-scale United States invasion of Nicaragua from air, sea and
Honduran bases offers a beguiling vista of short-range military success. In this
view, United States troops would overpower the Nicaraguan forces in a few weeks.
The Soviet Union and Cuba would steer clear of any confrontation, the Sandinista
Government would disperse and the United States would install a conservative,
pro-Washington regime in Managua. Within weeks, a United States President could
claim a victory.  In the longer term, however, the prospects for such an
invasion are poor. In all likelihood, much of the Sandinista leadership would
fade into the countryside and regroup, attracting support from Nicaraguans and
other Latin Americans outraged by the invasion.  Many United States soldiers
would be needed for the occupation.  In time, the new Nicaraguan regime would
lose credibility and start to unravel. United States forces would have to shift
from mere occupation duties.  There would be missions to search and destroy,
programs for rural pacification and for strategic hamlets, and efforts to win
the hearts and minds of Nicaraguans. The United States would then find itself
back at square one. In sum, while the early course of an invasion would be
markedly different from that of Vietnam, the ultimate result would be the same -
a standoff and eventually failure.  Furthermore, an invasion would damage
broader United States interests. Most of Latin America would see us as a bully.
It would take us decades to erase the stain. An invasion would also send shock
waves throughout Europe - already skeptical of our Latin America policies. The
Soviet Union would have a propaganda field day. Most Europeans would understand
that Nicaragua's only real threat to the United States' vital interests is the
possible future construction of missile bases - bases that United States planes
could take out at an early stage and in a single run.

The advocates of open military intervention are dangerously short- sighted. They
remain mesmerized by what they see as an opportunity to reassert, with one
dramatic stroke, the United States' determination that they believe earlier
leaders frittered away in Vietnam. To such observers, our military intervention
in Southeast Asia was a noble undertaking that faltered only because our leaders
lacked the will to win and mistakenly shackled the military.

Accordingly, the revisionist theory continues, United States forces bogged down,
the public tired of the jungle stalemate and eventually the United States threw
in the towel. To put it another way: What could have been won on the battlefield
of Vietnam was lost in Washington's corridors of power by high-level
irresolution subsequently transmitted throughout the body politic.

Today, even as extensive, provocative United States military maneuvers are
unfolding in Central America, some members of the Administration have taken a
page from the ill-fated book written by their counterparts in President
Johnson's day: They are warning President Reagan that our adversaries are
testing his character and that the United States must respond with great force.

In 1964 and early 1965, the parallel argument was that President Johnson's
leadership would wither if he did not stand up to North Vietnam and its
Communist sponsors by sending large numbers of American troops into the South.

Fortunately, there is still time to avoid disaster: The Rubicon in Central
America lies some distance ahead.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 7, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
CRISIS AND HOPE

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 796 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 6


The quiet reflective thoughts here about the Administration's recent actions in
Central America are less dramatic than the noisy headlines.

There is less talk now about ''another Vietnam'' there than a week or so ago,
but still some concern about the dangers of accident, and a lot of practical
questions about how to avoid a U.S.-Soviet confrontation on the high seas. For
example, when U.S. warships intercept a Soviet freighter in international waters
off the coast of Nicaragua and demand to know where it is headed and what it is
carrying, some senators and allied ambassadors ask what we would say if an
American freighter, bound for Israel and laden with arms, were intercepted by
Soviet naval vessels with a similar demand.

Also, what are our naval commanders instructed to do if the captain of the
Soviet freighter replies that he's headed for Nicaragua with a cargo of missiles
and tanks?

We are committed to free trade on the high seas. We have not declared a blockade
of Nicaragua, which is an act of war, and therefore could do little more than
bob around and watch the Soviet weapons go by.

Senator John Glenn of Ohio has another question. He wants to know how this U.S.
naval task force and the 5,000 or so U.S. troops headed for Honduras are armed,
and with what instructions. Secretary of State Shultz replies that our men will
be armed and defend themselves if attacked, but will take no offensive action
and ''withdraw'' if faced with the prospect of direct combat.

Apparently what the President has in mind, as usual, is not the use of force but
the display of force. He is not a belligerent man, but for him all the world's a
stage, and his hope is that if our ships are strolling along the Pacific and
Caribbean coasts of Central America and our troops are holding military
exercises and building airfields in Honduras for a few months, this will be
enough to persuade the Russians, the Cubans and their supporters in Central
America to negotiate a peaceful settlement.

It's a gamble. He made this decision so quickly that he took the Congress and
even some key members of his own Administration and the allies by surprise, so
there has been a lot of opposition on Capitol Hill and anti- Yankee
demonstrations in Mexico and elsewhere in Latin America against this ''gunboat''
diplomacy.

Yet there's something to be said for his strategy, if not for his tactics or
politics. By ordering men and ships into Central America, he has got the
attention of the Russians, Fidel Castro in Cuba and their Latin American
supporters, who are now talking about a peaceful settlement of the disputes
provided all foreign military intervention is withdrawn from Central America;
not a bad idea.  It has not really been reasonable to suppose that the Russians
thought the United States would permit them to establish a network of communist
states and military bases in Latin America any more than they would permit us to
establish a network of military bases and democratic enclaves in Eastern Europe.
Nothing after Napoleon and Hitler has preoccupied Moscow more than the defense
of its borders and a security belt of communist states on its periphery.  The
Russians believe in the safety of geography, and insist on a sphere of influence
to protect them against military invasion or ideological infection.
Accordingly, while they believe in extending their influence wherever they can,
as we believe in exporting our ideology to Eastern Europe, they are too
realistic to risk a major confrontation with the power of the United States
close to our borders and far from theirs. They tried it in the Cuban nuclear
missile crisis and withdrew when President Kennedy faced them down.  There are a
couple of other reasons for hoping that something useful may come out of this
Central American crisis. Ever since the last World War, this country has been so
preoccupied by Korea, Vietnam, Iran, Europe and Japan, all with good reason,
that we have paid insufficient attention to our neighbors, though their economic
and social troubles have sent their peoples streaming over our borders.
Twenty-five years ago, I wrote in this corner that the American people would do
anything for Latin America except to read about it. Now, even in the summer
heat, they are paying attention; not much, but some.  Finally, the President has
not only ordered the Navy and the Army into Central America to defend his
policy, but also has created a commission, headed by Henry Kissinger, to
consider what his policy there should be.  None of this would have happened
without the conflict in Central America. The Chinese write the word ''crisis''
in two characters, one meaning ''danger'' and the other ''opportunity.'' Having
lived longer than all of us, they may have a point.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 7, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS MASS MARKET

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 712 words


Mass market paperbacks are soft-cover books sold at newsstands, variety stores
and supermarkets, as well as in bookstores. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from bookstores and representative wholesalers with
more than 40,000 outlets across the United States.

1

MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $3.95.) The secret behind a
woman business tycoon's rise to power: fiction.

2

DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (NAL, $3.95.) Four novellas with mainly
nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.

3

THE CASE OF LUCY BENDING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $3.95.) An aberrant
8-year-old girl epitomizes the society of Florida's Gold Coast: fiction.

4

LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Pocket, $3.95.) Life in the international glitter set:
fiction.

5

TRULY TASTELESS JOKES TWO, by Blanche Knott. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor.

6

THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER, by Jeffrey Archer. (Pocket, $3.95.) The children of two
bitter business rivals marry: fiction.

7

CINNAMON SKIN, by John D. MacDonald. (Fawcett, $3.50.) Travis McGee investigates
a suspicious accident at sea: fiction.

8

DAKOTA!  by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam, $3.95.) Dangers await Toby Holt in the
Bad Lands, while his wife faces perils at home: historical fiction.


9

SPELLBINDER, by Harold Robbins. (Pocket, $3.95.) From soldier in Vietnam to
television evangelist: fiction.

10

TRULY TASTELESS JOKES, by Blanche Knott. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor.

11

FRIDAY, by Robert A. Heinlein. (Ballantine/Del Rey, $3.95.) The adventures on
Earth of an Artificial Person: science fiction.

12

THE MAN FROM ST. PETERSBURG, by Ken Follett. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) International
intrigue on the eve of World War I: fiction.

13

EDEN BURNING, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $3.95.) A woman returns to face her steamy
past in a Caribbean island: fiction.

14

RETURN OF THE JEDI, by James Kahn. (Ballantine/Del Rey, $2.95.) Novelization of
the latest ''Star Wars'' film.

15

RIDE THE RIVER, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $2.95.) A young woman braves the
dangers of Tennessee's mountain country: fiction.

 TRADE Trade paperbacks are soft-cover books usually sold in bookstores and at
an average price higher than mass market paperbacks. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States .

1

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $7.95.) Three generations of a wealthy
San Francisco family: fiction.

2

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $5.95.)
Black men and women in the South: Pulitzer Prize-winner for fiction.

3

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson. (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.

4

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Inspirational
talks by a California professor.

5

LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $10.95.) How to add
years to your life and life to your years.

6

BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon strips
featuring some very odd characters.

7

GARFIELD EATS HIS HEART OUT, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) The latest
adventures of that gluttonous cat: cartoon humor.

8

THIN THIGHS IN 30 DAYS, by Wendy Stehling. (Bantam, $2.95.) How-to.

9

BELOVED, by Bertrice Small. (Ballantine, $6.95.) A descendant of Cleopatra
relives the romantic destiny of her legendary forebear: fiction.

10

WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?  by Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press,
$7.95.) Guide for job hunters and career changers.

11

THE RAPTURE, by Hal Lindsey. (Bantam, $6.95.) Predictions about an approaching
global event based on an interpretation of the Bible.

12

FIT OR FAT?  by Covert Bailey. (Houghton Mifflin, $4.50.) Exercises for fitness.

13

PLAIN JANE WORKS OUT, by Linda Sunshine. (Bantam, $3.95.) Exercises for women
who know they'll never look like a movie star: humor.


14

PERSONHOOD, by Leo F. Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.) A prescription for becoming
one's individual self.

15

RETURN OF THE JEDI, by James Kahn. (Ballantine/Del Rey, $5.95.) Illustrated
edition of the novelization of the film.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 7, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PLANS UNDER WAY FOR 2 NEW ARMORIES

BYLINE: By BETSY BROWN

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 1, Column 3; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1262 words


THE county will have two modern armories by late 1986 instead of one 65-year-old
fortress-like building in Yonkers, and it will have three times as many National
Guardsmen as it does now, some of them Manhattan residents who will come to
Westchester as ''weekend warriors.''

The decision to build the two armories was made without fanfare by the state
after a disagreement between the city of Yonkers and the county over the
location of an armory. Both sides, apparently, have won.

The county wanted an armory combined with a public-safety training center for
police officers, to be built at Grasslands, the county reservation in Valhalla.
Yonkers wanted either a new armory to replace the old one, or - what it will get
- to add a new building of about the same size and to save the old armory and
use most of it for community recreation.

Lieut. Col. Marvin Shiro, spokesman for the state's division of military and
naval affairs, said that in recent years the Guard had ''more people, more
equipment and more Federal money'' and needed more space and more suitable
space.

Some of the state's armories date to the 1800's. Many look like old fortresses,
massive buildings with turrets and huge doorways big enough for tanks to enter.
Some are obsolete, and some have already been torn down or converted to other
uses. The one in White Plains is being converted to apartments.

The National Guard in the state is at 95 percent of its full strength - 21,700
of a possible 22,400 - which is its highest level since the Vietnam War, after a
low of 14,500 in 1979. Nationally, the Guard has 415,341 members and a limit of
431,762.

The colonel said that part of the reason for the almost-full strength is the
recession. Although National Guard duty is only part time, it offers a small
extra income. Members are sent to various training centers for six months and
then are paid for drilling two days a month and for two weeks active service
each year. The pay ranges from $80 to $200 for a two- day weekend and from $300
to $1,000 for the two-weeks of active duty, depending on rank.

Bids will opened Aug. 17 for construction of the Grasslands armory, expected to
cost about $5.3 million, with the Federal Government contributing $2.2 million,
the state $1.7 million, and the county $1.4 million. The building will be two
floors high with 31,000 square feet of floor space for the armory and 11,500 for
the county's public-safety training center. Construction is to begin in the fall
and be completed in 12 to 18 months.

In Yonkers, plans are being drawn up for a 44,000 square foot, two-floor
building to be built next to the old 42,000 square foot armory on North Broadway
and connected to it by covered walkways over Quincy Street, which will be closed
to city traffic. The project was estimated at $5 million, with the Federal
Government paying $1.7 million, the state, $2.3 million, and Yonkers $1 million.

The county's National Guard contingent now is the 101st Signal Battalion, which
has its headquarters and one company in Yonkers, with 165 men and 40 women; a
second company in Ossining, with 132 men and 11 women, and others in Orangeburg
and Brooklyn.

The two signal companies will probably be moved to Grasslands and so will parts
of the 42d M.P. company, which now has a detachment at Ossining and one at an
armory at Fort Washington Avenue in Manhattan. The colonel said it was not
unusual to station National Guardsmen at a distance from their homes. What units
will use the new Yonkers building has not been announced.

Ironically, Mayor Angelo Martinelli of Yonkers lobbied for continuing to have an
armory in his city because it would be convenient for Yonkers guardsmen, who
now, apparently, will have to serve at Grasslands.

''We want to preserve our armory,'' he said. ''It's a beautiful building.
Besides, who joins the National Guard? If you look, it's more than 50 percent
minority - Hispanics and blacks - and you should have armories where minorities
live, so they don't have a problem of transportation. The county wanted it in a
nicer area, up there in the wilderness.''

Further, the Mayor said city officials wanted the armory kept or replaced as
part of the development of the waterfront and Getty Square, the other two points
of a triangle with the armory property.

''THen we got the idea of saving the old armory instead of just building a big
new one,'' he said.

Richard Kaeyer, a Yonkers and Mount Kisco architect, volunteered to draw up a
''concept,'' and the result is a preliminary plan that would use part of the old
armory for the National Guard and the rest as a ''brotherhood center,'' with a
swimming pool and other sports facilities that would be available to the
Y.M.C.A., Y.W.C.A., the Catholic Youth Organization, the Jewish Community
Center, and other local and civic organizations.

Lieut. Col. Paul Suchanyc, commander of the 101st Signal Battalion, said the
Guard needed more space to house its sophisticated new equipment.

''For years, we used hand-me- downs from the Army,'' he said. ''We had World War
II-vintage equipment. But we're a high-priority unit. If anything happens, we're
going, and we will have to interface with active units.'' He added:

''You need modern equipment - you wouldn't use an old crank telephone with a
touch tone. We did a lot of screaming and hollering, and now the state is
spending more.''

He said the battalion was ''like a small telephone company that can provide
electronic communications, radio, Teletype, switchboard, facsimile - anything a
telephone company can do.'' The duty includes climbing telephone poles and
stringing cables, and the armory has two pitted, ragged poles scarred by the
climbing practice of hundreds of feet, including those of Guardswomen.

He said the unit needed classroom and drill space, storage space, space for
vehicles and parking for Guardsmen's cars. With new drill space, the battalion
will not have to go to Camp Smith in Peekskill, as it does several times a year,
''wasting good practice time on the road,'' the colonel said.

The 101st has not been called out since 1980, when it guarded prisoners at
Greenhaven during a strike of prison guards; and its last Federal duty was in
1970 when President Nixon called on the states to provide guardsmen to deliver
mail during a postal strike. Before that, its last action was in 1961, when the
battalion was shipped to Fort Devens, Mass., and was about to be sent to Berlin,
when ''everything cooled down,'' the colonel said.

The armory, a barn-like building, has not been painted since the Depression,
when the Work Projects Administration did it, and Colonel Suchanyc is not sure
how strong the old floors are; he never brings in as many vehicles as he thinks
he could.

It is already used by community groups, such as the Kiltie Band from Yonkers,
which practices there one night a week; high school basketball teams, and the
Civil Air Patrol. It has been used for roller skating, and is available free to
charitable groups, at a moderate fee to school groups, and for $300 to $350 for
profit-making groups.

To the disappointment of its superintendent, Desi O'Hagan, the old Yonkers
armory, which sits on a hill overlooking a wide stretch of the Hudson River, has
not attracted movie makers. It was considered as a location for ''Raging Bull,''
the life of Jake Lamotta, and also as a representation of a turn-of-the-century
Madison Square Garden, and more recently, as the setting for ''Eagle of
Broadway.'' It was ''always in the running, but never got there,'' Mr. O'Hagan
said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of 101st Signal Battalion members (page 21); photo of Jonnie
Peter, Daniel Smith and Roger Jackson (page 21); photo of National Guard Armory
in Yonkers

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 8, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN IS A FOREIGN INTEREST 'VITAL?'

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1491 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 7


President Reagan has stated over and again that ''defense of the Caribbean and
Central America against Marxist-Leninist takeovers is vital to our national
security.''

Traditionally, to call a place ''vital'' has been a portentous step in
diplomacy. It has often been interpeted as a signal that if push came to shove,
a nation would fight rather than lose.

Is this the interpretation Mr. Reagan seeks?

The President has left the question hanging, perhaps with a purpose, perhaps
not. His aides say he has never specifically discussed with them whether
American troops would be dispatched to prevent guerrilla victories in El
Salvador and Honduras. But a key Administration aide asserted privately that
such action was ''implied'' in a good many documents and conversations and, in
particular, in the public use of the word ''vital.''

At one time or another, American Presidents have declared almost every part of
the world to be ''vital,'' except Africa and the Antarctic. As to whether
Central America is ''vital,'' Reagan Administration officials argue that if
Congress would only provide the necessary aid to the friendly countries of that
region, those countries would be able to take care of themselves and the
question of what was ''vital,'' and whether American combat troops were needed,
would ''never'' arise.

'Never Say Never'

However, when he was asked last month to clarify that point, Mr. Reagan said
that Presidents ''never say never.''

Administration officials later explained that Mr. Reagan meant to modify an
earlier statement in which he asked rhetorically if American soldiers would be
sent into combat and then responded, ''The answer to that is a flat 'no.' '' The
officials said that Mr. Reagan's exchange with himself, coming after his earlier
use of the word ''vital,'' had caused considerable confusion and surprise.

Perhaps the confusion should not have come as a surprise. Those two elements can
often serve a purpose, keeping the opposition off balance, whether the
opposition be another politician, another government, or both. Furthermore,
according to Prof. Ernest May of Harvard University, the process of defining
this country's vital interests has ''largely been ad hoc'' since the end of
World War II, with the results often being confusion or suprise, or both.

Professor May, who has written about the topic, recalled that in the Truman
Administration, National Security Council studies were prepared stating that
South Korea was of no strategic value. ''But when it was attacked in 1950,'' he
pointed out, ''it ceased to be an object looked on for its own sake and came to
embody a principle, the principle that the U.S. had a vital interest in insuring
that aggression did not succeed.''

Acheson Speech Recalled

''It is hard for people in government to sit down and say that a certain country
is or is not vital apart from exact circumstances that lie in the future,'' he
continued. ''Moreover, it is always difficult to take any particular piece of
property and say we couldn't live without it. Its importance usually stems from
its being seen in a particular context as part of a chain of possible events.''

To make matters worse or at least more complicated in the case of South Korea,
Secretary of State Dean Acheson, gave a speech in early 1950 defining American
vital interests in Asia and the Pacific as running from the Aleutian Islands
near Alaska to the Ryukus near Japan, thus excluding Korea and the Asian
mainland. A number of critics argued that this omission encouraged the North
Koreans to believe they could attack without fear of an American response.

It was the kind of omission that later Presidents and Secretaries of State were
not to allow themselves.

From the time of the Korean War, Truman began calling the American stake in
Indochina and Vietnam ''vital.'' Every President from Eisenhower to Nixon was to
repeat that incantation. Eventually, of course, combat troops were introduced in
an attempt to back that up.

Dulles's Domino Theory

In 1955, after the French defeat and the partition of Vietnam and as French
troops were leaving South Vietnam, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Secretary of
State John Foster Dulles engaged in a scuffle over American stakes. The Chiefs
issued a memorandum stating that Indochina was ''devoid of strategic
interests.'' But Mr.  Dulles invoked the ''domino theory,'' to the effect that
if South Vietnam fell to Communism, the rest of Asia would soon follow. His
insistence on these larger consequences prevailed.

Eisenhower and his successors instituted various formal procedures for
determining vital interests, but officials treated them simply as bureaucratic
exercises, and high-level officials never felt bound by them unless they were
uttered publicly by the President.

With regard to Central America and South America, President Kennedy initiated
what were called Country Assistance and Strategy Papers, which in general
assumed the whole area was vital to American security. This was in accordance
with the Monroe Doctrine by which all foreign powers were warned away from the
hemishere.

But by the 1960's, as some State Department officials recall, no one wanted to
cast American interests in terms of the Monroe Doctrine. ''It was honored in
silence,'' said one, ''so as not to offend the Latin Americans'' by seeming to
treat the area as a United States province.

Johnson's Use of the Marines

But the Monroe Doctrine was called into doubt earlier, argues Prof. Robert W.
Tucker of Johns Hopkins University, when ''Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy
made an exception with Cuba - at the height of the cold war with the Soviet
Union.'' His point is that Washington took no action to prevent a pro-Soviet
government coming to power in Cuba and thus compromised the American stake.

It was an exception tempered only in part, according to Professor Tucker, when
President Johnson sent the Marines into the Dominican Republic in 1964 to
forestall a putative Communist takeover. To Professor Tucker, it is
''axiomatic'' that the United States should be prepared to use force in the
Central American and Caribbean area, ''as a great power must'' to defend its
role.

To him and many American foreign policy analysts, the list of vital American
interests would include Central America, Western Europe, the Persian Gulf and
Northeast Asia. It is a tall order, one that, many Pentagon and military
analysts would say, exceeds American military capability.

There is little or no questioning of the ultimate American stake in Central
America in the Administration or Congress. Generally, politicians and analysts
agree that the region is vital in terms of protecting American shipping, in
terms of the problems that would be caused by the spread of Communist-backed
revolutions throughout the area and into Mexico, including the flood of refugees
to this country that might follow, and in terms of Washington's credibility
worldwide.

Trapped Between Choices

Nor is there much doubt that Washington has the military capability to make its
interests stick in the region, at least for a while. But that, of course, is the
matter that Administration officials do not like to talk about in detail. They
find themselves trapped, much as those who held high office before them, between
wanting to send a strong signal to Moscow, Havana and Managua not to press their
support of revolutions and fearing that the message will frighten the American
people more than the potential adversaries.

Moreover, there has always been concern that calling a country ''vital'' would
only encourage leaders of that country to believe they could do whatever they
wanted, or ''get away with murder,'' as an Administration official remarked in
reference to the ''death squads'' that Salvadoran military commanders are said
to sanction.

Finally, the term ''vital'' has also been used to pry additional aid out of
Congress. Like Presidents and soldiers and diplomats, few legislators want to
risk political responsibility for losing something that is ''vital.''

Since April, President Reagan has offered the following reasons that Central
America is vital to American security:

''If we cannot defend ourselves there, we cannot expect to prevail elsewhere.
Our credibility would collapse, our alliances would crumble and the safety of
our homeland would be put in jeopardy.''

''Two-thirds of all our foreign trade and petroleum pass through the Panama
Canal and the Caribbean. In a European crisis, at least half of our supplies for
NATO would go through these areas by sea.''

''The result could be a tidal wave of refugees - and this time they'll be 'feet
people' and not 'boat people' - swarming into our country seeking a safe haven
from Communist repression to our south.''

The ''revolution (in El Salvador is) exported from the Soviet Union and from
Cuba and from others of their allies.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 8, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SERVICE CHAPLAINS PONDER WAR LETTER

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1266 words

DATELINE: SAN ANTONIO, Aug. 2


Lieut. Col. John Mahon puts in full days as a chaplain at Lackland Air Force
Base here, adapting the mass to the needs of browbeaten recruits, comforting
those wracked by homesickness, and otherwise helping young men and women make
the harrowing adjustment to military life.

Now Colonel Mahon, along with hundreds of other chaplains in the armed forces,
faces the additional task of making the Roman Catholic bishops' statement on
nuclear war relevant to the military people to whom they minister.

''People will be asking questions,'' said Colonel Mahon, a Catholic who works
with basic trainees. ''They are having problems of conscience. We should know
what to tell them.''

Some chaplains, including Colonel Mahon, say they agree with the National
Conference of Catholic Bishops, which in the pastoral letter adopted May 3
condemned nuclear war as ''immoral,'' endorsed the concept of an American-Soviet
''freeze'' on nuclear arms, and opposed some elements of current United States
military policy.

Chaplains of All Faiths

Other chaplains are so far noncommittal, awaiting further study of the bishops'
document. But for chaplains of all faiths, among them the 27 ordained men and
women who serve here, the pastoral letter has sharply accented difficult and
challenging questions of the morality of nuclear war.

According to the Army Chief of Chaplains, Maj. Gen. Patrick Hessian, a Catholic
priest, the bishops' letter ''is most helpful as chaplains attempt to educate
and help inform the consciences of commanders.''

General Hessian, who heads a corps of 1,476 chaplains, has briefed the top Army
staff officers on the bishops' document, aided by a letter from Terence Cardinal
Cooke of New York, who is in charge of the Military Ordinariate that supervises
Roman Catholic chaplains. The Cardinal's letter, which was sent to all Catholic
chaplains in the armed services, emphasizes that the bishops' statement supports
Catholics in the military and upholds the right of a nation to legitimate
self-defense, calling for a limited nuclear deterrent.

At the same time, the letter points out that the bishops' statement does
question the ''morality of some strategies of defense, and requires us to
examine our individual consciences and our 'national conscience' concerning some
widely accepted attitudes and policies.''

Questions for Catholics

Among the quandaries raised by the bishops' letter is the proper role for
Catholics in the nuclear arms industry and in the armed forces. Bishop Leroy
Mathiessen of Amarillo, Tex., site of the nation's nuclear weapons assembly
plant, has urged Catholics to quit their jobs in the plant as an act of
obedience to Christian moral principles. Other bishops, expanding on the
document's teaching that a Catholic is morally forbidden to launch a nuclear
attack on a civilian population, asked whether there might not be other limits
to a Catholic's participation in the military.

Military chaplains find themselves in an especially sensitive spot, answerable
to their denominations, their commanding officers, and the military people in
their care. While their churches train them for the clergy, the military gives
them a career, complete with rank and salary.

In recent conversations, chaplains stationed here and elsewhere described
themselves as a conservative lot who have achieved a degree of ecumenical
teamwork rarely seen among their civilian counterparts.

They displayed a general agreement that the pastoral letter had sparked interest
in an issue they had long pondered. They were eager to dispel what they regard
as a prevalent perception of the military as favorable to nuclear conflict and
devoid of moral awareness, though many were reluctant to draw conclusions about
what meaning the letter might have for military personnel and expressed solid
support for the need for a nuclear deterrent.

Chaplain's Role Enhanced

''By calling attention to this extremely important question of conscience, the
bishops have greatly enhanced the chaplain's role,'' said Maj. Gen. John A.
Collins, a Catholic who is Air Force Chief of Chaplains. ''Toward the conclusion
of the pastoral, they specifically addressed men and women in the military.''

Since the Vietnam War, chaplains have encountered more and more young people who
morally object to performing their military duties. ''Chaplains on the scene
help people work through problems of conscience,'' said Col. William D. Franks,
a Methodist chaplain here. ''Sometimes it means getting them out of the
military.'' Col. Thomas N. Christianson, a Moravian chaplain, said some recruits
come to a sudden awakening. ''We've got people at Lackland who fire at a target
that is a silhouette of a human being,'' he said. ''Some come back refusing to
do so again and sit in my office.''

Beyond an initial fear that the bishops' letter was fundamentally an anti-
military document, a fear partially allayed by Cardinal Cooke's letter, concern
about the letter and the moral issues it presents has yet to emerge to any great
extent among military personnel in general. But plans are already under way,
here at Lackland and elsewhere, for using the bishops' letter in study groups
and in counseling individuals as they wrestle with its implications.

Highlighting Moral Issues

Many chaplains consider the letter a valuable resource for carrying out what
they see as a responsibility for highlighting moral issues among officers and
enlistees. Most said they were themselves wrestling with aspects of the 150-page
document.

''Sometimes I feel I'm in over my head,'' said Lieut. Col. George A. Sturch, a
Southern Baptist chaplain at Lackland. ''There's a lot of fear and trembling
that goes with it.'' Colonel Sturch said the implications of nuclear war, as
measured by Biblical injunctions, were ''almost too much to take.''

Though the Navy regards the letter as an internal matter for the Roman Catholic
Church, the Air Force and Army have called on their chaplains of all
denominations to study the pastoral letter and to utilize it in their work.

''These are matters of grave concern,'' said Maj. Gen. Carl R. Smith, commander
at Lackland and former aide to Defense Secretary Caspar W.  Weinberger. ''What
the bishops did was totally legitimate. We are well served by talented groups
such as the bishops. Of course I retain the right to agree or disagree.''

Letter Distributed Widely

In June, Air National Guard chaplains held a daylong seminar on the subject at
Marble Collegiate Church in Manhattan. Some speakers and chaplains sharply
criticized the Reagan Administration's military policy. Col. Carroll Anderson,
chief of the Guard chaplaincy, said a videotape of the day's proceedings would
be made available to Guard units.

In addition to briefing top Army officials, General Hessian has forwarded a
synopsis of that briefing to all Army senior officers.

''Having read and absorbed it,'' the chief chaplain said, ''we need to talk
about it. The issues need to be discussed. We should have no 'no comment.' ''

Meanwhile the Air Force Chief of Chaplains' office has mailed a copy of the
bishops' document, along with Cardinal Cooke's letter, to all 855 Air Force
chaplains.

For military chaplains, in an ecumenical setting, the ramifications of the
document go far beyond the church. ''It gives credibility to some of the little
things I'm doing,'' said Colonel Christianson, the Moravian chaplain here.

''Now it's not just Tom Christianson,'' he said, ''but the leaders of a huge
body of believers are also thinking about these issues.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Col. Thomas Christianson; photo of Lieut. Col. John Mahon

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WEIGH IMPEACHMENT IN AN ILLEGAL WAR

BYLINE: By Don Edwards; Don Edwards, Democrat of California, is chairman of the
House Judiciary Committee's Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 787 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Do we have any means to stop the President from waging an illegal war? On July
28, the House voted 228 to 195 to stop the invasion of Nicaragua by a mercenary
army hired by the Central Intelligence Agency. President Reagan's response was,
in effect, ''Try and stop me.'' Congress has not yet had recourse to what
undoubtedly is its most effective check on the President - the possibility of
impeachment.

Only once in history has Congress sought to hold a President responsible for
conducting an illegal war. On July 30, 1974, as a part of impeachment
proceedings, the House Judiciary Committee considered Article IV, charging
Richard M. Nixon had conducted a secret and illegal war against the neutral
nation of Cambodia.

Article IV lost, 26 to 12, but the vote should not be viewed as an important
precedent that an illegal Presidential war is not impeachable. Why not? Because
one of the chief reasons given for rejecting Article IV was that the War Powers
Act made the question moot. Who knows what the verdict would have been had there
been no War Powers Act or if, as now, the heart of the act, the legislative
veto, had been declared unconstitutional?

More than anything else, our Founding Fathers feared that the Commander in Chief
would abuse his position to make unwanted war. As Thomas Jefferson put it, to
check ''the dog of war'' it was necessary to take the war-making power out of
the hands of a single person, the executive, and give give it Congress, where a
majority vote - arrived at after debate and deliberation - would be required.
This provision was included in Article I of the Constitution - part of a larger
constitutional package of safeguards against executive abuse.

As for impeachment, it had been included in the proposals before the
Constitutional Convention from its beginning. A specific proposal making the
executive removable from office on conviction for ''malpractice or neglect of
duty'' was unanimously adopted even before it was decided that the executive
would be a single person. James Madison argued that provisions for impeachment
were ''indispensible'' to defend the country against ''the incapacity,
negligence or perfidy of the chief magistrate.'' Benjamin Franklin said that the
Con stitution should provide for the ''regular punishment of the executive when
his misconduct should deserve it and for his honorable acquittal when he should
be unjustly accused.'' In Nicaragua, as in Korea, Lebanon, the Bay of Pigs, the
Dominican Republic, Vietnam and Cambodia, we find ourselves involved in a war
solely because of Presidential action.  The Supreme Court has effectively
destroyed the War Powers Act as a Congressional check on illegal Presidential
wars. Pundits are saying that Congress must find a new way to play a part in
war-making decisions - must strengthen its oversight and rely more heavily on
the power of the purse. I agree with these cream-puff remedies but suggest
emphatically that what is more important is that Congress comply with all the
provisions of the safeguarding package that our Founders provided in the
Constitution for keeping a bridle on the chief executive, of which the provision
for impeachment is an essential part. Is it responsible for Congress to use all
of the safeguards except the one the Founders considered most important?  The
truth is that when the decision is whether to wage an undeclared war, Presidents
can do as they please. The Senate and House Intelligence Committees and the
Congressional military committees will be told something about it, usually after
the fact and only when public hysteria has reached a level where criticism will
be stigmatized as un-American. A few members of Congress will complain in
unnoticed speeches. The big newspapers will mention the actions ''with some
concern.'' A majority of the public will support the President, chiefly because
the war has already begun and the ''enemy'' has been identified by the President
as a serious threat to our nation.  So, what are we to do? I suggest a
conservative return to the remedy suggested in the Constitution.  The 1984
general election campaign will provide an opportunity to debate the issue: Each
candidate for Congress should be asked to promise that if the President violates
his oath of office by unilaterally going to war against a country that has not
attacked us, he will be called to account by a bill of impeachment. The election
offers a chance, perhaps our last, to restate, redefine and limit the war-
powers of the President according to the Constitution. If we do not, all future
Presidents will be able to claim immunity for unlawful conduct of foreign
affairs. We have a responsibility to draw this line in the nuclear age.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DRUKEN DRIVING MEETS GRASS-ROOTS RESISTANCE

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1431 words


Rowe Killingsworth, driving his truck through Oklahoma, saw an automobile moving
erratically and suspected that the driver was either drunk or sleepy. He picked
up his citizens' band radio and alerted another truck driver to the danger.

The local police overheard the conversation and stopped the car, and Mr.
Killingsworth drove on into the night, worried that he had got someone into
trouble.

''But then,'' he said, ''I realized: 'Why should I feel bad? I might have saved
somebody's life.' ''

In Shreveport, La., last September, about a year after the incident in Oklahoma,
Mr. Killingsworth helped found Truckers Against Drunk Drivers. It is one of an
increasing number of groups around the country that are forming to fight drunken
driving.

Wider Range of Participants

Relatives of victims in accidents caused by drunken drivers began the movement
several years ago. Now, however, a wider range of people are starting such
groups, and many are doing so without the impetus of a family death or injury.

In 1981 there were 49,301 highway fatalities, about half of which were caused by
drunken drivers. Some of the first groups used that statistic as a successful
recruiting tool, pointing out that more Americans died on the roads that year
than in the Vietnam War. The movement entered a period of rapid growth, often
fueled by reports in the local news media and the efforts of leaders who
traveled across the country to generate greater interest.

Grass-Roots Organizations

Besides the truck drivers, there are Students Against Driving Drunk, Physicians
Against Drunk Driving, Mothers Against Drunk Driving, Dealers Against Drunk
Driving, Citizens For Safe Drivers, Remove Intoxicated Drivers and many other
organizations.

These have monitored court cases, lobbied state legislators, worked with the
police, formed support groups for victims' families, set up free taxi services,
offered coffee along highways and spread information about drunken driving
through schools, car dealers, the news media and many other organizations, such
as Rotary Clubs.

Legislators, lawyers and police officials around the country have said the
grass-roots groups have been effective in changing the laws and how they are
enforced.

In Ada County, Idaho, where seven children under the age of 11 were killed from
December 1981 to December 1982 in accidents involving drunken drivers, the
mothers of the children planted seven white crosses in a flower bed on the lawn
of the state capital in Boise. Along with other members of Remove Intoxicated
Drivers, they were protesting because for three straight years no legislation on
drunken drivers had been passed in the state. In the next session a bill was
passed, making Idaho one of 29 states to adopt stricter laws on drunken drivers
this year.

Influence in the States

''These groups are very good at getting the people back home informed and
interested,'' Martin Smith, a State Senator from Morton, Miss., said in an
interview. ''Politicians respond to the wishes of their constituency, and when
the people back home want to get the drunk drivers off the roads and stop this
senseless killing, the politicians start reacting.''

A recent Mississippi bill eliminated plea-bargaining in drunken driving cases,
established one-tenth of 1 percent as the level of conclusive guilt and set a
45-day minimum license suspension for those whose blood alcohol content exceeded
the limit.

William Smith, a State Senator from Big Flats, N.Y., agrees. In 1973 his 27-
year-old daughter was killed by a drunken driver, but his subsequent efforts to
get legislative action were frustrated for several years.

'Sympathy, But No Bills'

''There was no attention,'' he said in an interview. ''I couldn't even get a
bill out of committee. There was sympathy, but no bills.''

New York raised its drinking age to 19 from 18 last December; New Jersey raised
its to 21 from 19 last January and Connecticut's drinking age is to be raised to
20 from 19 Oct. 1.

Doris Aiken, the president of Remove Intoxicated Drivers, says New York leads
the country in setting up roadblocks, or systematic checkpoints, to detect
drunken drivers. New York City, Westchester County and Albany County are some of
the areas where there are such roadblocks. They have also been used in
Connecticut and New Jersey, but to a lesser degree.

System of Minimum Fines

Over the last three years, Senator Smith estimates, 20 to 30 bills on drunken
driving have been passed in the state. He considers the Stop Driving While
Intoxicated Program the most important result. The program established a system
of minimum fines with the proceeds to be sent to local governments that use the
money to buy breathalyzers, pay the police to work overtime on special patrols
directed against drunken drivers, pay prosecutors to work on extra cases to
lighten the drunken driver caseload and to finance other measures to advance law
enforcement in their area.

''These groups have made my job a lot easier,'' said Allen Bailey, a prosecutor
in Anchorage, where 65 of the 80 cases in the State District Court are related
to drunken driving. He said that pressure from the local chapter of Mothers
Against Drunk Driving had induced judges to hand out stricter sentences in
drunken driver cases.

''They're helping to get information into our hands so that we can make better
decisions,'' said Richard Striegel, a Superior Court judge in Floyd County, Ind.


Death Toll in 1982: 43,990

Leaders of the groups look to the highways rather than the courtrooms or
legislative halls for proof of their effectiveness. Last year 43,990 Americans
died in motor vehicle accidents, 5,311 fewer than in 1981. This was the largest
one-year drop in 29 years, with the exception of 1974, the year of the gasoline
crisis. About half those deaths came in accidents involving drinking, according
to the President's Commission on Drunk Driving.

The commission was formed in April 1982 and has helped the grass-roots groups to
work with local and state governments. Last March, in Washington, the Department
of Health and Human Services organized a Conference for Youth and Drinking and
Driving, drawing high school students from all 50 states. Ten groups of students
presented programs that have been effective in dealing with drunken driving.

Project Graduation, one of the programs of action presented at that conference,
started in 1980 in Maine because so many highway deaths were occurring near the
time of high school graduations. It has since been adopted in several school
systems across the country. The program offers alcohol- free beach parties,
resort outings, boat cruises and other events as alternatives to beer bashes.
There were 12 deaths at graduation time in Maine in 1979, before the program
started. This year there were none.

An Example in Indiana

Todd Johnson is a starting defensive back on the Cedar Grove High School
football team in Indiana. He is also the president of his school's chapter of
Students Against Driving Drunk and sometimes he drinks alcohol.

''At first people think you're being hypocritical,'' he said in an interview,
''and they call you names like Mr. SADD or Captain SADD. They think you're
trying to stop people from drinking, but then they realize that you're trying to
stop drinking and driving.''

SADD was started in September 1982 by Bob Anastas, a Massachusetts high school
teacher, after two of members of the hockey team he coached died in accidents
involving drunken drivers. The group, which now has chapters in 6,000 high
schools, is run by students trying to alert their peers to the dangers of
drunken driving.

Doctor Moved to Action

Physicians Against Drunk Drivers was organized by the Mississippi Medical
Association in May 1982.

''I'm a surgeon,'' said Dr. Dewey H. Lane of Pascagoula, Miss. ''I end up trying
to put together crushed bodies in the emergency room. Over and over. The
unnecessary suffering I saw kept haunting me, so I decided to do something about
it.''

Dr. Lane and his associates waged an intensive lobbying campaign and in the last
session of the State Legislature, stricter laws were passed. Other groups around
the country tell of similar achievements, but the prize can be somewhat bitter.

''I hate it when people congratulate me on the progress we're making because I
had to lose my two boys before I did anything,'' said June Gerrish, the head of
MADD's Anchorage chapter. Her grandsons, Scott, 13, and Wesley, 10, were killed
Dec. 5, 1981, by a drunken driver.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JOHN BRADEMAS PLUNGES IN

BYLINE: By Charlotte Curtis

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 832 words


IN 1981, when former Indiana Representative John Brademas became president of
New York University, an official close to the selection committee observed that
''Brademas seems to know everyone worth knowing in this country.'' And that he
does.

A gregarious, informal man, he arrived quietly. Yet he was more than
perfunctorily wined and dined. And within what seemed like 10 minutes, he was
fully integrated. So much a part of things that even he was a little surprised.

What startled him about this vast, supposedly cold and impenetrable city was the
extent to which he was immediately ''plunged into such a wide variety of outside
activities.'' And not just the ''five nights a week, September into Spring''
that is the social whirl.

He has joined the boards of the New York Stock Exchange, the Rockefeller
Foundation, the RCA Corporation (including NBC), the Loews Corporation (of which
Laurence A. Tisch, chairman of N.Y.U.'s trustees, is chief), and Scholastic, the
publishers.

Governor Cuomo grabbed him to run his committee on fiscal and economic
priorities. On top of that, he chairs the New York Federal Reserve Bank board.
Yet he denies he's overscheduled.

''If like me you have a low threshold of boredom,'' he said happily, ''this is
the perfect job. I feel very much at home here, and in this part of town.''

This part of town is Greenwich Village, once New York's bohemia, now artily
casual and expensive with lots of charm on the side streets. But he lives in a
penthouse duplex on top of one tall building on Washington Square, and his big
modern office surmounts another. Thus the charm and crowds have been replaced by
the wide-angled views associated with money and power.

Nice as these surroundings are, however, he pays them scant attention, for he is
a doer. His abiding concern is the advancement of an economically sound,
artistically cultivated, well educated and secure society, and the difference
between what he did in Congress and his role at N.Y.U. is the chair in which he
sits to achieve the same goals.

It appears, too, that he may stay at N.Y.U., even if the Democrats should regain
Washington and sing him siren songs, though skeptics aren't so sure. On the
matter of education, however, there is no question as to his dedication.

''I'm the son of a Greek immigrant and a schoolteacher,'' he said. ''My family
regarded education as central to life. I have been to two great universities'' -
Harvard and Oxford. ''I've had the opportunity to travel. I was 26 when I first
ran for Congress, and lost in a close race in a Republican district.''

That was 1954. A year later, Adlai E. Stevenson hired the young Rhodes scholar
for his 1956 Presidential campaign, during which he met many of ''the shakers,
movers and intellectuals'' with whom he has forged enduring friendships. In
1958, he was finally elected to what became 22 distinguished and productive
years in Congress. Then he was defeated.Throughout, he has believed children
should have the chance to go to good schools, ''that this from a child of the
Methodist Church is a moral responsibility,'' and that in all things the goal
must be excellence.

''I came home from Harvard once with three A's and a B,'' he said, ''and my
father wanted to know why the B.''

The B didn't prevent him from being graduated magna cum laude, nor keep him out
of Phi Beta Kappa. When he left Oxford, he had his doctorate in social studies.
Even then he was ''a frustrated Hispanist.''

''Tom Enders has the job I always wanted to have,'' he told guests at a recent
farewell dinner that he and his wife, a physician, gave for President Reagan's
new Ambassador to Spain. ''I'm a frustrated Mayan archeologist. I did my honors
thesis on Mexico, my doctorate on the anarchist movement in Spain.''

That he, a critic of the Vietnam War, should entertain for the controversial
deputy chief of mission in Cambodia during the bombings may have struck some as
odd. Not Dr. Brademas. He said he was ''not unaware of Tom's role,'' and that
they were personal friends.

''Spain is the mother country of Hispanic culture,'' he added. ''Several years
ago I went back to my old haunts in Barcelona. Now, with the rector of the
University of Barcelona, we are establishing the first Catalan studies program
in the United States.''

Clearly, Dr. Brademas is a conciliator, and he urges consideration of the role
on others. ''A legislator reconciles, accommodates points of view,'' he said.
''It's the only way to get anything done, to make the system work. Frankly,
there's too much ideology around, and not enough civility.''

He is still too new, he said, to prescribe for New York. Yet he saw what
cooperation among ideological foes did for South Bend after Studebaker
collapsed. Had that unity existed beforehand, things might have been easier.
What was missing from that labor, government and business cohesion, he said,
were the university and college faculties. ''I want to help forge these
connections,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 10, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR AND VIETNAM;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR; The writer of this article spent four years covering
the war in Vietnam between 1962 and 1973.

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1905 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Aug. 4


Some critics of Reagan Administration policy toward El Salvador say they see
very strong analogies between the United States involvement in the guerrilla war
here and the American role in Vietnam.

Some Administration officials, rejecting that comparison, argue that there are
virtually no parallels between the two wars.

A visit to the country and interviews here and in Washington indicate that there
are, without much doubt, some similarities between the two wars and between the
policies pursued and the problems encountered by United States officials in the
two conflicts. There are also, without much doubt, some significant differences.

Perhaps the most striking analogy between the experiences in Vietnam and El
Salvador has little to do with the situations that prevailed on the ground in
both countries. Instead, it involves the world view and political instincts of
policy makers in Washington.

United States officials in the 1960's initially viewed the war in South Vietnam
as a challenge originating in Peking and Moscow, and the more direct support of
the Vietcong from North Vietnam as international aggression.

Soviet Union Blamed

In much the same spirit, early in his Administration President Reagan said:
''The Soviet Union underlies all the unrest that is going on. If they weren't
engaged in this game of dominoes, there wouldn't be any hot spots in the
world.'' His first Secretary of State, Alexander M. Haig Jr., said the problem
in El Salvador ''is external intervention in the internal affairs of a sovereign
nation in this hemisphere - nothing more, nothing less.''

Another apparent similarity grows from the fact that in both situations the
United States began by trying to fight a proxy war and assume an advisory role.

In this connection, both the South Vietnamese Government of 1961 and the
Salvadoran Government of 1980 did not seem to many critics to be the most
suitable instruments or proxies with which to wage a war.

In Vietnam much of the American advice was not taken. When the advice was taken
it usually involved decisions that were the least painful politically and
socially for the South Vietnamese ruling elite.

Loyalty Was First Priority

One example involved military promotion policy. For more than a decade a series
of Governments in Saigon fought a stubborn and successful battle against United
States pressure that selections of commanders be based on military merit.

The successive South Vietnamese Governments could grasp the argument but would
not agree with the priority. To them the first priority always remained the
political loyalty and reliability of division and corps commanders to the
leaders in Saigon.

In the Vietnam War some of the leading thinkers on counterinsurgency used to say
the early stages of a guerrilla war tend to skew priorities. The leader of the
embattled nation knows that the fledgling guerrilla army cannot storm the
presidential palace and depose him. But his own army clearly can. The more
competent a commander is militarily, the less attractive he may seem to the
political leader.

The final collapse of South Vietnam in 1975 began when an incompetent, but
politically loyal, division commander panicked and began a headlong retreat from
the Central Highlands to the coast.

''You could argue,'' said an official who served in Vietnam, ''that, in the end,
promotion policy lost the war.''

Promotion by Politics

Until recently, at least, it seemed to some United States officials involved in
El Salvador's guerrilla war that a clear parallel existed here.

El Salvador's small army had fewer than 500 commissioned officers until
recently. It also had, a United States expert said, ''an automatic promotion
policy.''

There was also a tendency much like that in Vietnam to give key command jobs to
officers on the basis of political reliability rather than merit, according to
United States analysts.

There have recently been some signals in El Salvador that a more wholesome
policy on military promotions may be evolving. But even optimists tend to agree
that it is too soon to declare that a fundamental change for the better is under
way.

A variety of analysts agree that while Gen. Eugenio Vides Casanova, who became
the Defense Minister this spring, has been more receptive than his predecessor
to advice on tactics and humane treatment of civilians by the army, little
change has been made among unit commanders.

Resisting U.S. Advice

Until recently, another similarity seemed to involve other forms of military and
political advice.

The South Vietnamese Army was in many ways a very competent military
organization. But much of the time it resisted adopting the tactics and
aggressive spirit that United States advisers pleaded for. A United States
officer who served in Vietnam and El Salvador recalled what he bitterly called
Vietnamese ''search and evade'' missions, which substituted for search-
and-destroy operations.

As late as this spring, the situation in El Salvador seemed to be similar.
United States advisers told visitors that many Salvadorans were fighting a ''9
to 5, five day a week war,'' and giving up the night hours to the guerrillas.

But since early summer there seems to have been a change, close to dramatic, in
the Salvadoran willingness to accept military tactical advice.

Elections Considered Important

Another striking parallel between Vietnam-era officials in Washington and Reagan
Administration officials involves a strong and persistent belief that the
holding of elections in the proxy nation, and the creation of what they regard
as a legitimate government, will cripple the rebel movement.  Some experts in
counterinsurgency are dubious about the validity of this premise. In some third
world nations, various measures such as stamping of identity cards at polling
places tend to coerce people to vote. But elections do not seem to coerce
guerrillas. After the March 1982 elections in El Salvador, the leftist
guerrillas regrouped and by October were stronger than ever.

Many United States officials again seem to believe that presidential elections
in El Salvador, most likely to occur early next year, will significantly affect
the ability and persistence of the leftist coalition.

There seems to be another analogy in the reluctance of United States officials,
particularly those far away in Washington, to apply strong pressure on the host
countries when they ignore United States advice or pursue what the Washington
officials consider to be self-destructive policies.

Withdrawal Not an Option

United States officials sometimes did apply heavy pressure in Vietnam but would
not press their point of view to a serious confrontation. ''Suppose they ask us
to leave?'' officials sometimes asked.

The ultimate sanction of United States withdrawal was regarded as unthinkable
and not a serious option. Much the same situation seems to prevail in El
Salvador, according to officials here and in Washington.

While there seems to be more willingness here recently to accept purely military
advice, there has been less inclination by the Salvadoran authorities to adopt
social policies repugnant to the economic oligarchy, the upper middle class and
the army. And United States pressure to do so has been timid.

Despite promises to see justice done in the cases of eight Americans slain here,
almost certainly by right-wing, Government-controlled gunmen, El Salvador has
not brought anyone to trial. It is not thought likely that if trials are finally
held officers who ordered the killings will be tried.

Human Rights an Issue

More important to the course of the war is the continuing abuse of human rights
involving Salvadoran civilians.

Salvadoran church officials believe that at least 40,000 civilians have been
killed since late 1979 and that the great majority were the victims of right-
wing ''death squads.''

Although officials in Washington put the figure much lower, the former United
States Ambassador here, Deane R. Hinton, put the death total at 30,000 in a
speech in San Salvador this year.

In that speech Mr. Hinton warned that the Government's behavior was hurting the
war effort. He said the ''gorillas'' of the right-wing ''Mafia'' were destroying
El Salvador as surely as the left-wing guerrillas in the mountains.

Although Mr. Hinton's speech had been cleared by officials in the State
Department, it was repudiated by White House officials as too strong and
unsuitable in its nearly anguished call for an end to official thuggery.

Distance Is Emphasized

Moreover, a variety of experts believe that the statutory requirement that
President Reagan certify every 180 days that El Salvador is making progress in
improving human rights, disciplining its security forces and in carrying out
land redistribution and other social changes has tended to give ''Salvador the
leverage, not us.''

As certification has routinely followed cerification, it seems to have become
apparent to Salvadoran officials that only cosmetic measures are required on
their part. Much the same situation applied in Vietnam, although the South
Vietnamese authorities and security forces never showed the same callousness
that prevails here.

Reagan Administration officials who argue that there is almost no analogy
between the two crises tend to emphasize heavily an argument that Vietnam was
very distant and El Salvador is very close to the United States and that El
Salvador more clearly represents a vital United States interest.

Among the differences between the two conflicts, the intensity of combat stands
out. The troops of North Vietnam and of main force Vietcong units were among the
best assault infantrymen in the world. They had an awesome willingness to climb
over barbed wire under the muzzles of Government machine guns. The Salvadoran
rebels are apparently not in the same league.

Fighting Is Less Intense

Moreover, the disparity in firepower, whether used discriminately or
indiscriminately, in the two wars is hard to exaggerate. It may be that more
steel and powder was expended in a day or two in Vietnam than in the entire
Salvadoran conflict. This, some American experts think, may be to the good.

But it also seems to be one expression of a vast difference in mood and
confidence on the part of policy makers in Washington. President Kennedy met
little domestic opposition when he undertook a program of ''combat support'' in
South Vietnam that soon had 16,000 advisers actually living and fighting with
Vietnamese forces.

And the Vietnam War began on a euphoric, ''we don't lose'' mood. That kind of
optimism seems less evident today. If policy makers in Washington feel certain
that they can win in El Salvador, few of them explicitly say so.

President Johnson began direct United States involvement in Vietnam with a
98-to-2 vote of confidence from the Senate.

President Reagan has had no such blank check, but he has not seemed to want a
blank check. The Administration's moves here have been on a much smaller scale
than its vigorous policy statements might indicate.

Although Vietnam-era officials have often been accused of waging the Vietnam War
halfheartedly and too cautiously, they seem in retrospect much more aggressive
in their policies than carefully proscribed efforts in El Salvador, where there
is no combat support, no field advisers and little military aid.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 10, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cuban Will Be Sworn To Kissinger Panel

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 131 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 9


The White House said today that a Cuban-born economics professor from Yale
University, Carlos Diaz-Alejandro, would be sworn in as a member of the Reagan
Administration commission on Central America despite objections by conservative
groups.

The chief White House spokesman, Larry Speakes, said the panel, headed by former
Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, would be sworn in Wednesday, pending
completion of security and conflict-of-interest clearances.

SAN ANTONIO, Aug. 9 (AP) - President Reagan's policy in Central America is
''wrong and potentially dangerous,'' according to Mayor Henry Cisneros of San
Antonio, a member of the Latin commission. If Mr. Reagan's policies are
followed, Mr. Cisneros said, the situation there could become a conflict worse
than Vietnam.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 10, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Books: A Grandmother

BYLINE: By Richard F. Shepard

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 294 words


BESSIE. By Lawrence Bush. 426 pages. Seaview/Putnam. $17.95.

IN ''Bessie,'' Lawrence Bush has written a novel about a Jewish grandmother
quite different from those we usually get to read about. Bessie, inspired by his
own grandmother, was a leftist, a one-time fervent Communist albeit with an
independent mind that often kept her from toeing the party line.

Bessie spent her youth in her native Russia, where her brothers recruited her to
the cause which eventually brought her to Siberian imprisonment. When she
escaped, she came to New York and paced the immigrant treadmill, working in a
factory, attending night school, meeting a young man. When the Bolshevik
Revolution erupted, she and her husband sailed to Russia to join it. Her husband
died and she once again fled, this time before the onslaught by the Whites, and
returned to New York.

This is an episodic story, taking Bessie through Bund rallies at Madison Square
Garden, through strikes, through Vietnam demonstrations and into an old age in
the Bronx, where her politics have mellowed into an acceptance of Israel and a
sense of identification with the Jewish people. It is an interesting story
because it is mirrored in the lives of many who went the same route and, without
shifting their moral positions on radical issues of the day, often found that
the world had changed. Bessie was a realist, but this in no way conflicted with
her idealism.

Mr. Bush has written ''Bessie'' with love and grace. He has placed his
protagonist at all the scenes that counted in the lives of such activists and
yet he has fashioned a life of small incident for her as well. He has kept
Bessie very much an individual and a warm human being. It is a part of the
American story that is rarely recounted.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 11, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MUSIC CONFEREES TRACE THE SOUNDS OF CULTURES

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1168 words


There was talk of moon-shaped lutes and sacred serpents, of shamans and
missionaries, of panpipes, Shinto temples and Polynesian dance. Terms like
''acculturation'' and ''epistemology'' were bandied about, and one could hear
sotto-voce discussions of tenure and grant applications as well as music from
Japan, Puerto Rico and the Bolivian Andes.

It was the 27th conference of the International Council for Traditional Music,
which is taking place this week at Columbia University's School of International
and Public Affairs and will continue through Monday. The council, according to
its president, Erich Stockmann of East Germany, is an organization dedicated to
''the study, practice, documentation and dissemination of traditional music.''
The opening sessions on Tuesday were attended by more than 200 professors and
students of ethnomusicology from five continents. The world is their jukebox.

''Music is not a universal language,'' Dr. Stockmann said. ''It is one way that
a group of people finds and expresses its own cultural identity.''

Among academic disciplines, ethnomusicology - loosely defined as the study of
music in its social and cultural context - is young but growing. According to
Dieter Christensen, the council's secretary-general and the director of
Columbia's department of ethnomusicology, the term itself was coined in 1950 by
a Dutch scholar, Jaap Kunst.

'Creators of Tradition'

Ethnomusicologists use techniques from both anthropology and musicology. In a
typical graduate program, like that at Columbia, a doctoral dissertation is
usually the report of field research on music in a community. Many include
recordings and film or video documentation. ''It's the most fundamental area of
music study,'' said Bruno Nettl, a professor at the University of Illinois.

''Musicology has trouble dealing with change,'' said Marjorie Crouch, who is
working toward her master's degree at the University of Maryland. ''But
ethnomusicology accepts change. And instead of studying documents trying to
reconstruct styles, you can work with the creators and carriers of a
tradition.''

The papers scheduled in the weeklong conference include ''Hopi Melodic
Concepts,'' ''Applications of Computers in Dance Research: European Chain
Dances,'' ''Choreographic and Kinesthetic Elements in the Performance of the
Seven-String Zither'' and ''Fiddler Off the Roof: The Neo-Klezmer Movement in
America.'' The conference has also planned film and video showings, including
''Anastenaria: A Firewalking Ritual in Northern Greece,'' and performance
workshops in Ewe drumming from Ghana, American jazz and Khyal Hindustani vocal
music from India.

Blood and Music

In one afternoon program, Maria Ester Grebe of Chile showed slides from the
Andes of a rooster being sacrificed to the spirit of music. In the evening,
Grupo Aymara of Bolivia performed music from the Andean high plains. Elsewhere,
Barry Brook, president of UNESCO's International Music Council, said that
research for the group's 10-volume ''Music in the Life of Man: A World History''
scheduled for 1991, had shown a correlation between rare blood groups and
certain musical characteristics. Tr,an Van Khe of Vietnam told stories of
recording engineers cutting ''mistakes'' out of traditional performances.

And Steven Feld talked about research he had done on the Kaluli tribe in the
rain forests of Papua New Guinea. ''The music exhibits a central structural
fact: a marked lack of preference for unison,'' he said. ''And they know what
unison is - there's a missionary who's tried to get them to sing that way for 10
years.''

Before there were ethnomusicologists, there were collectors and observers of
oral traditions. In England, Cecil Sharp sparked a folk-song revival early in
this century. In Hungary, Bela Bartok's extensive folk- song studies had a
strong influence on his own music. And in the 19th century, colonists in Africa
and elsewhere wrote descriptions of native music - although these were tinged
with the cultural biases that later ethnomusicologists would do their best to
avoid.

Scholarly Methods Developed

Eventually, ethnomusicology made its way into academe as anthropologists
recognized music's important place in other cultures (and occasionally in their
own) and as composers from Debussy to Bartok to Gershwin to Colin McPhee (who
did pioneering studies in the 1930's in Bali and Java) became fascinated by
music outside the Western classical tradition.

Ethnomusicology began to develop its own scholarly methods in the 1960's, as
many groups in the United States sought to reassert ethnic identities and as pop
and jazz musicians began to experiment with sounds and structures from India and
Africa. Dr. Stockmann said there is currently a similar ''Ethno Boom'' in
Europe.

The council was founded as the International Folk Music Council in 1947 by Maud
Karpeles, who had worked with Cecil Sharp, Dr. Christensen said. At first, its
main concern was collecting and preserving what were thought to be traditional
British folk songs and dances, but its scope expanded, first to North America
(where variants of British songs could be found) and later to other traditions
in Europe and around the world.

It now includes scholars from 69 countries and has formal national chapters in
50 countries, and is associated with UNESCO's International Music Council, an
umbrella organization. (The other major professional group in the United States
is the Society for Ethnomusicology, which will hold its annual meeting later
this year in Tallahassee, Fla.)

Urban Added to Primitive

At its 1981 conference, in Seoul, South Korea, the organization decided to
become the International Council for Traditional Music, because the term ''folk
music'' was inappropriate for such oral traditions as the classical music of
India.

One of the themes of the council's conference is ''Music in an Urban
Environment.'' ''For the longest time, ethnomusicology has been involved with
so-called primitive cultures,'' said Adelaida Reyes-Schramm, a professor at
Columbia and the chairman of the conference's program committee. ''Only very
lately has there even been a term, 'urban ethnomusicology,' which is tautologous
- if ethnomusicology is supposed to study music everywhere, why do you need the
word 'urban'? But by now, it's no longer acceptable or fashionable to proclaim
the division in such absolute terms.''

It was certainly possible to see music in an urban environment as Pepe Castillo
and part of his Puerto Rican folklore troupe sang and danced in a faculty
lounge, or at noon as the Waka-Bayashi troupe performed Shinto festival music in
a courtyard of the School of International and Public Affairs, next to an
angular modern sculpture and in front of the law library as a dozen
ethnomusicologists pointed tape recorders toward them. One conference
participant listened intently to the troupe's dramatic flute and drum music, and
sighed, ''It's a nice change from people talking.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gruop Aymara

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR COMBAT: U.S. IS NOW MORE HOPEFUL;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2093 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR


In purely military terms, the fortunes of the Salvadoran Government in its war
with leftist guerrillas seem to have improved in recent weeks, according to a
variety of foreign experts.  This improvement may be especially significant
because, unlike several previous upswings in the war, it seems to stem less from
mistakes by the rebels and more from improved performance by the Salvadoran Army
and Government.

But some United States military advisers and civilian analysts believe it is too
early to say whether the improvements are permanent or are enough to insure that
the insurgency can be ended successfully.

''Two years from now there will still be guerrillas in Morazan,'' a United
States military adviser said, referring to a northeastern province that is a
sparsely populated and rugged guerrilla stronghold. But the adviser expressed a
belief, now widespread in the United States Military Group stationed here, that
''you don't win guerrilla wars by killing guerrillas.'' It is the acceptance of
that proposition by some senior and well-placed officers of the Salvadoran Army
that, as much as anything else, accounts for a relatively optimistic mood in the
United States Military Group and the American Embassy.

This spring the Salvadoran Government formally adopted a written ''National
Campaign Plan,'' which emphasizes population control rather than an attempt to
destroy guerrilla units in a war of attrition. The plan, which for practical
purposes was written by United States experts here and in Panama, also stresses
the need to achieve durable physical security in one area at a time and to
follow up with a pacification program that stresses economic and social
development.

''Some of the officer corps is still looking for and longing for a quick
knockout blow,'' an American said. ''And for people in this business that's
pretty natural. But so far the army is sticking to the national plan.''

If most people familiar with El Salvador and its problems tend to agree that
trends favorable to the Government are evident, there are also factors that may
require that optimism be carefully qualified.

For one thing, the guerrilla army, which is a coalition of five different
Marxist-oriented armed groups, has not been seriously damaged in battle and
shows no sign yet of demoralization, according to United States and Salvadoran
experts.

''We are not knocking them down and stacking them up,'' said an American, who
added, however, that the national plan's emphasis on control of and security for
the population had de-emphasized the need to kill insurgents.

For another thing, at least twice before in the war, which began in early 1980,
the guerrillas had encountered periods of setback. But in each case, they
rallied and came back stronger than ever.

Human Rights Violations

Still another reason for worry among officials here is that the Government and
the army have still not managed to end or to firmly control a pattern of
violations of human rights on the part of the paramilitary security forces that
include the national guard, the treasury police, the national police and gangs
of right-wing thugs.

The killing by regular army soldiers this spring of some Indians in Sonsonate
Province whose offense consisted of refusing to permit a rich landowner to build
a road across their property showed that some army commanders are also guilty of
such crimes.

Pessimism may also be justified in that the officer corps has so far remained
reluctant to change itself institutionally. In the long run, some foreigners
believe, such housecleaning may be indispensable if the country is to be
pacified.

Most United States advisers, emotionally and intellectually scarred by their
Vietnam experience, dislike using the word optimism. But a mood of optimism has
replaced an equally palpable mood of pessimism that prevailed here earlier in
the year.

From '9 to 5' to Full Time

Earlier, disgrunted United States officials complained that the the army and its
officers lacked the soldierly qualities needed to win. The army was described as
a ''9 to 5, five day a week outfit.''

Not all faults have been erased, but United States advisers now mostly call it a
''24 hour, seven day a week army.''

While this is apparently not precisely true, even more cynical foreign residents
see changes for the better.

''Seventy percent of the army has been in the field almost continuously since
June 11, when the National Campaign Plan operation began,'' a United States
adviser said. This does not mean that the remaining 30 percent of the
22,400-member regular army is idle. Some soldiers are required to man static
defensive positions guarding bridges, power stations, dams and other vital
national installations. And at any given time some soldiers are undergoing
training.

But one thing that foreign analysts find encouraging is that fewer men are tied
up now in purely static positions.

Accepting U.S. Advice

While some Salvadoran officers seem to remain recalcitrant about accepting
United States advice, perhaps the most encouraging trend of all is the increased
willingness of officers in key commands and pivotal positions to accept purely
military tactical and strategic advice and to prosecute the war in a more
aggressive manner.

United States officials said that in the past the army seldom operated at night,
or in small units, and did far too little patrolling and laying of ambushes.
Instead, it spent much of its energy in large sweeps involving more than one
battalion, followed by withdrawal from the countryside to the barracks. ''That
was like trying to shovel water,'' an American said.

Since June, advisers said, there has been much more willingness on the part of
some commanders to use the methods and tactics Americans have long advocated,
including prolonged field operations, patrolling and night operations.

Such advisers are also heartened because the once tiny officer corps trained at
the Salvadoran military academy has been expanded by several hundred junior
officers who have been trained by United States instructors. These junior
officers are considered able to carry out the new tactics.

'Friendly Firefights'

''To a civilian it may sound strange,'' a United States adviser said, ''but one
encouraging sign is that second lieutenants are starting to die out there. That
means they are making mistakes and their own mistakes are killing them, but they
are leading the men and being aggressive.

''Another indication of change is that you are starting to have 'friendly
firefights,' or cases in which two army units wind up exchanging shots. That
doesn't happen unless units are working at night and moving around.''

Apparently, not all of the Salvadoran senior officers are willing, or competent
enough, to carry out tactics suggested by the United States. For now, however,
this may not be especially critical because the basic principle of the National
Campaign Plan is to concentrate the main effort on no more than two key
provinces. In fact, most effort is being concentrated on a single province, San
Vicente, although a coordinated effort is going on in the neighboring province
of Usulutan.

More than 4,000 of the army's better trained soldiers were sent in to San
Vicente in early June. About 1,200 soldiers had already been stationed in the
province, one of 14 provinces in El Salvador.

Sweeps Against Guerrillas

While other army units undertook shorter offensive operations against guerrilla
strongholds in other areas nearer the border with Honduras, the forces assigned
to the National Campaign Plan in San Vicente began a series of repeated sweeps
to drive away guerrilla bands that had controlled much of San Vicente.

Unlike past operations, the soldiers have for the most part stayed in the field
rather than return to bases. Meanwhile, a pacification program committee
consisting of representatives of six Government ministries has tried to begin a
program of economic and social work in the province, which had been badly
disrupted by the war.

For example, the Government says it has reopened 38 of 123 schools that had been
closed. So far it has opened medical clinics in 12 of the 13 largest towns in
the province, has begun to rebuild roads and has taken tentative steps to
restore electrical power and water services, which had been destroyed in most
towns.

''It is going well,'' a United States adviser said, ''better than hoped for. In
40 days the Salvadorans cleared and secured more territory than they had in the
whole war up to then.''

Mutiny by Provincial Commander

The key, United States officials say, is whether the Salvadorans will have the
patience and willingness to remain in the field and in the priority areas of San
Vicente and Usulutan until fundamental security has been consolidated and
paramilitary civil defense units have been trained and are functioning
effectively.

After a mutiny by a provincial commander set off an internal power struggle in
the army this year, Gen. Eugenio Vides Casanova replaced Gen. Jose Guillermo
Garcia as Minister of Defense. General Vides Casanova placed Col. Rinaldo
Golcher, who is regarded by Americans as one of the more able Salvadoran
officers, in command of the operation in San Vicente and Usulutan.  Officers
such as General Vides Casanova and Colonel Golcher now tend to at least say most
of the right things, almost as if they were reading from a United States Army
manual on low-intensity conflict.

While it therefore seems that important elements of the army are willing to
embrace a good deal of United States advice, it remains uncertain that the army
will be able to carry out those policies effectively.

Technical Problems

A few problems are mechanical and technical. The army's radios have insufficent
range, are not secure from eavesdropping and often do not work, advisers said.

There are also command and control problems. The chain of command from army
headquarters to troop commanders works only fitfully, leaving commanders largely
on their own. The field commanders make few reports to headquarters, according
to analysts.

In numbers the Salvadoran Army is only a little larger than an American
division, although it is organizationally more complex. But the headquarters has
only three staff officers in its operations section. A single United States
infantry division would have 16 to 17 staff officers and many competent
noncommissioned officers in the operations section.

One problem facing the Government forces and the United States advisers is that
the guerrilla forces, usually estimated to total 5,000 to 6,000 armed men, are
regarded as relatively well led and well motivated. Some Americans think that in
motivation and skill the guerrillas are better than the Government troops on a
man-for-man basis. Others disagree.

''In Vietnam were motivating the educated,'' an American said, alluding to the
relative military sophistication of South Vietnamese soldiers. ''Here we are
educating the motivated.''

Rebels Often Fight Hard

Most analysts are willing to concede that the guerrillas often fight hard.
Government helicopters have been coming home with as many as 30 bullet holes in
them, an analyst said. And A-37 fighter bombers are now no longer flown by a
single pilot but by two-man crews because of the danger that a pilot will be
wounded or killed and a plane lost.

Until recently contact between the Government troops operating in San Vicente
and Usulutan was quite light. In part this may have been because the Government
is not quick to exploit tactical intelligence. But most experts believe that it
was more because the guerrillas simply sidestepped the well- advertised
Government operation.

Late last month some sizable rebel units returned to San Vicente and fought a
stubborn battle with the army.

The Government says it has killed about 250 guerrillas in the province since
June, but many foreigners are skeptical of the figure.

'Avoid the Body-Count Syndrome'

One United States adviser has a different repugnance for such statistics.

''I am determined to try to avoid the body-count syndrome we got into in
Vietnam,'' he said. ''In the first place it is pointless, and in the second
place you can't have any faith in the numbers.''

He then alluded to still another reason, growing out of the Government's already
stained record of brutality toward civilians.

''If you give them the idea you want bodies to count, you'll get bodies,'' the
American said with a grim smile.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Salvadoran soldier (Page A4)

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

The Worm and the Apple;
Backpedaling on Peddling

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 349 words


In May, we awarded our very first apple to Mayor Koch for his ''responsive and
reasonable action to regulate street vendors.'' In the process, we quoted a city
official who warned that ''peddling is the Vietnam of municipal issues.'' Now
the allusion seems painfully apt. By plunging ahead with the best of intentions,
Mr. Koch has made the situation worse.

To many people, food peddlers are a nuisance: they block sidewalks, cheapen the
atmosphere of prime shopping avenues and siphon off restaurant business to the
underground economy. But the peddlers also have their constituency. Quick, cheap
lunches are increasingly scarce in midtown, and hard-working peddlers embody
romantic notions of the American dream.

After exploring the issue last spring, the Mayor and City Council agreed that
the number of food peddlers on the streets should be limited to 5,500, 1,500
fewer than the number then licensed.  To achieve that goal, the Mayor signed a
bill last May to limit licenses issued. It also set new standards for licensed
peddlers and barred them from certain streets.The new law promptly backfired. It
deferred the suspension of new licensing until July 31. So what happened? Almost
immediately, 4,000 new peddlers applied for licenses and the city, wary of legal
challenges, felt obliged to grant them. The total now is 11,000 - double the
optimum number.

Stanley Schlein, who recently left his job as peddler adviser to the Mayor but
continues in a consulting role, offers lame explanations: The city felt it had
to permit a grace period for new peddlers to sign up. They argued that other
family members should be licensed so they could take over the cart should the
breadwinner-peddler get sick. In any case, he adds, all 11,000 licenses are up
for review in February, when enforcement of new standards should result in a
''significant drop.''

It will take a whole lot of standards enforcement to bring the 11,000 peddlers
down to 5,500, or even back to the 7,000 on the street before the Mayor decided
to intervene. We take back the apple, at least until February.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AFGHANISTAN'S PARALLEL TO CENTRAL AMERICA

BYLINE: By J.S. Mehta; J. S. Mehta, who was India's Foreign Secretary from 1976
to 1979, is professor for world peace at the University of Texas, in Austin.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 702 words


No analogies are exact but the Soviet Union's problems in Afghanistan may
provide a more instructive parallel than Vietnam to United States policy in
Central America.

The Afghan revolution of April 1978 succeeded because the Marxist-inclined
factions were able to locally exploit increasing disaffection with social and
economic conditions. The Kremlin did not trigger the revolution but of course
welcomed the gratuitous extension of ''socialism.'' Yet before long, the
ideological militancy of Hafizullah Amin, Prime Minister and later President,
led to the disintegration of the revolutionary coalition, as both the
nationalists and the conservative tribes and mullahs who originally supported it
became alienated from the new Government. When widespread insurgency showed that
the country was turning hostile to the Soviet Union, the Russians tried to
eliminate Mr. Amin.  The attempt misfired, however, and then, in nervous
impetuosity, the Kremlin launched the ill-fated military intervention. Today,
even though the Government installed by the Russians has retracted many
socialist measures, it has not gained domestic legitimacy. The presence of
''foreign infidels'' has turned the insurgency into a holy crusade. Thus, what
was a local irritant has become a running sore and an international
embarrassment.The Soviet Union will not be defeated by the Afghan rebels, but
the intervention has been a strategic and political disaster. It led to the
shelving of the second strategic arms limitations accord, creation of the United
States Rapid Deployment Force and an increased American presence in the Indian
Ocean. It also constituted a near-fatal blow to detente.  Moreover, it shattered
the claims of Communism as a principal supporter of peace, anti-imperialism and
nonalignment. It revived the arms race in the Subcontinent and invited
overwhelming condemnation from the Islamic community and the United Nations.
Afghanistan has become a quagmire for the Russians, who now use Western alarm at
the intervention and covert Central Intelligence Agency assistance to the rebels
as justification for their continued presence.  All this has lessons for the
United States. In El Salvador, too, the insurgency won't go away. Honduras is
being militarily bolstered as Pakistan was after the Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan. The contras - the Nicaraguan counter-revolutionaries - are being
trained and armed as the Afghan rebels and refugees were. Cuban support to the
Sandinista Government and Salvadoran guerrillas is as marginal as the outside
backing for the Afghan rebels. A naval quarantine will not frighten the
Sandinistas into abdication but would probably strengthen their resolve and
internationalize the conflict.

Of course, the parallel problems of the two may prove diplomatically convenient.
In the United Nations Security Council, the Soviet Union will undoubtedly accuse
the United States of interference against sovereign Nicaragua, just as the
United States condemned the Kremlin's actions in Afghanistan. And the United
States will probably draw on the same defense that the Soviet Union used.
Privately, both may be thankful for the other's veto - and will persist with old
policies, ignoring international opinion.

In a better world, both superpowers could profit from studying the other's
experience. They might find themselves in agreement that defiant nationalism is
stronger than military power used to coerce small nations. They might even
acknowledge to each other that all problems are not wholly or largely due to the
other's conspiratorial malevolence. They could both disengage with dignity by
letting regional powers who have vital interests in peace and stability in their
areas ''circle the wagons'' against all political and military interference.
Finally, the superpowers could elevate their rivalry to another plain, competing
to prove which ideology - democracy or Communism - has the maturity and
self-confidence to take the side of self-determination, justice and
international diversity.

In both Afghanistan and Central America, the superpowers have fueled, not
smothered, next-door nationalism. They would risk much less if they learned to
live with it.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
State Dept. Takes Over 3 Vacant Embassies

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 108 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 11


The State Department has taken over the vacant embassies of Iran, Cambodia and
Vietnam and will rent them out after making renovations, officials said today.

The three embassies, whose owners no longer have diplomatic relations with the
United States, need to be refurbished ''before they disintegrate before our
eyes,'' said Harvey Buffalo, deputy director of the State Department's office of
foreign missions.

Instead of selling the buildings, as it could do under United States law, Mr.
Buffalo said, the State Department has decided to hold them ''until such time as
relations are re-established and then they would be reverted back.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

LINCOLN CENTER PRESENTS DECADE OF FESTIVAL FILMS

BYLINE: By NAN ROBERTSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1504 words


It's the movie fan's movie festival.

''Everybody's favorite film is here,'' said Joanne Koch, executive director of
the Film Society of Lincoln Center. ''Every film had its American premiere
here.''

It is the first retrospective of the 20- year-old New York Film Festival,
embracing the first 10 years. Beginning tonight, it will run through Sunday,
Aug. 28, at the 1,096-seat Alice Tully Hall. Fifty-two films will be shown,
among them famous, dazzling masterpieces and hidden nuggets that gleam in the
dark. They feature the work of some of the ''most exciting, imaginative and
innovative directors of the decade from 1963 to 1972,'' Mrs. Koch said.

The New York Film Festival Retrospective represents about one-fifth of the total
number of films shown during those 10 years, with choices made by a committee of
critics and Film Society officials.

The honor roll of directors' names includes Altman, Bergman, Bertolucci,
Bogdanovich, Bresson and Bunuel; Fassbinder, Forman, Godard, Herzog, Kurosawa
and Lelouch; Malle, Olmi, Ophuls, Pasolini, Penn, Polanski and Pontecorvo;
Satyajit Ray, Resnais, Rohmer and Rossellini; Teshigahara, Truffaut, Varda,
Visconti and Widerberg.

Timeless Metaphor

Tonight is Jean-Luc Godard's ''Weekend,'' a raw, angry denunciation of the
cynicism, callousness and materialism of French society in 1967. Godard's
traffic-choked landscape is littered with blazing, bloody auto wrecks - from one
such gruesome pileup a woman's voice rises, shrieking, ''My purse! My Herm es
purse!''

In total contrast, is Hiroshi Teshigahara's ''Woman in the Dunes,'' a haunting,
poetic and timeless metaphor made in Japan in 1964. A young widow confined to a
deep pit that is forever threatened by engulfing sand gives shelter to a
stranger from the city; he finds both entrapment and escape there into his
ultimate destiny.

There will be two screenings every evening and two matinees Saturdays and
Sundays. Ticket are $4.50 a show. The Alice Tully Hall box-office number is
362-1911.

Tomorrow is Akira Kurosawa's 1965 film, ''Red Beard,'' an epic about two doctors
in a charity clinic in 18th- century Japan, starring Toshiro Mifune. Also
tomorrow is ''Far From Vietnam,'' directed by Alain Resnais, William Klein,
Joris Ivens, Agn es Varda, Claude Lelouch and Jean-Luc Godard, and assembled by
Chris Marker. All of the film's directors speak out on the Vietnam War in this
1967 documentary.

Bertolucci and Bogdanovich

Tomorrow night is ''The Spider's Stratagem,'' directed by Bernardo Bertolucci,
released in 1970 and starring a radiant Alida Valli in a tale of memory and
revenge in post World War II Italy. The scene will then shift to a small,
windblown town in Texas in 1951 with Peter Bogdanovich's 1971 gem, ''The Last
Picture Show.'' The admirable cast includes Timothy Bottoms, Jeff Bridges,
Cloris Leachman, Cybill Shepherd and Ellen Burstyn.

Sunday is ''Band of Outsiders,'' Jean-Luc Godard's 1964 movie in which Anna
Karina, Sami Frey and Claude Brasseur dance on the edge of a volcano. In the
afternoon is ''Chloe in the Afternoon.'' This is Eric Rohmer's wistful, 1972
comedy about a married man who clings to domestic bliss while toying with
illicit romance in the arms of a quirkily seductive Significant Other. Zouzou
plays Chloe.

Sunday night is ''Sandra,'' Luchino Visconti's 1965 version of the Electra
story, starring Claudia Cardinale and Jean Sorel. The same evening is
''Muriel,'' in which Alain Resnais spins a mystery with Delphine Seyrig as a
lonely woman trying to come to grips with a love she had thought long gone.

The Scandalous and the Heroic

There are 42 more movies coming up in the next two weeks.

Among them, of course, is Bernardo Bertolucci's ''Last Tango in Paris'' with
Marlon Brando, Maria Schneider and Jean-Pierre Leaud. The Film Society's movers
and shakers called ''Tango,'' which had its world premiere at the 10th New York
Film Festival in October 1972, ''perhaps the single most exciting event of our
first 10 years.''

A Fassbinder First

There will be second looks at - or, for many moviegoers, a chance to see for the
first time - Luis Bunuel's classic ''Diary of a Chambermaid,'' Robert Rossen's
''Lilith,'' ''Robert Bresson's ''Mouchette,'' Werner Herzog's surreal ''Even
Dwarfs Started Small,'' Roman Polanski's ''Knife in the Water,'' Louis Malle's
''Murmur of the Heart,'' ''Shakespeare Wallah'' by James Ivory, Gillo
Pontecorvo's ''Battle of Algiers'' and ''The Servant,'' directed by Joseph
Losey, with a screenplay by Harold Pinter.

''Recruits in Ingolstadt,'' the first of Rainer Werner Fassbinder's films to be
shown in the United States, has not been seen, for contractual reasons, since
its New York Film Festival premiere in 1971. A story of brief encounters between
ardent soldiers and complaisant women, it stars Hanna Schygulla, Irm Hermann and
other members of the Fassbinder repertory company.

There will also be much to look forward to in 1984. Mrs. Koch of the Film
Society, savoring the thought, said: ''We'll show our second decade of festival
films in a retrospective next year.''

The schedule for the New York Film Festival retrospective:

Friday

6:30 P.M.  ''Weekend'' (1967), France/Italy, directed by Jean-Luc Godard.

9 P.M.  ''Woman in the Dunes'' (1964), Japan, Hiroshi Teshigahara.

Saturday

1:30 P.M.  ''Red Beard'' (1965), Japan, Akira Kurosawa.

5 P.M.  ''Far From Vietnam'' (1967), France, Alan Resnais.

7:30 P.M.  ''The Spider's Strategem'' (1970), Italy, Bernardo Bertolucci.

9:30 P.M.  ''The Last Picture Show'' (1971), United States, Peter Bogdanovich.

Sunday

2 P.M.  ''Band of Outsiders'' (1964), France, Jean-Luc Godard.

4:30 P.M.  ''Chloe in the Afternoon'' (1972), France, Eric Rohmer.

6:30 P.M.  ''Sandra'' (1965), Italy, Luchino Visconti.

9 P.M.  ''Muriel'' (1963), France/Italy, Alan Resnais.

Monday

6:30 P.M.  ''Diary of a Chambermaid'' (1964), France, Luis Bunuel.

9 P.M.  ''Intimate Lighting'' (1965), Czechoslovakia, Ivan Passer, and ''Loves
of a Blonde'' (1965), Czechoslovakia, Milos Forman.

Tuesday

6:30 P.M.  ''Fists in the Pocket'' (1965), Italy, Marco Bellocchio.

9 P.M.  ''Oh! What a Lovely War'' (1969), Britain, Richard Attenborough.

Wednesday

6:30 P.M.  ''Shakespeare Wallah'' (1965), India, James Ivory.

9 P.M.  ''Mouchette'' (1966), France, Robert Bresson, and ''The Wild Child''
(1969), France, Francois Truffaut.

Thursday

6:30 P.M.  ''Lilith'' (1964), United States, Robert Rossen.

9 P.M.  ''Even Dwarfs Started Small''(1970), West Germany, Werner Herzog.

Aug. 19

6:30 P.M.  ''The Butcher'' (1969), France/ Italy, Claude Chabrol.

9 P.M.  ''Barravento'' (1962), Brazil, Glauber Rocha, and ''Mandabi'' (1968),
Senegal/France, Ousmane Semb ene.

Aug. 20

Noon.  ''The Sorrow and the Pity'' (1970), Switzerland, Marcel Ophuls.

5 P.M.  ''Merchant of Four Seasons'' (1971), West Germany, Rainer Werner
Fassbinder.

7:30 P.M.  ''Bad Company'' (1972), United States, Robert Benton.

9:30 P.M.  ''Accattone'' (1961), Italy, Pier Paolo Pasolini.

Aug. 21

2 P.M.  ''Shadows of Our Forgotten Ancestors'' (1964), Soviet Union, Sergei
Paradjhanov.

4:30 P.M.  ''The Rise of Louis XIV'' (1966), France, Roberto Rossellini.

6:30 P.M.  ''Kes'' (1969), Britain, Ken Loach.

9 P.M.  ''The Servant'' (1963), Britain, Joseph Losey.

Aug. 22

6:30 P.M.  ''Adalen '31'' (1968), Sweden, Bo Widerberg.

9 P.M.  ''The Ritual'' (1969), Sweden, Ingmar Bergman, and ''WR - Mysteries of
the Organism'' (1971), Yugoslavia, Dusan Makavejev.

Aug. 23

6:30 P.M.  ''Murmur of the Heart'' (1971), France/Italy/Germany, Louis Malle.

9 P.M.  ''The Shop on Main Street'' (1964), Czechoslovakia, Jan Kadar and Elmar
Klos.

Aug. 24

6:30 P.M.  ''Boy'' (1969), Japan, Nagisa Oshima.

9 P.M.  ''Last Tango in Paris'' (1972), Italy/France, Bernardo Bertolucci.

Aug. 25

6:30 P.M.  ''Knife in the Water'' (1962), Poland, Roman Polanski.

9 P.M.''The Battle of Algiers'' (1965), Italy/Algeria, Gillo Pontecorvo.

Aug. 26

6:30 P.M.  ''The King of Marvin Gardens'' (1972), United States, Bob Rafelson.

9 P.M.  ''Recruits in Ingolstadt'' (1971), West Germany, Rainer Werner
Fassbinder, and ''Walkover'' (1965), Poland, Jerzy Skolimowski.

Aug. 27

Noon.  ''L'Amour Fou'' (1968) France, Jacques Rivette.

5 P.M.  ''Zorns Lemma'' (1970), United States, Hollis Frampton, and ''Not
Reconciled'' (1965), West Germany, Jean-Marie Straub.

7:30 P.M.  ''Mickey One'' (1965), United States, Arthur Penn.

9:30 P.M.  ''Heat'' (1972), United States, Paul Morrissey.

Aug. 28

2 P.M.  ''Charulata'' (1964), India, Satyajit Ray.

4:30 P.M.  ''The Deserter and the Nomads'' (1968), Czechoslovakia/Italy, Juro
Jakubisko.

6:30 P.M.  ''Images'' (1972), Ireland, Robert Altman.

9 P.M.  ''In the Summertime'' (1971), Italy, Ermanno Olmi.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Jeff Bridges, Marlon Brando

TYPE: schedule

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 13, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT PRAISES U.S. HISPANIC UNIT

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section 1; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 868 words

DATELINE: TAMPA, Fla., Aug. 12


President Reagan, sounding like a candidate, intensified his effort to win the
support of Hispanic American voters today as he urged their help in achieving
his Central American program and in moving on to four years of economic growth.

In a speech to the convention of the United States Hispanic Chamber of Commerce
here, Mr. Reagan also strongly denounced Cuba as an ''economic basket case''
whose Government had betrayed its people and emphasized economic aid over
military pressure in his Latin American policies.

The President, who is still months away from the formal re-election declaration
expected by his aides, said his Administration had ''fundamentally changed''
Government's direction, and he urged Hispanic American business leaders to join
him in further economic growth ''in the next four years.''

He praised the progress of Hispanic Americans and called on them to serve as ''a
bridge to our neighbors in the South.''

Intensified Political Effort

With three Hispanic-oriented events scheduled for the next three days, including
visit to Mexico on Sunday, the President has begun his most intensive effort yet
at reversing the slippage feared by his strategists among what they see as the
1984 campaign's awakening giant, this country's 14.6 million Hispanic Americans.

Returning almost fondly to the oratory of his 1980 victory, Mr. Reagan recalled
a time of ''ominous signs'' for the nation and of fear of spiritual ''malaise''
among its citizens in the Carter Administration.

''This great nation is moving forward again,'' he told the gathering at the
Hyatt Regency hotel. ''And we're not turning back.''

Mr. Reagan was warmly received by the group, which gave him a standing ovation
when he declared that ''too much politics has been played'' with the Central
America issue. ''When it comes to keeping our country safe, there must be no
Republicans and Democrats, just Americans,'' he said.

Cuba as 'Economic Basket Case'

At the outset of a 25-day combined work and vacation trip designed to focus
heavily on the rapidly growing Hispanic population, Mr. Reagan mixed lavish
praise of Hispanic communities with denigration of Fidel Castro's Cuba as ''the
economic basket case of the hemisphere.''

''The Cuban Government sells its young men as Soviet cannon fodder in exchange
for a massive subsidy without which it couldn't survive,'' Mr. Reagan told the
gathering, which included a large number of Cuban Americans.

Mr. Reagan described the Cuban people as ''betrayed'' by their Government and
said, ''The only things abundant there today are slogans, weapons, repression,
and shortages.''

Mr. Reagan described the hemisphere as facing ''a challenge of supreme
importance'' in the form of Central American insurgencies he said are instigated
in Moscow and Havana.

''A faraway, totalitarian power has set its sights on our friends and neighbors
in Central America and the Caribbean,'' he continued. ''If we don't meet our
responsibilities there, we will pay dearly for it.''

Economic Aid Emphasized

In defending his latest moves in the region, which include increased military
and economic aid and war game maneuvers, Mr. Reagan said those who denied a
security threat in the area were ''courting disaster.'' At the same time he
insisted, ''Those who claim our support is only of a military nature are
building a huge straw man.''

Three-fourths of his program is directed at economic aid, the President said,
adding, ''Security assistance is not the essence of our approach to Central
America and the Caribbean.''

In emphasizing economic aid and avoiding some of his earlier, harsher warnings
about a Soviet-Cuban threat, Mr. Reagan was reflecting White House opinion polls
that have been showing a mixed reaction to his Central American programs,
including concern over the risk of military involvement.

In concentrating on a large 1984 Hispanic vote, White House strategists hope to
hold off the effects of a heavy anti-Reagan vote that Democrats are expecting
from blacks. The White House strategy in approaching Hispanic voters could be
seen in Mr. Reagan's balancing praise of the business progress of Hispanic
Americans with careful promises to improve the unemployment problem that is
troubling their communities.

''For all their talk about compassion,'' Mr. Reagan said of his critics'
assertion that he insensitive to the poor, ''those who call themselves liberal
gave us terrible inflation that would have devastated millions had we permitted
it to continue.''

Mr. Reagan also met with Roy P. Benavidez, a retired Army master sergeant, whose
Social Security disability benefits were revoked and then restored last month.
Mr. Benavidez was wounded in the face, head, stomach, back and leg while
rescuing eight Special Forces comrades under heavy enemy fire in the jungle near
Loc Nimh, Vietnam, in 1968. Mr. Benavidez, who says he still has two pieces of
shrapnel in his heart, was presented the Congressional Medal of Honor by
President Reagan but later lost his disability benefits under an Administration
move to restrict eligibility for the payments. His benefits were restored after
a recommendation by an administrative law judge.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan, Roy P. Benavidez

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 14, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

YOUTHS IN WEST GERMANY SHAKE OFF THE PAST

BYLINE: By JAMES M. MARKHAM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1875 words

DATELINE: ESCHELBACH, West Germany


A new generation, no longer burdened by guilt for Hitler's crimes, is coming
into the corridors of power in West Germany.

It is a generation of people in their 20's and early 30's who, in important
ways, have broken with their parents' view of themselves and the world.

Raised in the prosperity that has made West Germany an influential nation, they
tend to chafe at political tutelage by the United States, which in the
imagination of many looms under President Reagan as a danger to peace.

These young West Germans are not fired by any surge of revivalist nationalism or
patriotism, though politicians of the left and the right look for such a mood.
If the Nazi trauma has left a legacy, it is a blank, a void where national
feeling normally arises.

At the same time, interviews and conversations with young people throughout the
country suggest that an undeclared search has started for a German idiom in
which Germans can express themselves - in speech, in film, and music.

''There used to be a time when it was great to use American words and
expressions,'' said Beate Thewalt, a 21- year-old student who grew up here in
the village of Eschelbach. ''People say now - 'Why not say it in German?' ''

The implications of the emergence of this new generation are potentially
enormous for the future of West Germany, whose military weight and geographic
position make it the European pivot of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

In Bonn, politicians from Chancellor Helmut Kohl on down worry about ''the youth
question'' and, more significantly, factor it into their own political
calculations.

In parliamentary elections in March, one strand of this generation's thinking
found expression in the Green Party, which, with 5.6 percent of the popular
vote, won 27 Bundestag seats.  The four-year-old Green Party stands for many
things - preservation of a threatened environment and opposition to nuclear
weapons and nuclear energy - but in the most fundamental sense its embodies a
rejection of what has been West Germany's economic and foreign policy consensus.

Studies after the elections showed that two-thirds of the 2.2 million West
Germans who voted for the iconoclastic Greens were under the age of 35, and that
the upstart party polled about 20 percent of such votes in university towns and
industrial centers, where new trends tend to be born.

The Greens, however, are not the majority party of West German youth. According
to an analysis by the conservative Christian Democratic Party, which won the
election, 15 percent of West Germans between the ages of 18 and 29 voted Green,
41 percent voted for the left-of-center Social Democrats, 38 percent voted
Christian Democratic and 5 percent for the liberal Free Democrats.

Greens Initiate Dicussions

But the Greens, while drawing a limited share of the total vote, have shown a
capacity to articulate issues. The bigger, established parties then find
themselves forced to discuss the issues - ranging from the advisability of
holding a census to the strategic implications of American medium-range nuclear
weapons.

This autumn the Greens will be in the forefront of antimissile demonstrations,
dragging many Social Democrats in their wake.

Eschelbach, a mainly Roman Catholic village nestled in the leafy Westerwald, is
some distance from West Germany's industrial and cultural centers - in miles and
in spirit. Its 700 citizens live mostly from light industry. Last March only 8
of the village's 407 eligible voters cast ballots for the Greens; 306 voted for
the Christian Democrats and 86 for the Social Democrats.

 On a recent evening in a local restaurant, 11 young people from Eschelbach,
aged 18 to 26, were able to accept this proposition: President Reagan's foreign
policies are a danger to West Germany, threatening to embroil the country in a
nuclear war.

 Two of them were university students. The others were semiskilled workers or
low-level state employees.

''I think the United States is using the B.R.D.,'' said Monika Altmann, a 22-
year-old student, using the German initials for the Federal Republic of Germany,
''to put in weapons, to put in their missiles and to keep war as far away as
possible from home.''

Swiss-Style Neutrality

Others added similar sentiments: West Germany should strive to be
''independent'' from the United States, free of foreign troops and nuclear
weapons. It should be neutral like Switzerland.

Klaus Blettenberg, 21, a purchasing agent, objected to talk of an American
withdrawal from West Germany, saying it would endanger the position of West
Berlin and lead to an extension of Soviet influence in West Germany. But Iris
Schaff, 18, an architect's assistant, countered, ''If the American troops pulled
out and the B.R.D. still remained connected to the United States, I don't think
the Russians would do anything.''

Miss Thewalt, 21, a political science student at Bonn University, seemed to sum
up the group's feelings about responsibility for World War II and its horrors.
''I think on the one hand we see ourselves as the ones who did it,'' she said.
''And on the other hand I think we see ourselves as the victims of the war. I
never really felt that we did it, that my parents did it or my grandparents did
it. It was 'some people' who did it.''

Spotty instruction in school about the Nazi period - many young West Germans say
the intensity of instruction about Hitler varies with each teacher - and the
passing of years have made the war remote. ''I find it inconceivable that the
Third Reich was able to happen,'' said Amelie Kr"uger, a 23- year-old West
Berliner. ''But a lot of people say - 'I'm living now. I don't want to hear
about the past.' ''

War Fading Into History

Already, World War II is on the verge of becoming ''grandfather's war'' - not
''father's war.''

West German men in their early 5O's - like the 53-year-old Chancellor Kohl -
were for the most part dragooned into the Nazis' collapsing war machine as
teen-agers. They have, therefore, a far weaker sense of guilt and involvement in
the war's excesses than do older men.

This generational shift was dramatically spotlighted this summer when Chancellor
Kohl, on a visit to Moscow, stunned his Soviet hosts by speaking openly about
his vision of a reunited Germany, and rejecting a Russian journalist's
suggestion that Germany started the First World War.

The Soviet Union has played on West Germans' guilt feelings about both wars. The
Chancellor's performance suggested that those days are ending.

The Time Is Gone By'

''One no longer identifies with this guilt question,'' said Peter Henseler, 31,
a Bonn official in the Christian Democrats' youth organization. ''And I would
say: 'Thank God. The time is gone by.' ''

Rainer Stuckenbock, a 26-year-old antiwar activist, acknowledged that ''the
interest in history is very small'' among people his age and that there is a
subconscious tendency to explain away Hitler's crimes.

''Most of the people begin to say: 'The others did this, too. The Russians did
this. The Americans in Vietnam. The French in Algeria. The Israelis in Lebanon.'
''

But shaking off the past has not meant the rekindling of nationalism. Opinion
polls show consistently that young West Germans have a weak sense of national
pride.

''I have a national feeling for Berlin, but none for Germany,'' said Beate
Kockel, a 20-year-old from Frankfurt who is studying fashion design in West
Berlin. ''I feel more like a European.''

National feeling is reflected in attitudes toward the West German military. A
June poll by the Allensbach organization found that 36 percent of West Germans
under 30 do not believe peace can be kept through a strong German Army.

 The number of registered conscientious objectors has risen from 33,792 in 1972
to 59,776 last year. The figure does not include the thousands of young men who
move to West Berlin, a haven from military service, to escape the draft.

One impediment to the growth of what Chancellor Kohl likes to call ''a normal
patriotism'' is the abnormality of a Germany divided between a capitalist West
and a Communist East. ''There is this consciousness of the division,'' said Mr.
Stuckenbock, the peace activist. ''The people of France and other countries are
not divided. Why should we be divided? It is an abstract concept of a nation.''

But pan-German sentiment is weak among young West Germans, who for the most part
rarely visit East Germany. A poll of West Germans aged 14 to 21 demonstrated
considerable ignorance about the ''other'' Germany. Forty-three percent of those
polled - compared to 20 percent in the overall population - regarded East
Germany as a ''foreign country.''

German Rock Reflects the Mood

Since 1979, though, there has been an explosion of West German rock music - for
the first time in German, not English - that has helped the new generation forge
a specifically German identity. Led by singers like Nina Hagen, who was expelled
from East Germany, and Udo Lindenberg, this ''new German wave'' has also voiced
widespread fears about nuclear war.

A smash hit, ''99 Balloons,'' by a group called Nena, is a fable about nuclear
war. Another song by Vulture Nosedive, ''Visit Europe as Long as It's Still
Around,'' ends with a thundering nuclear detonation. Bap, which sings in the
slurred dialect of Cologne, attacked a short-lived Nazi-punk moment in the new
wave in a song entitled ''Crystal Night.'' The generation's anxieties about
nuclear war are in part a legacy of parents who have drilled home the horrors of
war. But deep opposition to the stationing of new American medium- range
missiles in West Germany is also a demand for sovereignty in a question that is
perceived as affecting the fate of Germany.

Strong Antinuclear Sentiment

Polls show that emotional support for the antinuclear movement is extremely
strong. A survey by the Wahlen research group revealed that 64.7 percent of West
Germans between the ages of 18 and 29 found the peace movement ''necessary,''
compared with a mere 14.3 percent who found it ''unnecessary.''

At the same time, 78.7 percent of the same group found it ''good'' that West
Germany was a member of NATO - compared with 10.8 percent who found alliance
membership ''bad.''

Conversations with many young West Germans leave no doubt that the advent of the
Reagan Administration - and discussions in Washington about a limited nuclear
war in Europe - have acutely sharpened their anxieties. ''I have become really
agressive against the Americans,'' said Jutta Schmidt, 26, a political science
student in West Berlin. ''They have never had a war in their country. Why do you
need an army in Germany if you have your bombs and your Pershings?''

Such deep anti-American feelings are matched, though, by more thoughtful views.

''After the war, the Americans stayed here as a protecting power,'' said Claudia
Assenmacher, 25, a pharmacy student in Bonn. ''I am persuaded that if the
Americans were not here, sooner or later the Russians would take their place.''

Miss Assenmacher said she, unlike others, did not believe President Reagan
wanted a war. ''But he is perhaps as unlikely to compromise as the Russians,''
she concluded.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Beate Kockel

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 14, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KENNEDY PLAYED HIS 'DEATH' FOR HOME MOVIE



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 643 words


President Kennedy made a home movie depicting his death two months before he was
assassinated in Dallas, according to a new book and a former White House
photographer.

''The President wrote the script,'' said the photographer, Robert L. Knudsen,
who said he shot the movie on a weekend in Newport, R.I., in September 1963.
''He just called me over one day and said they wanted to have some fun and shoot
a movie.''

The movie is detailed in the book ''A Hero for Our Time'' by Ralph G. Martin,
published by Macmillan.

''The man with the binoculars watched President Kennedy as he got off the Honey
Fitz at Newport and walked down the long pier,'' the book says.

''Suddenly Kennedy clutched his chest and fell flat on the ground. Walking
behind him was the dignified Countess Crespi and her small son. Both simply
stepped over the President's body - as if he were not there - and continued
walking toward the shore.

''Right behind the countess came Jacqueline Kennedy, and she, too, daintily
stepped over her husband's body. Behind her was Red Fay, Under Secretary of the
Navy and Kennedy's PT boat buddy. Fay stumbled and fell directly on the
President's body. Just then, a gush of red surged from the President's mouth,
covering his sport shirt.'' A report by The Associated Press dated Sept. 21,
1963, detailed a movie made in Newport but said it was Mr. Fay who lay down on
the dock and Kennedy who stumbled over him.

Film Isn't in Archives

Mr. Knudsen confirmed the book's account and said the sequence had been shot
several times. Reporters observed the action, but none were close, he said;
thus, the reference to ''the man with the binoculars.''

He would not say what had become of the movie. No such film is in the archives
of the John F. Kennedy library in Boston, said Mary Lee Quinn, an audio-visual
curator.

''There were about four other couples there,'' Mr. Knudsen said. ''They thought
it would be kind of fun to do it. There was a little dialogue, but I'm not about
to repeat it. It was done in confidence, and even though he's dead, it's still
in confidence.''

He said that when Kennedy was killed Nov. 22, 1963, in Dallas, he thought back
to the home movie.

''I wondered if it was a premonition he had,'' the photographer said, ''or a
quirk of fate.''

Mr. Martin, the author of the book, said in an interview that Kennedy was
preoccupied with death.

''He'd come back from a trip and say, 'Thank God I wasn't killed today,' '' the
writer said. ''He always asked his friends how they'd like to die. Someone
finally asked him and he said, 'Airplane.' Why? He said, 'Quick.' ''

Five Years of Research

Mr. Martin said he spent five years compiling material for the book and
conducted hundreds of interviews.

He has not interviewed Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis since she was first lady. At
that time, Mr. Martin said, ''we sat and drank all afternoon and she lost that
little girl voice and told me things she probably shouldn't have, like how she
hated touch football.''

Among other highlights of ''A Hero for Our Time'' are Kennedy's views of the
situation in Vietnam, which he called ''a white man's war against the natives.''

The book also reports that Pierre Salinger, Kennedy's press secretary, said the
President and Nikita S. Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, had carried on ''a
wonderful dialogue in private letters - things they couldn't possibly say
aloud.''

''The two men really got to know each other,'' Mr. Salinger says in the book.
''There were some 60 letters between them. In the language they used, the
references they made, it was like a peasant writing to an intellectual - but
they were on the same wavelength.''

In Mr. Salinger's opinion, the book says, ''That relationship was so strong that
it would have led to disarmament. Nikita Khrushchev cried when Kennedy died.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 14, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TODAY, MORE BUILDINGS ARE COMPETITIVE CREATIONS

BYLINE: By JOSEPH GIOVANNINI

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2003 words


The Paris Opera may be one of France's most loved and famous buildings, but last
year, the French government has decided that Paris needs a second, larger opera
house to complement it. The existing Opera was the result of an architectural
competition held in the early 1860's; the weighty decision on the new one will
once again be made through a competition staged by the French government.

This May, more than 600 architectural firms from around the world responded by
submitting designs for a new 2,700 seat opera house, with two halls, to be sited
on the Place de la Bastille. French President Francois Mitterrand himself is
expected to select the winning proposal this month from among the
recommendations made by a jury of professionals. All of France may be enjoying
its August vacation, but for at least 600 tense architects, this is the cruelest
month.

The Paris opera competition is only one of the most dramatic and prestigious
competitions in an increasing number that have been held over the last several
years, both abroad and in the United States. Competitions in the past have
produced internationally renowned buildings - ranging from the Spanish Steps in
Rome to New York's Grand Central Station and the Georges Pompidou Center of Art
and Culture in Paris. Some involve only those architects with already
established reputations; others provide a chance for young or unknown architects
to gain recognition and commissions. For the sponsor, competitions have the
advantage of presenting many design options. But sometimes, such contests raise
public and professional controversies.

The French have set a very strong precedent lately for block-buster competitions
- most recently, with such projects as the Parc de la Villette and the
International Center of Communication at La Defense, at the edge of Paris. A
Danish architect, Johann von Spreckelsem, won the competition for the huge
communication center. About a week ago, the young French-Swiss architect Bernard
Tschumi, who teaches architecture at New York's Cooper Union, signed the
contract for the Parc de la Villette - a 125 acre, multi-facility, $300 to $400
million project. Says Mr. Tschumi, ''Without a competition, I would not have had
the opportunity to do a project of this scale.''

In the United States as well, architectural contests have proliferated. Donald
J. Stastny, a Portland, Oregon architect who has served as professional advisor
on two major national competitions, says, ''Architectural competitions are now
at the zenith of a cycle - there has been a rash in the last five years, with
local competitions going on all the time.'' And Michael Pittas, director of the
Design Arts Program of the National Endowment for the Arts, confirms: ''No doubt
about it, there are now many more. We're funding three times as many now as a
year ago.''

The most visible recent American competition was for the controversial Vietnam
Veterans' Memorial, won in 1980 by Maya Yang Lin, a Yale student. But to mention
only a few others, this spring the New York firm Eisenman/Robertson won an
invitational competition (one in which entry is limited to a small group of
invitedparticipants), for a $20 million visual arts center at Ohio State
University. The Cambridge, Mass., architects Michael Dennis and Jeffrey Clark
were selected out of 256 firms, in an open national competition, to design the
$4.3 million art museum for the University of California at Santa Barbara. The
Chicago architect Helmut Jahn, of Murphy/Jahn Associates, recently won a
competition sponsored by a private developer for a Houston skyscraper
approximately the height of the Empire State Building.


The United States has a long tradition of architectural competitions, which have
resulted in such national monuments as the U. S. Capital building, the White
House, the Washington Monument and the Lincoln Memorial. In New York, Central
Park, the New York Public Library, the New York Stock Exchange, among other
buildings, have come out of competitions.

Architectural competitions were frequent in the U.S. in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, until the tradition died out in the 1920s, partly
because of practices abusive to the architects. Thearchitect and planner Paul D.
Spreiregen, in a 1979 book called ''Design Competitions,'' writes that as early
as 1870, the American Institute of Architects tried to protect its membership
and clients by writing a competition code.

Today, with the proliferation of design competitions, there is again a
widespread concern among architects about abuses - such as inadequate
compensation for the enormous amount of work involved in entering a competition,
biased juries, or occasional failures to follow through with the winning
project. John Morris Dixon, editor of ''Progressive Architecture,'' says, ''I've
heard over and over again from architects that they've invested so much more in
participating in a competition than they've gained from the relatively small
fees.''

A participant in the Santa Barbara museum competition, who asked not to be
named, said, ''We got a $21 per diem during the three day public competition,
with no expense allowances during the time we traveled. When the citizens came
in to look at us as we worked - because the competition was a good PR event for
raising funds for the museum - we felt like a sideshow under the gun. The NEA,
which funded the competition, should protect the integrity of its own name by
supporting only those competitions that are professionally run.''

The Boston architectural firm, Goody Clancy and Associates, won the competition
for Eagle Ridge, a major resort development in Steamboat Springs, Colorado, but
did not get the commission. The architects and developers could not negotiate a
contract. ''I'm bitter,'' says John Clancy, who sued the developers for the
promised $20,000 finalists' stipend and other fees. The case was settled out of
court.


Still, despite such criticisms, there are a number of reasons for the increased
frequency of architectural competitions. In 1972, the descendant of the A. I.
A.'s long-standing competition code was challenged by the Federal Government,
for violating restraint of trade laws, and the A. I. A. withdrew the code.
According to Mr. Dixon, ''That opened the door to more competitions. The A. I.
A. lost its power to restrict an architect's participation in competitions that
did not comply with its rules.''

But Mr. Dixon also believes that the national controversies of ten years ago
over improper influence in awarding government building contracts have
encouraged political officials who stage competitions ''to keep it clean.''
Competitions, generally, are open to public scrutiny.

Mr. Jahn, the architect who won the Houston skyscraper competition, cites
another reason for the popularity of competitions. ''Developers are recognizing
the greater value of good design,'' he says. ''The media attention that comes
with competitions is helpful in marketing. In the early 1970s, there were no
competitions held by developers.''

Some governmental agencies have invited developers and architects to pair in
proposing development packages that are judged in competitions on the basis of
both their financial and design merit. The New Haven architect Cesar Pelli,
working with developers Olympia and York, won New York's Battery Park City
competition in this type of competition.


Competitions have also been vigorously encouraged by the NEA through its Design
Arts Program. From 1979 through 1982, the Endowment funded and provided
technical assistance for 26 competitions, and this month announced awards for a
half dozen more. New York Senator Daniel Moynihan has, since 1980, introduced
legislation to encourage competitions for federal buildings. Robert Peck, a
member of Senator Moynihan's staff, says, ''The real intent is to
institutionalize a concern for good design in the General Services
Administration. An engineering mentality is now dominant in the GSA, and it
attracts bland design.'' According to Mr. Peck, the bill may also open up
selection procedures in the government, discouraging the old- boy system.

But William Lacey, president of Cooper Union and once a strong proponent of
competitions, now has his hesitations. ''If you want to pick an architect and if
you want to design a building with that architect,'' he says, ''a competition
creates an artificial situation: the client and the architect have limited
contact.''

''Competitions don't produce the best work because you can't possibly know
clients and their needs,'' says Mr. Burgee. ''You're responding only to a
written program. The clients can't react to early schematic designs; there isn't
that useful exchange between the architect and client.''

Very well established architects like Mr. Burgee do not enter competitions.
''We're not hard pressed,'' he says. And Mr. Jahn says, ''At this point we're
not doing open public competitions because they take a tremendous amount of time
and we have a reasonably good work load. In a limited competition, I agree to
compete if it's the only way of being considered further.''


There are other reasons why architects do not enter competitions. Robert
Venturi, of Philadelphia's Venturi, Rauch and Scott Brown, says, ''Artists like
us don't win competitions. The decisions are made by consensus. The unusual
project is the result of individual patronage, and is seldom a group decision.''

An associate of Mr. Venturi, Steven Izenour, also points to the discouraging
statistics: ''We've done 27 competitions in 24 years; we've won two, and built
one. We'd have better odds in a rotary bin. There's an element of usury in
competitions, at least in this country - you're playing on the architect's need
for a client to exercise his profession. Architects without work, in a bad
economy, can't build a building the way a painter can paint a canvas. Besides,
if you enter to win, you play to the jury and try to anticipate their
expections. . . Still, you can always just enter a competition for yourself, to
try out new ideas.''

Some architects also have doubts about the esthetic results of competitions. New
York architectural designer James Wines, of SITE, Inc., who recently lost a
competition for a museum of modern art in Frankfurt, Germany, says, ''You end up
tempering what you want to do. If you don't do that one thing that wrenches it
out of complacent design and conventions of good taste, you'd probably win.''
The design SITE submitted had a wall sheered off - an unmistakable allusion to
the destruction Frankfurt experienced during the war. ''The twist, that's what
kills us,'' says Mr. Wines. ''The judges sensed that the project had a level of
commentary.''

Mr. Izenour also doesn't believe that competition winners really represent the
cutting edge of the profession. ''It's the also-rans that are interesting.''

Mr. Jahn, however, points to such competition winners as the Pompidou Center,
the Sydney Opera House and Boston City Hall, as ''unusual buildings that made a
great impact on the profession.''

''There has always been a controversy in the profession between people who want
to promote competitions and the people opposed to them,'' says Jean-Paul
Carlhian, a former chairman and current member of the A. I. A.'s Sub-Committee
on Competitions. ''The people for competitions want to foster new ideas, new
talent and enlarge a client's design options; the people against them talk about
the expense, the time lost in running it, and about the unfairness of biased or
unprepared juries.

''I don't want to be an advocate or opponent. They've simply got to be done
properly. For example, you standardize the requirements as much as possible and
a professional advisor rules out entries that violate the rules. A project need
not be delayed; an architect need not feel exploited, and he need not exploit
himself by overproducing. The whole issue is whether or not the competition is
run in a professional manner.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 14, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 434 words


Hyphens and Diplomacy Fact one: there are about 15 million Hispanic- Americans
and 5.5 million of them are eligible to vote. Fact two: President Reagan turns
up in Mexico today after talking politics with Cuban-Americans in Tampa and an
organization of Hispanic veterans in El Paso. Conclusion: There's a big new
hyphen in national politics and Senor Reagan wants to turn it to his own
advantage.

This is in a tradition as American as the melting pot. As they become
politically confident, ethnic minorities learn to speak out on foreign affairs.
Far from moving toward the Spanish-speaking separatism that some people fear,
Hispanics press claims on the President with increasing urgency.

Foremost on the President's mind is his Central American policy, which
anti-Communist Cuban exiles fervently applaud. But Florida's Cuban community is
safely Republican; his real problem is with Mexican-Americans, whose votes
matter a lot in Texas and California. If Mr. Reagan wants to reach for that
support, he needs to moderate his language and his adventurism.

To some extent, it's already happening. The talk will be of negotiations, not
naval maneuvers, at the meeting today with Mexican President Miguel de la
Madrid. Mr. Reagan has endorsed a regional peace plan put forth by Mexico and
its Contadora partners, Venezuela, Colombia and Panama. But the depth of that
endorsement concerns Mexicans on both sides of the Rio Grande.  Prominent among
the doubters is the only Mexican-American member of the Kissinger Commission on
Central America, San Antonio's Mayor Henry Cisneros. He warns of plunging into a
self-destructive quagmire more traumatic than Vietnam. New Mexico's Gov. Toney
Anaya condemns gunboat diplomacy that can only result in years of open warfare
or decades of guerrilla war.  Indeed, the very proximity argument used to
justify American involvement in Central America has a different spin for
Hispanics. G.I.'s in Vietnam fought unknown Asians. But a war in this
hemisphere, says Arnoldo Torres, director of the League of United Latin American
Citizens, would mean ''for us to kill our own.'' Hispanics are not a monolithic
bloc, and they have yet to show anything like the potency and passion of other
ethnic lobbies. But the President is too shrewd a politician not to read the
warning signs, and to respond.  As he repeats tirelessly, Central America isn't
Vietnam. It certainly isn't. One difference is that there weren't 15 million
Vietnamese-Americans electing nine of their own as members of Congress and
deciding Texas elections when Lyndon Johnson took the country to war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 14, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS MASS MARKET Mass market paperbacks are soft-cover books
sold at newsstands, variety stores and supermarkets, as well as in bookstores.
This listing is based on computer-processed reports from bookstores and
representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 outlets across the United
States.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 669 words


1

MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $3.95.) The secret behind a
woman business tycoon's rise to power: fiction.

2

DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.

3

SPELLBINDER, by Harold Robbins. (Pocket, $3.95.) From soldier in Vietnam to
television evangelist: fiction.

4

THE CASE OF LUCY BENDING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $3.95.) An aberrant
8-year-old girl epitomizes the society of Florida's Gold Coast: fiction.

5

FRIDAY, by Robert A. Heinlein. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) The adventures on
Earth of an Artificial Person: science fiction.

6

LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Pocket, $3.95.) Life in the international glitter set:
fiction.

7

TRULY TASTELESS JOKES TWO, by Blanche Knott. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor.

8

DAKOTA!  by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam, $3.95.) Dangers await Toby Holt in the
Bad Lands, while his wife faces perils at home: historical fiction.


9

THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER, by Jeffrey Archer. (Pocket, $3.95.) The children of two
bitter business rivals marry: fiction.

10

CINNAMON SKIN, by John D. MacDonald. (Fawcett, $3.50.) Travis McGee investigates
a suspicious accident at sea: fiction.

11

TRULY TASTELESS JOKES, by Blanche Knott. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor.

12

THE MAN FROM ST. PETERSBURG, by Ken Follett. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) International
intrigue on the eve of World War I: fiction.

13

EDEN BURNING, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $3.95.) A woman returns to face her steamy
past in a Caribbean island: fiction.

14

YESTERDAY'S SON, by A. C. Crispin. (Pocket/Timescape, $2.95.) Novel inspired by
an episode in the ''Star Trek'' television series.

15

RETURN OF THE JEDI, by James Kahn. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $2.95.) Novelization of
the latest ''Star Wars'' film.

 TRADE Trade paperbacks are soft-cover books usually sold in bookstores and at
an average price higher than mass market paperbacks. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States .

1

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $7.95.) Three generations of a wealthy
San Francisco family: fiction.

2

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson. (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.

3

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $5.95.)
Black men and women in the South: Pulitzer Prize-winner for fiction.

4

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Inspirational
talks by a California professor.

5

LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $10.95.) How to add
years to your life and life to your years.

6

BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon strips
featuring some very odd characters.

7

LINDA EVANS BEAUTY AND EXERCISE BOOK, by Linda Evans. (Simon & Schuster/Wallaby,
$9.95.) How-to by the television personality.

8

THIN THIGHS IN 30 DAYS, by Wendy Stehling. (Bantam, $2.95.) How-to.

9

GARFIELD EATS HIS HEART OUT, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) The latest
adventures of that gluttonous cat: cartoon humor.

10

WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?  by Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press,
$7.95.) Guide for job hunters and career changers.

11

ROYAL SEDUCTION, by Jennifer Blake. (Fawcett/Columbine, $5.95.) A New Orleans
belle, a European prince, international intrigue: historical romance.

12

FIT OR FAT?  by Covert Bailey. (Houghton Mifflin, $4.50.) Exercises for fitness.

13

PLAIN JANE WORKS OUT, by Linda Sunshine. (Bantam, $3.95.) Exercises for women
who know they'll never look like a movie star: humor.


14

ITEMS FROM OUR CATALOG, by Alfred Gingold. (Avon, $4.95.) Spoof of the L. L.
Bean catalogue.

15

THE RAPTURE, by Hal Lindsey. (Bantam, $6.95.) Predictions about an approaching
global event based on an interpretation of the Bible.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A NOVELIST FINDS POLITICS 'THE OPPOSITE OF WRITING'

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 714 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 14


James Webb went to the Naval Academy, where men are made. He went to Vietnam,
where men were broken. He was graduated from the Georgetown University Law
Center, farm club to Capitol Hill. He worked in Congress, farm club to the
executive branch.

And then, just as James Webb was being considered to head the Veterans
Administration for President Reagan, he called a halt to it all. James Webb,
marine, veteran, lawyer, Congressional aide, wanted to be known as a writer.

He had, after all, written ''Fields of Fire,'' considered one of the finest
novels to come out of the Vietnam War. He had written ''A Sense of Honor,''
which rocked the Naval Academy. He had another book in him, as writers so often
put it, and he wasn't going to let Capitol Hill or the Veterans Administration
keep him from freeing it.

That book, ''A Country Such as This,'' a fictional chronicle of three men making
their way through the anguish of the post-World War II years, is to be published
by Doubleday & Company this autumn.

When Morality Is Not Clear

Mr. Webb is a novelist from Washington, an important figure in the Washington
literary scene, and yet he is not a Washington novelist. The situations his
characters face are ethical, not political, and in a way, Mr. Webb's decision to
become a writer was a flight from politics.

''In my books people face situations where morality is not clearly defined,''
Mr. Webb said the other day. ''In Vietnam we faced them all the time. Throughout
the past 25 years we've had these choices. But politics is the art of taking
ambiguities and boiling them down simply enough so you can say 'yes' or 'no.' It
is the opposite of writing. In writing you take these ambiguities and you expand
them. You flesh them out. You deal with them.''

But politics and writing done with grace and insight share important qualities:
They respond to events and, when both are performed artfully, they move people.
But the one, politics, left Mr. Webb so frustrated that he saw only its limits.
The possibilities offered by the other, writing, beckoned.

Limits of Legislative Process

''In my three years on the Hill the greatest feeling I had was the limitation of
the legislative process,'' said Mr. Webb. ''In writing, you can affect people's
emotions and attitudes. How do you help Vietnam veterans? People in Congress say
we need a program. The answer is: It's not a legislative problem. It's a
societal problem. I think 'Fields of Fire' touches people more deeply than
veterans' programs.''

For a time, however, Mr. Webb, once the chief Republican counsel to the House
Veterans Affairs Committee, could not break free from the political life of
Washington. The telephone constantly rang, politics was always with him.

''I was tied into political Washington, and I lost a lot of time as a writer
because I had personal obligations in the political arena,'' he said. ''I worked
on veterans' issues, I'm kind of still on call. A guy from Nebraska with no
arms, a veteran, calls me and asks for help. What should I do? I can't ignore
the guy.''

Mr. Webb's experiences here provide some insights into a writer's life in
Washington, a capital that produces more words and less literature than most.

Wealth of Federal Resources

He found the resources of the Federal Government invaluable, the scholarly
solitude of the Library of Congress soothing, the friction of competing ideas
invigorating. At the same time, there was a deadening seriousness to it all. It
was a city that forever looked at the record, as the politicians on Capitol Hill
are fond of saying, rather than a city that looked inside itself.

''It's not a great place for a writer of fiction,'' said Mr. Webb, who is 37
years old. ''This is a hard facts city. The creativity here is political, not
philosophical. It's not an introspective place at all.''

Mr. Webb is still known as a writer on Vietnam, and his new book will do little
to dispel that image; the major character is a Navy pilot who flies sorties over
Vietnam, is captured and becomes a prisoner of war.

''As a person, I'll never leave the Vietnam War,'' he said. ''I don't think any
of us will. I'm at peace with the war, but I'm not obsessed with the war. My
next book is not going to be about any of this.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of James Webb

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 16, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

3 IN HUNGER STRIKE OVER SALVADORANS AT U.S. BASE

BYLINE: By E. R. SHIPP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 620 words

DATELINE: COLUMBUS, Ga., Aug. 15


Two priests and an Army reservist have begun a hunger strike here in the
Muscogee County Jail after being arrested for protesting the presence at nearby
Fort Benning of 487 Salvadoran soldiers who are undergoing officer training.

Fort Benning has the Army's only training school for officer candidates,
according to Lieut. Col. R. Wayne Andrews, a spokesman, and is training its
second contingent of Salvadorans since last year.

The clergymen, the Rev. Roy L. Bourgeois, a Maryknoll priest from Lutcher, La.,
and the Rev. Larry Rosebaugh, an Oblate priest from Chicago, and the reservist,
Linda Ventimiglia of Salem, Ala., have been part of a group of protesters called
Concerned Citizens for Latin America who have staged marches, rallies and acts
of civil disobedience since the soldiers arrived here in May.

They were arrested by Federal marshals Friday on charges of re-entering a
military establishment after being ejected. The night before, they and five
others were detained by the military police after they staged a candlelight
vigil on the lawn of the base commander, Maj. Gen. James J. Lindsay.

Message to Commander

According to another base spokesman, Bill Walton, the eight ''placed a written
communication'' under the commander's door, set burning candles around the lawn,
and drove eight crosses into the ground.

After being detained on the base, they were, in the words of Mr. Walton,
''released at the boundary of the post at 1:30 A.M.''

While Fathers Bourgeois and Rosebaugh and Miss Ventimiglia were later arrested
on Federal charges, no charges have been brought against the other five.

''What they like to do out there,'' said Samuel Wilson Jr., an assistant United
States Attorney handling the case, ''is give people fair warning. They felt
these people were given more than fair warning.''

On three previous occasions since July 30, the three protesters had been ejected
from the base, first for donning officers' uniforms and entering a restricted
barracks to distribute fliers in Spanish to the Salvadoran soldiers, urging them
to lay down their arms; then for distributing similar messages to American
soldiers, and then last Tuesday, for climbing a pine tree on the base and
playing a recording of the final homily on peace of Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo
Romero, who was assassinated in El Salvador in 1980.

Three Refuse to Eat

Father Bourgeois, interviewed by telephone today, said the three had been held
incommunicado until now. He also said they began a hunger strike on Saturday.

''We will not eat until the Salvadorans leave and we are going to see it through
all the way,'' the 44-year-old priest said.

Father Bourgeois, who said he was a Vietnam War veteran and a holder of the
Purple Heart, said the protests at Fort Benning were intended to call attention
to what he described as ''a great injustice.''

''Our country is training soldiers to kill and afflict greater suffering on the
Salvadoran people,'' he said.

The clergymen and Miss Ventimiglia have rejected offers by local attorneys to
represent them and have said they will handle their own cases. They have also
refused to sign personal recognizance bonds that would result in their release.

William L. Slaughter, the Federal magistrate before whom they appeared Friday
afternoon, said: ''I offered them an opportunity to be released on their own
recognizance, but they declined to sign anything. They said they didn't want to
cooperate with 'the system' or have anything to do with 'your laws,' whatever
that means.''

No trial date has been set for the priests and Miss Ventimiglia. If convicted on
the charges in Federal court, they face up to six months in jail and a fine of
up to $500.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 16, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Altman's 'Streamers' Set for Film Festival

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 96 words


''Streamers,'' Robert Altman's film based on David Rabe's award- winning play,
will be shown on the closing night of the New York Film Festival, Oct. 9, at
Avery Fisher Hall.

''Streamers'' was the third in David Rabe's Vietnam trilogy, which also included
''The Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel'' and ''Sticks and Bones.'' ''Streamers''
won the Drama Critics Circle Award for Best American Play of the 1975-76 season.

The film is set in an army barracks on the eve of the Vietnam War. It features
Matthew Modine, Michael Wright, Mitchell Lichtenstein and David Alan Grier.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 17, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SHIPMATES RECALL FLAMES OF WAR

BYLINE: By FRANK J. PRIAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 821 words


They stood in the shade of the gray steel bridge yesterday, four not-so-young
men. They were on the flight deck of the Intrepid, the aircraft carrier turned
museum, at 46th Street and the Hudson River, but in each other's eyes they saw
again the South Pacific, the flames, the fear - and the enemy.

''Right there is where the kamikaze hit on Oct. 13, 1944,'' said Fred Bok.
''There were nine men in a gun tub, all black stewards. That's what black men
had to do in the Navy in those days. But they had volunteered to be a gun crew
and they gave them a twin-40 mount. The Jap plane hit the flight deck and
skidded right into them. They never stopped firing and they all died. They were
buried as gunners' mates. That doesn't seem like much now, but it was an honor
in l944.''

''There used to be a five-inch gun right over there,'' said Elmer Anderson.
''One day, an SB2C dive bomber came in damaged. He had a 2,000-pound bomb under
his belly, and when he hit the deck it broke loose. I jumped into that turret
and for 10 seconds you could have heard a pin drop anywhere on this ship. As you
can see, we're here; the bomb didn't go off.''

''Then we all heard the skipper on the bullhorn,'' said Joe Esposito. ''He said,
'Send that pilot to the bridge,' and when the guy got up there, he ripped the
wings right off his shirt. He was supposed to have ditched that plane and he
landed against orders.''

It was as if the last 40 years had never happened as these men and about 100
others like them gathered yesterday to celebrate the anniversary of the
commissioning of the Intrepid, one of the most decorated of all American combat
ships in World War II.

Mr. Bok, an engineer from Lompoc, Calif.; Mr. Anderson, a retired auto supply
buyer from Kansas City, Mo.; Mr. Esposito, a retired shoe repair man from
Buffalo and Dr. Roy Latall, an orthopedic surgeon from Lincolnshire, Ill., met
by plan. They have kept in touch over the years thanks to Mr. Anderson's wife,
Dorothy, who urged them all to make it to yesterday's reunion.

''We were all arresting-gear specialists,'' Dr. Latall said, ''the guys who
catch the planes when they land. In fact we were the first members of the crew.
we were waiting in Newport News for her to be commissioned and we made the first
shakedown cruise. That was the original bond among us.''

The anniversary celebration, which included a dinner and dance on board the
carrier last night, was arranged by the Intrepid Museum Foundation, a nonprofit
organization that took over the 900-foot 41,000-ton carrier in 1981, moved her
from the Philadelphia Navy Yard to New York, restored her and converted her into
a naval museum.

The 900-foot Intrepid was commissioned in 1943 in Newport News, Va., and
participated in five major battles in the South Pacific. After a torpedo
disabled her rudder at Truk, the crew rigged a sail to maneuver the stricken
vessel back to Pearl Harbor.

The ship served in the Mediterranean after World War II, made three combat
cruises off Vietnam and recovered the Mercury 7 and Gemini 3 space capsules. By
the time she was decommissioned in 1974, some 55,000 officers and men had served
aboard her. The combat crew, including air groups, ranged from 3,000 to 3,500
men at a time.

Carroll Chase, who sells motorcycles in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, turned up at the
reunion yesterday and was astonished to come across several of his old
shipmates. ''I was in a different division, Mr. Chase said, but I was an
aviation machinist mate like Fred Bok and Elmer Anderson, so we knew each other.
''You really don't get to know too many guys well on a big ship so I was
surprised to see them - and very happy.''

Pieces of Plane in Briefcase

Each returnee was issued a Navy- style baseball cap with ''Intrepid'' emblazoned
across the front. Mr. Bok carried - incongruously - a briefcase. In it, were
pieces of the Japanese plane that killed the nine stewards' mates, a memorial
book recounting the ship's exploits during World War II and some 1945 copies of
The San Francisco Examiner showing kamikaze planes exploding on the Intrepid's
flight deck.

Suicide planes killed at least 40 of the Intrepid's crew in different incidents,
but the ship and her planes accounted for 650 enemy planes destroyed and 289
ships sunk or damaged.

Engineers, physicians, retired Navy men and insurance executives became youthful
again yesterday as they recalled comrades who died, captains they admired and
tough boatswain's mates they thought they hated.

Almost all the returned veterans served in World War II.

''That doesn't surprise me,'' said Bertram Nusbaum Jr., a radar operator in 1944
and an insurance executive in Virginia now. ''We experienced a type of
camaraderie that very few men will ever know. The peacetime Navy is spit and
polish, the wartime Navy was all action. When the ship caught fire, we knew how
to put it out. We were a team in a very special sense.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of of former crew members of Intrepid

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 17, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BENJAMIN COHEN, NEW DEALER, DIES

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 761 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 16


Benjamin V. Cohen, one of the key architects of President Roosevelt's New Deal,
died Monday at Georgetown University Hospital. He was 88 years old.

Mr. Cohen was found unconscious by the police two weeks ago in the modest Dupont
Circle apartment where he lived alone. A hospital spokesman said Mr. Cohen died
of pneumonia.

A shy, scholarly man, Mr. Cohen was generally credited with being Roosevelt's
''top brain'' among the advisers who made up what became known as ''the brain
trust'' that shaped such major New Deal legislation as the Tennessee Valley
Authority, the Federal Housing Administration and the Wage and Hour Law.

He had joined the Roosevelt Administration at its start in 1933, one of a number
of young lawyers drawn to Washington because of the social despair that engulfed
the nation in the Depession. He soon found himself teamed with Thomas G.
Corcoran, a free- wheeling politician with whom he shared a Georgetown mansion
in those early days of the Administration. The two men, so unlike in
temperament, became known as the ''Gold Dust Twins,'' so named for a popular
soap powder advertisement of that time.

Called 'the High Priest'

A few years before his death in 1981, Mr. Corcoran said of his former partner:
''He is the high priest. He is the saint.''

In addition to framing much of the social legislation passed to ease the nation
out of the Depression, Mr. Cohen was a key draftsman of lend-lease legislation
that provided military supplies and other defense services to the Allies before
the United States entered World War II.

In 1941 he went to London as legal adviser to the United States Embassy and on
his return he served as general counsel to James F. Byrnes in the Office of
Economic Stabilization. After Mr. Byrnes became Secretary of State, Mr. Cohen
became the Secretary's special assistant and later was named State Department
counselor.

Mr. Cohen was the last of the Roosevelt ''inner circle'' to leave the
Government, in 1947, but he was drafted into Government service again by
President Truman to serve from 1948 until 1952 as a member of the United States
delegation to the United Nations General Assembly. He was the United States
representative on the United Nations Disarmament Commission in 1952.

Became Adviser to Kennedy

In 1960 he was named by Senator John F. Kennedy, at that time seeking the
Democratic Presidential nomination, to serve as his special assistant on
disarmament. Later he became an early critic of American involvement in the
Vietnam War.

Benjamin Victor Cohen was born Sept. 23, 1894, in Muncie, Ind., the son of a
Polish immigrant who operated a small business. At the University of Chicago,
where he won his undergraduate and law degrees, Mr. Cohen was consided one of
the most brilliant students ever to graduate, and he later won top honors as a
graduate student at Harvard University Law School, where he came under the
influence of Felix Frankfurter, at that time a law professor and later a Justice
of the United States Supreme Court.

In World War I, Mr. Cohen was an attorney for the United States Shipping Board.
After the war, he represented American Zionists at the Paris Peace Conference.
Before joining the Roosevelt Administration, he practiced corporation law in New
York City.

Some years after leaving the Government, Mr. Cohen reflected sadly on some of
his ''brain trust'' colleagues who had defected from the Roosevelt
Administration.

''I may be stubborn,'' he once said, ''but my thinking has changed little since
1933.''

In 1974, just months before President Nixon resigned, Mr. Cohen delivered a
lecture at the University of California on the subject of how best to
restructure the office of the Presidency to bring it more effectively under
democratic control.

His proposal, never adopted, was to establish in the office of the President a
small ''executive council'' to serve as a ''super Cabinet.'' The group, he said,
would monitor and coordinate the policies and performances of the regular
Cabinet offices, thus doing the work done then, and still done, by top White
House aides.

In his later years, Mr. Cohen was a familiar figure, stooped but smiling, as he
walked his miniature schnauzer, Mr. Tweed, in the Dupont Circle area. A
bachelor, he dined infrequently with friends but consulted with them often on
Democratic legislation and problems.

He is survived by one sister, Pearl C. Freund of Los Angeles; two nephews,
Bernard Freund of Muncie and Frank Tick of Los Angeles, and one niece, Selma
Jean Cohen of New York City.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Benjamin V. Cohen

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 18, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
LIBEL AND POLITIC

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 826 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Aug. 17


A libel case of extraordinary importance, William C. Westmoreland v. CBS , is
now taking shape in pretrial proceedings. The documents already piled up show an
extreme example of the lawsuit as a form of combat, between resourceful
opponents. But more than that they show a case with troubling implications for
American democracy.

General Westmoreland sued last September for $120 million. He said his
reputation had been hurt by a 1982 CBS television documentary, ''The Uncounted
Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' The program said that the American command in
Vietnam, headed by General Westmoreland, had deliberately understated the
numbers of enemy forces in 1967-68.

A few months after the program, TV Guide printed a long article charging that it
was ''a smear'' - that CBS had violated its own guidelines by, for example,
using a paid consultant as a witness on camera. CBS News executives ordered an
internal investigation, which agreed that there had been procedural faults
though it stood by the film's conclusion. CBS offered General Westmoreland 15
minutes of air time to reply; he said no to the offer and sued.

A penetrating look at the case as it has developed so far will appear in the
September issue of The American Lawyer. The article, by Connie Bruck, is
critical of CBS executives. It says they ran scared when attacked in the TV
Guide piece, which itself had faults, and thereby actually encouraged the
general to sue.

The American Lawyer also argues that the backers of the Westmoreland lawsuit
have a political aim: to damage CBS News and discourage television coverage of
controversial issues. The general is being represented without charge by Dan
Burt, president of the Capital Legal Foundation, a conservative public-interest
firm.

Mr. Burt is quoted as saying, after he forced CBS in the litigation to give him
its internal report on the program: ''We are about to see the dismantling of a
major news network.'' More recently he said that CBS had ''the same kind of
morale problems that they had at the White House during Watergate.'' (When I
asked, a CBS executive dismissed as ''nonsense'' the idea that the network had
been chilled by this case.) CBS is represented in the litigation by David Boies,
an antitrust lawyer at the great New York firm of Cravath, Swaine & Moore. He
has so far taken General Westmoreland through five days of questioning, with
more to come.  Asked exactly what it was in the program that he thought libeled
him, General Westmoreland referred to its use of the word ''conspiracy'' but
said he could not say beyond that. Again and again he replied: ''I would refer
you to the complaint.'' It seems surprising that a man seeking $120 million for
damage to reputation could not specify how he had been hurt.  Asked about the
Phoenix program, he said its purpose was to capture and interrogate Communist
political figures in South Vietnam. Mr. Boies asked about reports that they had
in fact been assassinated. If so, the general replied, those were
''indiscretions.'' Mr. Boies said William Colby, who ran the program, had
testified that 10,000 were assassinated. If so, General Westmoreland said, ''it
would be a serious indiscretion.'' After a recess, evidently at his lawyer's
urging, the general withdrew the word ''indiscretion'' and said assassinations
were ''wrong.'' When Mr. Boies asked what he had done to investigate reports
that they were occurring, he said: nothing.  But as I read those transcripts, my
main reaction was not that CBS was scoring points. It was that the whole subject
- the argument about enemy numbers in Vietnam and how they were reported - was
inappropriate for resolution in a lawsuit.  Everything about the Vietnam War,
from its origins to the details of its conduct, was the subject of intense
political debate in the United States. The notion that a judge and jury can
decide the ''truth'' about any aspect of that war is grotesque. It is also
dangerous. For how can you have open debate on issues of fundamental public
policy if critics fear that their views will be re- examined in libel suits?
From the beginning of the Republic, Presidents and generals have been subject to
uninhibited criticism. Jefferson suffered smears beyond anything published
today. Yet I know of no case in which a high Federal official has won libel
damages for criticism of his official actions. Officials who were criticized had
ways to answer, and did. It is only today, in our more legalized society, that
anyone would even think of turning such debates into libel suits.  The Supreme
Court has held that Federal officials are absolutely immune from libel suits
when they make critical comments ''within the outer perimeter'' of their duties.
Democracy requires that we, the public, have the same privilege in checking the
exercise of official power. General Westmoreland has been highly successful in
answering CBS, and that should be the end of it: debate, not lawsuits.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 18, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CITY SUBWAYS: FUN TO SOME, A 'VALLEY OF DEATH' TO OTHERS

BYLINE: By DAVID W. DUNLAP

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1231 words


For Ida Friedman, riding the subways is a matter of faith - her faith in the
Lord.

''I'll ride them alone, day or night, any time,'' she said as she stepped aboard
a D train on its way to Brooklyn, ''because I can walk through the valley of
death and fear no evil.''

On the day after John D. Simpson announced that the subway's ''intractable''
problems were among the things driving him to resign the presidency of the New
York City Transit Authority, the 232-mile network over which he presides was a
valley of death to some, an exotic adventure to others.

But to most of its millions of riders, traveling among 465 stations on 5,000
cars, it was the only way to go. Many railed at the crime and vandalism in the
subways, at the heat and noise down there and, above all else, at the fact that
the trains were simply not getting them anywhere on time these days.

Steve Bloom seethed in frustration at the City Hall station of the Lexington
Avenue IRT. The No. 5 express was in front of him, going nowhere, its doors
resolutely closed.

He resigned himself to a trip aboard a local. ''There never seems to be any
sense to the scheduling,'' he said. ''I wish there was.''

The local, a No. 6 train, was clean and, more important, air-conditioned. But
the only thing on Mr. Bloom's mind was how late he was crawling to an upper East
Side appointment.

The local and express trains caught up with each other at Union Square, and Mr.
Bloom bolted across the platform. Air-conditioning in the No. 5 train came
through open windows; the fans were blowing hot air. Graffiti obscured virtually
every surface in sight.

And the local pulled out first.

A rave review for the subway? ''Actually, we've quite enjoyed it,'' said Chris
Metz, a British businessman on vacation with his wife and two daughters.

They were an incongruous sight on a No. 2 train rumbling through the Bronx. It
was not just his blue blazer and paisley tie and their summer print dresses. It
was their animated interest in the graffiti, which they ex citedly pointed out
to one another while fellow straphangers dourly absorbed the knocks and bumps.

''We're fascinated,'' said Michelle Metz. ''We've never seen anything quite like
it. The only thing is that it's too difficult to read.''

On Tuesday the Transit Authority operated 6,140 train trips. Because of go-slow
orders for track repair and inspection, 3,153 arrived at their terminals at
least four minutes late. In the morning rush hour 92.6 percent of the runs were
on time, but in the evening the figure dropped to 58.5 percent. On July 28, the
most recent date on record, the subway turnstiles turned 2,359,659 times.


Among the millions of riders, the subways are perhaps cruelest to the elderly. A
stooped woman with a cane stopped before a bench full of young people in the
West Fourth Street IND station and asked, ''Where are there moving stairs?''

''There aren't any,'' she was told, and so she hobbled out of the station. Fifty
feet away, out of immediate sight, an up escalator was running smoothly.

An N train bound for Continental Avenue stopped in the East River tunnel. A
conductor's voice over the public address system broke a nervous silence:
''Ladies and gentlemen, we're going to have to wait here for a couple of minutes
while an RR train goes by in the other direction. There's nothing to worry
about. Thank you for your cooperation.''

James Constantino of Queens Village grimaced as he glanced around the car.
''Yeah, nothing to worry about, except that we're sitting below the river with
no way to get out.''

It may not have seemed that way to Mr. Constantino and the others stuck on the N
train, but the Transit Authority knew exactly where the passengers were and how
to get them out.

On the third floor of the authority's headquarters at 370 Jay Street in
Brooklyn, train masters and operators were monitoring sprawling display boards
showing the routing of all three systems, to the accompaniment of crackling
radios. ''Today was a very quiet day,'' said Kevin O'Connell, who was in charge
of shepherding the IRT.

The earliest mishap of the day occurred at 12:22 A.M. when a Brooklyn
Bridge-to-Pelham Bay Park No. 6 train lost power at Castle Hill Avenue in the
Bronx, only five stops from its destination.

As Mr. O'Connell spoke, one of his dispatchers, Russell Carey, leaned over a
microphone. ''Maintenance,'' he said, ''this is Carey in Command Center Division
A. Between one-six- one and one-six-two on the Jerome line, we have a reported
12-2.''

Mr. O'Connell translated: ties were burning on the tracks along Jerome Avenue at
161st Street in the Bronx. ''It's a very common occurrence,'' he said.

Overheard on the IND D train to Brooklyn:

''Is this the express?''

''It's express, but it's local.''

''It says express.''

''Yeah, but during the day it runs local.''

''Can I take this to Parkside Avenue?''

''I don't know. I think you should wait for the express.''

The downtown platform at Borough Hall was nearly empty when Fred, a wiry young
man dashed up the stairs and around the corner calling for the police.
''Officer, officer, there's a suspicious character down there!'' he cried. Fred
said the man had been giving women threatening looks. By the time the officer
reached the bottom of the stairs, the man had fled to the end of the platform.

''You take your life in your hands when you pay your 75 cents,'' Fred said. ''I
was in Vietnam, and I wasn't as scared in Vietnam as I am now.''

Yesterday 1,340 transit police officers patrolled the system, one-tenth of them
in plainclothes. At the same time 90 detectives were at work.

From midnight to 4 P.M. yesterday, there were 16 reported felonies in the subway
system: 5 robberies (one a questionable report), 4 chain snatchings, 3 purse
snatchings, 3 pocket-pickings and one assault (also questionable). Three people
were arrested for felonies.

No commodity is more valuable in the subways in August than air-conditioning -
and nothing is more rare, according to a number of disgruntled travelers.

''Riding the subways is like being a soggy piece of toast,'' said Leah Solo, a
25-year-old actress waiting for a train at Union Square. ''I ride every day, and
I think I've had about three air-conditioned trains since July 1.''

She noted a bright side, however: ''I'm leaving for Kenya and a safari very
soon, so I guess it's preparation for life in the jungle.''

For one young man, a nicely air- conditioned A train bound for Manhattan was
serving as something of a sleeper coach. He reclined comfortably over four
seats, his head cushioned in a deer-stalker cap. When the train pulled into the
Broadway-Nassau stop, a woman companion nudged him gently and they got off.

John D. Simpson was also relaxed yesterday afternoon. Having decided he'd had
enough as head of the Transit Authority, he sat with feet propped up in his
13th-floor office at 370 Jay Street. He said it had been a quiet day on the
system and that made it ''atypical.'' But there was one close call - the chance
that the Metro-North commuter railroad would be struck and its passengers
diverted to the city subway system.

''I got up at 5 this morning ready to go to Pelham Bay,'' Mr. Simpson said,
toying with a cigarette. ''But I called in and was told there wouldn't be a
strike. So, in light of the excitement yesterday, I rolled over and went back to
sleep.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of passengers on No. 5 express train (page B6)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOR WEEKEND WARRIORS NEW PRIDE AND GROWTH

BYLINE: By LENA WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1324 words

DATELINE: FORT DRUM, N.Y., Aug. 16


In 1979, having been expelled from high school and having lost his job as an
assistant manager at the Fish 'n' Chips in Somerset, N.J., 19-year-old Howard
Alford joined the National Guard.

''I hated it,'' Mr. Alford, of Somerset, recalled the other day as he sat atop
an M-48 tank during war games staged by the New Jersey Guard's 50th Armored
Division at this Army base. ''But my life wasn't going anywhere and joining the
Guard meant food on the table.''

In every state the National Guard is at its highest manpower levels since the
Vietnam War - a resurgence that is seen by many partly as a result of a weak
economy, but also as a return to patriotism and voluntarism.

'Constrained by Dollars'

In New York State, as of June 30, the Army National Guard was at 95 percent of
authorized strength - 21,700 soldiers of a possible 22,400 - after a low of
14,500 in 1979. In New Jersey, enlistment in the Guard was 10,970, of an
authorized strength of 12,839. Connecticut was only 1,000 short of its
authorized enlistment of 7,200, and officials there are predicting the Guard
will be at full strength by next year.

Nationwide, the Army National Guard was at 98 percent of authorized strength -
416,000 soldiers of a possible 431,762 - after a low of 370,000 in 1979. That
was the last year of the six- year Guard service commitment required of men who
were to be drafted into the regular armed forces in 1973, the final year of the
military draft. The Air National Guard was at 100 percent of authorized
strength, with an enlistment of 102,000.

''We are constrained by dollars,'' said Daniel Donohue, chief of public affairs
at the National Guard Bureau at the Pentagon. ''We have as many as we can pay
for. We have lines of people who want to come in and we can recruit more, but
economically we're limited.''

A Surprise to the States

The dramatic increase in the size of the Guard, while welcomed by state and
Federal officials, has caught many local governments by surprise and created
some logistical problems. The Federal Government provides 90 percent of the
financing for the Guard. The states contribute the remainder.

But Guard officials in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut said they needed
more space and more equipment to meet the growing need and to adequately train
their men and women.

Guard armories in the three states are being renovated and expanded. Two new
armories will be built by 1986 in Yonkers and Valhalla in Westchester County.

''Two of our armories are considered overcrowded,'' said Maj. William Lowe of
the 50th Armored Division in New Jersey. ''We have a proposal to build a new
armory in Fort Dix. We also have renovations and expansions going on constantly
throughout the state. Each year we do some construction.'' Connecticut is
currently spending $15 million to upgrade a training camp at Niantic.

Although National Guard duty is only part time, it offers a small extra income.
Members are sent to various training centers for six months and then are paid
for being on duty two days a month and for two weeks of active service each
year.

Pay varies from state to state, ranging from $80 to $200 for a two-day weekend
in New York, and from $300 to $1,000 for the two weeks of active duty, depending
on rank. In New Jersey, the pay ranges from $18.38 a day for a private
first-class to $167.94 for a two-star general. In Connecticut, pay averages
approximately $100 a day for enlisted members.

Medical Coverage and Pensions

Benefits offered by the Guard are often comparable to those in the active armed
forces, with full medical coverage, commissary privileges and pension available
for guardsmen who retire with 20 years of service. The Guard also offers tuition
assistance for many of its members and for college students who are enrolled in
the Reserve Officers Training Corps and serve in the Guard.

''I'd be here even if they didn't pay me,'' said David Lichtbach, a detective
with the New York City Police Department, as he carried an M-16 rifle through a
muddy field here toward his platoon's headquarters.

He paused, wondered aloud whether he should say such things, and determining it
was all right, continued: ''The Army is giving me certain skills that I can use
to help my country. Yes, the benefits are good, but I like what I do and I'd do
it with or without the pay.''

That kind of attitude is becoming more prevalent among the men and women of the
Guard, according to John P. Carragher, Assistant Adjunct General of the
Connecticut Guard. He pointed out that the average length of enlistment in the
Guard is 11 years, that well over 50 percent re-enlist and that nearly half of
those enlisted in the Guard have never had previous military service.

''The recession has nothing to do with it,'' he insisted. ''A lot of the kids
coming into the Guard are looking for guidance and discipline. They're looking
for an orderly environment and they tell us that. A lot of them want to do
something for their country. Now that may sound strange in this day and age, but
it's true.''

'This Gives Me Responsibility'

Todd Morrell of Blawenberg, N.J., perched on the side of an M-48 tank and,
looking very much like a kid playing weekend soldier, admitted that being in the
Guard made him feel good about himself and just plain gave him something to do.

''I joined on May 15, 1981 - my 17th birthday,'' he said. ''I was just hanging
out, not doing much of anything. This gives me some responsibility and the
experience is beneficial. It's something different than what most of the guys my
age back home are doing.''

The National Guard's role is to provide the reserve combat force for the armed
forces in case of emergency. But the most common question asked of the Guard is
whether, in the event of war, it would be ready to serve.

''That's a difficult question to answer,'' concedes Col. William C. Singleton,
chief of staff of the 50th Armored Division. ''Of course, we hope it never comes
to that. But to answer the question, it would depend on the unit and the
soldier. We don't view our training as a country club. We're not warmongers, but
if called, with a little more training, they can accomplish a mission.''

Aided in State Emergencies

The New Jersey Guard was called by Governor Kean to help out during last
winter's heavy floods in the central part of the state.

If there is one place that the resurgence of the National Guard is most evident,
it is here at Fort Drum, five miles north of Watertown. The base serves as the
training center for Guard units in all of the Northeast.

This month, 6,000 men and women from the 50th Armored Division - one of only two
armored divisions in the Guard - came to the fort for two weeks of summer
training. The units arrived by motor convoy on Aug. 6 and moved into the field
the following morning.

It is here, deep in the woods of this 102,000-acre base, that the Guard units
train for the day they may have to supplement the regular armed forces in the
event of war.

Helicopters hovered, firing missiles at targets hundreds of feet below.
Guardsmen armed with M-16 rifles patrolled the perimeters of the fields, where
small tent cities had been constructed. Jeeps manuevered between tanks on dirt
roads made treacherous by days of heavy rain.

This year marked the first time that the 50th Armored had spent a full eight
days in the field.

''In previous years we've moved into field locations for four days, then
returned to the cantonment area for two days of R & R, and to make necessary
repairs on our equipment,'' explained Maj. William Slossar of the public affairs
division.

''We felt the eight days in the field will offer us a better opportunity to test
our endurance in a combat environment over a sustained period,'' he added. ''All
the repairs have to be done in the field. We were concerned about fatigue among
the men, but the experiment has proven beneficial.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of National Guardsmen

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 20, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

2D QUARTER G.N.P. IS REVISED UPWARD TO A RATE OF 9.2%

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FUERBRINGER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1159 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 19


The economy grew even faster in the second quarter of the year than originally
reported, and inflation was even lower, the Government said today.

The gross national product, after adjustment for inflation, grew at a pace of
9.2 percent a year from April through June, while prices inched up at only a 3.5
percent annual rate, the Commerce Department reported.

Adding to this good news for the economy was a preliminary report today that
corporate profits, after taxes, rose 14.8 percent, the largest increase in
almost eight years. Manufacturing concerns, which were hard hit during the
recession, and banks and savings and loan associations accounted for most of the
increase.

Warning by Budget Office

But despite these positive indicators, Alice M. Rivlin, director of the
Congressional Budget Office, issued a warning today. She said that unless
Congress acted to reduce spending and raise taxes Federal budget deficits for
the next several years would be so high that they would result in ''higher
interest rates and slightly slower growth.'' Mrs. Rivlin made her comments as
the budget office released its midyear update of the Congressional budget and
economic forecast. (Page 34.)

The gross national product measures the nation's total output of goods and
services, and not since the fourth quarter of 1965, just before the Vietnam War
buildup began to overheat the economy, has it grown faster with lower price
increases in one quarter. In those three months, the economy shot ahead at a
10.1 percent annual rate. while prices, as measured by the so-called G.N.P.
deflator, rose at an annual rate of 2.2 percent. The deflator measures changes
in both prices and consumption.

Double-Digit Rise in 1978

In terms of growth alone, the second quarter's 9.2 percent is the highest in
five years. But while the G.N.P. surged at an 11 percent annual rate in the
second quarter of 1978, the rise in prices was also in double digits, soaring at
a 10.8 percent annual rate.

Since the Vietnam military buildup touched off the first of several increases in
inflation, such growth without inflation for any length of time has eluded
Presidents and their economic policy makers. This is the first quarter of such
positive news for the Reagan Administration, but it will be sometime before
economists and consumers know if it can continue.

''The recovery is well in gear,'' said Larry Speakes, the chief White House
spokesman, who is in Santa Barbara, Calif., with the President. ''The inflation
picture is more encouraging than we thought. With continued fiscal restraints,
we can have a recovery that is lasting, with solid growth and low inflation.''

A more immediate note of caution than Mrs. Rivlin's was sounded when the
Commerce Department, later in the day, reported that orders for durable goods,
which range from autos to airplanes, dropped 3.6 percent in July, after rising
for four months, including a 7.6 percent surge in June.

Robert Ortner, the Commerce Department's chief economist, said that ''a
one-month drop after a strong run- up should not be cause for concern; but if
they slip another month they would raise a question.''

The 9.2 percent growth of the economy follows a 2.6 percent increase in the
first quarter, and many economists are now predicting that the third quarter,
which ends in September, could be as strong as the second quarter. But they
acknowledge that such rapid growth in the fourth quarter would start them
worrying about a resurgence of inflation not too far down the road.

Upward Revision of Estimate

The 9.2 percent figure is an upward revision in the G.N.P. growth estimate from
the 8.7 percent first reported last month. G.N.P figures are regularly revised
because the first official report, which comes just after the end of a quarter,
is based on actual data for only the first month and estimates for the other
two. Revisions are made as more complete information is reported.

The revision, which amounts to a $2 billion increase in the inflation-adjusted
G.N.P., was based mostly on higher estimates for housing construction and a
slight improvement in net export figures because of a decline in imports. The
3.5 percent estimate for the G.N.P. deflator was revised downward from 4.5
percent, chiefly because of lower figures for residential construction prices.

But over all, the reasons for the surge in the second quarter remain the same as
originally reported: a 9.7 percent increase in consumer spending, most of it for
automobiles and appliances, and a strong effort by businesses to stem the
decline in their inventories, which had been falling sharply. This effort, a
response to stronger consumer spending, helped spur production.

In addition, business stepped up investment in autos, trucks and other business
equipment. The rise in spending on business equipment, said Steven Wood of Chase
Econometrics, a consulting concern, ''means the recovery is more broad-based, so
a small increase in interest rates will not be enough to derail the economy.''

'A Typical Rebound'

''This is a typical rebound at the beginning of a recovery,'' Mr. Ortner said
about the second quarter. ''Consumers let go of their purse strings and business
firms were trying to build up their inventories.''

But he added that, in the third quarter, the rate of increase in consumer
spending will be about half that in the second, while the inventory buildup will
be larger. This means that, going into the fourth quarter, businesses will not
be building inventories as fast, meaning a slower growth rate - around 4 percent
or 5 percent - but one that is ''sustainable'' without threatening a resurgence
in inflation.

The 3.5 increase in the G.N.P. deflator in the second quarter follows a 5.5
percent rise at an annual rate in the first quarter.

The fixed G.N.P. price index, which just measures changes in prices, rose 4.4
percent, after a 3.4 percent rise in the first quarter.

The first revision for gross national product for the second quarter of 1983 is
as follows, with all dollar figures in billions at seasonally adjusted annual
rates. Percentage changes are from the previous quarter at seasonally adjusted
annual rates:
                                                    Current Prices
                                             Last Pct.         Quarter Chg.
Gross National Product                             $3,270.0               x13.0
Consumption                                         2,148.4               x15.4
Business investment                                   335.9               x*4.6
Inventory change                                      -11.9                n.a.
Housing                                               127.7               x73.3
Net exports                                           -12.3                n.a.
Government                                            682.1               x*2.8
Memo: Final sales*                                  3,281.9               x*9.1

1972

Prices Gross National Product                      $1,523.4               x*9.2
Consumption                                         1,009.9               x*9.7
Business investment                                   162.3               x*5.9
Inventory change                                       -4.0                n.a.
Housing                                                52.4               x76.1
Net exports                                            11.0                n.a.
Government                                            291.9               -*1.4
Memo: Final sales*                                  1,527.4               x*5.9
Memo: G.N.P. price deflator                                               x*3.5
Memo: Fixed-weight price index                                           x*4.4%

* G.N.P. less inventory change.
n.a. Not applicable
Source: Commerce Department

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph of corporate profit (Page 34)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 20, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS DIGEST; SATURDAY, AUGUST 20, 1983

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 661 words


The Economy

The economy grew even faster in the second quarter than was originally
estimated, the Commerce Department reported, and inflation was even lower.
Officials said the G.N.P. grew at an annual rate of 9.2 percent, while prices
rose at a 3.5 percent annual rate.  The last single quarter in which the economy
grew faster with lower price increases was the fourth quarter of 1965, just
before the military buildup began for the Vietnam War.  More good news was that
corporate profits, after taxes, rose 14.8 percent, the largest increase in
almost eight years. Concern was expressed, however, that unless budget deficits
are reduced, high interest rates will slow recovery. (Page 1.)

New orders for durable goods fell 3.6 percent in July, the first decline since
February, the Commerce Department reported. Analysts said the decline is
evidence that high interest rates are forcing a slowdown in the economy.
Officials observed, however, that the orders remain 24 percent above the level
in October, considered the worst month of last year's recession. (33.)

The Congressional Budget Office predicts stronger growth this year and next in
its midyear report on the economy. But it still projects large future budget
deficits, even if proposed countersteps are approved. The figures in the
Congressional report closely paralleled those in the Administration's midyear
report. (34.)

Damage by Hurricane Alicia was estimated at $715 million to $1.65 billion as
teams of insurance adjusters arrived in Houston to start processing homeowner
and automobile claims. (7.) Glass damage in Houston's office skyscrapers was
extensive, officials said, but could have been worse. Specialists urged a
strengthening of the city's building codes, which some called lax. (7.)

Markets

The basic money supply declined $500 million for the week ended Aug. 10, the
first such drop since June 29, the Federal Reserve reported. The decline, which
exceeded expectations, touched off a rally that lowered interest rates. Credit
market participants were cheered by the belief that the Fed, with monetary
growth now slowing, would not move to tighten credit. (33.)

Stock prices varied within a narrow range.  The Dow Jones industrial average
closed up 1.73 points, to 1,194.21. In the overall market, however, declines
slightly outnumbered advances. For the week, the Dow rose 11.38 points. (37.)

The dollar was mixed, while gold prices fell $2 an ounce, to $418, in New York.
(39.) Livestock futures prices were mixed. (39.)

International

The Brazilian Government is under growing pressure at home to declare a
moratorium on repayment of its $90 billion of foreign debt. The pressure, once
confined to the opposition, now comes from businessmen, economists and
legislators from the Government's party. Opponents of a moratorium include
President Joao Baptisto Figueiredo and key members of his Cabinet. (1.)

Companies

The F.B.I. is investigating the possibility that the computers of at least two
companies were penetrated by the same group suspected of gaining entry to a
computer at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. In one case, the
computer involved was run by Gaffney-Cline Associates, a Dallas-based petroleum
advisory service. The other involved Canada Cement LaFarge of Montreal. (33.)

Bancal Tri-State, in which the Rothschilds own a stake, raised hopes on Wall
Street that it may be acquired. (34.)

Today's Columns

Brokers must now make a special report to the I.R.S.  about their customers'
proceeds from the sale of stocks, bonds and commodities. The requirement
provides a new weapon in the Government's battle against tax-evasion on Wall
Street. Your Money. (34.)

A new energy-saving method improves the operation of refrigerators, air
conditioners and heat pumps. It reduces the stages needed in vapor refrigeration
systems, and it allows heat pumps to be used in colder climates than are now
practical. Patents. (43.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 21, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOME APPLIED HISTORY FOR CENTRAL AMERICA

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2867 words


PRESIDENT

Reagan apparently didn't like everything he heard last weekend in Mexico.
Without specifying the American warships and troops sent to Central America, his
host, President Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado, warned against ''shows of force
which threaten to touch off a conflagration.'' Replied Secretary of State George
P. Shultz, ''The problem in Central America is not the show of force, it is the
use of force.'' President Reagan insisted 'hype and hoopla'' is distorting news
coverage of his Central American policies. Addressing Veterans of Foreign Wars,
he said, ''You wouldn't know from some of the coverage that the greatest portion
of our aid is humanitarian and economic.''

Some listeners were reminded of complaints about coverage during the Vietnam War
- a period that has come in for close study by critics and defenders of present
policies. The Week In Review asked six officials who advised President John F.
Kennedy during the formative stages of that American involvement whether there
are lessons from Vietnam that apply today in Central America. Their comments
follow.

If there is one overriding lesson of Vietnam, it is that an Administration must
level with Congress and the American people, accepting the burdens of a great
debate in which objectives and strategy are clarified, with their costs and
implications, and submitted for a clear vote of approval or rejection.

The Administration is apparently equating the role of Nicaragua (with Cuba and
the Soviet Union behind it) to North Vietnam (backed by China). It is a dubious
parallel still lacking in strong evidence, which has put the Administration in
the position of backing a massive ''covert'' operation while denying any intent
to change the Sandinista regime. Threats and military maneuvers the
Administration does not mean - or have public support - to back by outright
force can turn into called bluffs. Or they can create incidents that could tear
apart the American public, not to mention the key regional countries and our
allies elsewhere.

A deeper issue is the wisdom of the Administration's confused thrust in a
regional setting totally different from Vietnam. There, we had the support of
virtually all non-Communist nations in East Asia, who saw the conflict as
basically aggression from the North, a view subsequent events have confirmed.
Also, the legacy of French colonialism was a major, and underestimated,
obstacle. But in Central America we have to deal with the legacy of our own past
colonialism - as the area sees it. Key regional countries and the younger
generation throughout Latin America see the struggle as primarily due, not just
to desperate social and economic conditions, but to Washington's past armed
interventions and support for right-wing decadent dictatorships.

In Central America, we confront neither a strong North Vietnamese army nor a
threat of big power intervention (from China then). We can have our way if we
choose, but renewed colonialism - again as the area sees it - simply will not
work in the long run. The price of our past record may indeed include accepting
an unpalatable extreme leftist regime for a period of time; it need not include
hostile military bases - these we can readily deal with if they ever emerge. And
our clear national interest in the Panama Canal depends ultimately on working
with Panama and its neighbors and not being perceived as alien gringos. While
the area understands our present support for the El Salvador Government,
attempts to scotch revolutions by United States action could end by turning a
new generation of Latin American leaders wholly against the United States.
Nothing truly at stake in Central America warrants that risk or the risk that
Central America may distract us from the far graver economic and political
problems that could be spawned by the current Latin American debt crisis.  The
advice of regional nations is plainly to negotiate in a visibly serious fashion.
In this respect as well, El Salvador is clearly not Vietnam. As one who tried
for years to find an acceptable formula for a compromise political settlement in
Vietnam, I am convinced no such formula was possible in the face of a monolithic
North Vietnam totally in control (as events have now proved) of the Viet Cong in
the South and dedicated to ultimate total political control. By no stretch of
the imagination is the present opposition in Salvador, even with whatever
external ties and influences it may have, a like case. It is not monolithic, it
clearly contains elements that might fit into a democratic picture and it is
infinitely weaker. This is neither Vietnam nor postwar Central Europe, and a
compromise political settlement is conceivable.






(Johnson next)


It is dangerous and misleading to look for comparisons between the experience of
the Kennedy and subsequent Administrations in Vietnam with the situation in El
Salvador. When, in Vietnam, we helped the Government frustrate the North's
guerrillas, the North turned to its powerful and jungle-warfare-experienced
regular forces to subject the South (and Cambodia and Laos). No comparable
outside force exists in El Salvador and none of its neighbors is in a position
to carry out such a role. It might be more instructive to recall our help to
Greece in defeating guerrillas supported by outsiders in 1947-49, or the British
success in Malaya, 1948 to 1960. These successes were achieved by political,
economic and internal security measures adapted to the local situation.
Obviously this is required in El Salvador.

One people cannot prescribe political or economic formulae for another people
and culture - least of all by public lectures or legislative fiat. Reforms can
only be accomplished by sympathetic private dialogue in which each learns from
the other. The essence of effective government is the consent of the governed.
Installing institutions modeled on another culture and background does not
assure that consent.

Change for the sake of change is usually unwise. This was vividly demonstrated
to President Kennedy, when, with American acquiescence if not encouragement, and
stimulated by sensational media reporting from Saigon, Ngo Dinh Diem was deposed
- with virtually no concept of who and what would replace him.

American combat troops were not deployed in Vietnam until the spring of 1965,
when regular North Vietnamese forces had already entered the country. I have
always speculated on whether the results would have been different if, in the
early stages in 1960 - instead of deploying combat troops - we had devoted to
the development and support of South Vietnamese forces at least some portion of
the scale of effort that eventually went to our own forces and
''Vietnamization.'' It always seems simpler and easier to use Americans than to
enter into the ''nitty-gritty'' of developing local capabilities.

With the Soviet Union spending at least 10 times as much per capita in Cuba as
we are in El Salvador, I wonder if our friends and adversaries feel our
intentions are serious. I hope we can demonstrate that they are.






(Sorensen follows)


The Salvadoran revolution, in its geographical, historical, political and
military relationships with Washington and Moscow, bears scant resemblance to
the conflict that smoldered in Indochina during the Kennedy Presidency. There
are, nevertheless, lessons the Reagan Administration should consider before its
risky course in Central America becomes irreversible.

First, a Government in El Salvador that rejects, like the Diem regime in South
Vietnam, the military, land, legal, political and other reforms required to win
the confidence of its own countryside cannot be indefinitely maintained against
guerrillas whose fires are fueled by governmental misconduct.

As J.F.K. learned in Vietnam, each incremental increase in American military
advisers and assistance, every escalation in rhetoric about ''dominoes'' or
''national interest'', makes it harder for us to reverse course and thus easier
for the ''client government'' to resist our recommendations for reform. It also
stimulates the flow of military assistance to the guerrillas and, not
incidentally, increases their supply of captured or abandoned American weapons.
It was in this context that Kennedy, whatever his other errors, never accepted
strong and repeated recommendations to deploy U.S. combat units to fight in
South Vietnam and bomb North Vietnam.  Second, elections in which only one side
dares to participate will legitimatize neither the Salvadoran Government nor
American support for it. South Vietnam had several such elections. They did not
persuade our principal allies (or Kennedy himself), bring a halt to the Saigon
Government's mistreatment of Buddhists and other human rights violations, or
diminish Diem's vulnerability to local fears he was becoming more American
puppet than nationalist leader.

Third, if the U.S. show of force in El Salvador obtains not a Government victory
but a cease-fire and a negotiated political solution, however imperfect, that is
sufficient. That was Kennedy's course of action in Laos. He was bitterly
criticized for pursuing a ''no-win'' policy and for sending Americans to
participate in negotiations with the Communist Pathet Lao, Hanoi and Peking.

His permitting the Pathet Lao to participate in a neutral and independent
coalition Government (that later unsurprisingly failed to survive Hanoi's
victory in neighboring Vietnam) sounds much like allowing the Salvadoran rebels
to ''shoot their way'' into a share of power. But, as J.F.K. said, ''Experience
has taught us that no one nation. . . can solve all the problems of the world or
manage its revolutionary tides. . . Extending our commitments does not always
increase our security.''

Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon tried a different course in Indochina. The
result is symbolized by the Soviet naval bases built by the United States at
Camranh Bay and Danang. If we are to avoid both war in Central America and its
domination by pro-Soviet elements, let us hope that Ronald Reagan reads history.






(Krulak follows)


Analogies between Vietnam and our Central American situation spring up like
asparagus. We are bound to give them sober attention lest we make the same
mistakes twice. First, subversive insurgency is pretty much the same wherever
you find it. Bred in an atmosphere of hunger, sickness, poverty and inadequate
government concern, it is nourished by coordinated agitation. The agitators'
puppet strings go back to Moscow. In this case, Cuba and particularly Nicaragua
are the prime intermediaries. Second, the privileged sanctuary confers great
advantages on the antagonist who has it. In the Vietnam war, Laos and North
Vietnam provided sanctuary. In our fear of irritating the Soviet Union, we stood
by and watched a flood of warlike things pass through North Vietnam's port,
Haiphong. Once lost in the hinterland, the munitions were difficult to find and
destroy. As a result, in the 1968 Tet offensive, the North Vietnamese were able
to emplace heavy artillery within range of Saigon and every provincial capital.
More than anything else, our unwillingness to face up to the privileged
sanctuary cost the free world the Vietnam War.

The analogy with Central America is perfect. The Nicaraguan port of Corinto is
Haiphong, whence the munitions find their way to El Salvador through Honduras.
In North Vietnam, we belatedly took away the privileged sanctuary by mining
Haiphong. In Nicaragua, we can help to take it away by openly supporting the
freedom fighters who want to see the Sandinistas replaced by a freely chosen
democratic government.

Another analogy is gradualism. In Vietnam, we lost 58,000 lives and untold
treasure because we tried to inch our way toward a solution instead of providing
South Vietnam with all needed support at the outset. For example, we authorized
delivery of aircraft to the South Vietnamese - but not jet aircraft.

We must not repeat the error of gradualism. The Administration asked Congress
for $110 milliion for El Salvador and Congress cut it in half ($55 million) -
far less than the value of the 11 shiploads of Soviet material delivered to
Nicaragua in the first seven months of this year.

Finally, it is an error ever to do the actual fighting for your small friend
under attack by insurgent forces. Train him, supply him, arm him, educate him,
sustain him, but let him do his own fighting. We erred in Vietnam - we took over
a large part of the battle. In Central America, happily, we have so far avoided
that pitfall.






(Taylor follows)


Laying aside Vietnam, which can be made to prove or disprove just about
anything, there is a major lesson to be learned from the Kennedy Administration
experiences, with possible application to our policy in Central America. It
derives from the blended experience in the Bay of Pigs fiasco and the highly
successful Cuba missile crisis. Both episodes were carried out by the same
President, supported by essentially the same advisers. The success and the
failure resulted largely because of our having adhered to or ignored one
precept:

Before committing the United States to an important and risky foreign policy
action, be sure you know your goal and are determined to pay the price of
achieving it.

In the Bay of Pigs, the Kennedy team never had a clear understanding of the
purpose of the Cuban brigade that was landed on Cuban soil. Was it to drive
inland and try to incite a popular uprising? To join insurgents in the nearby
mountains? And what would the brigade do if it were boxed in its beachhead by
Castro's troops? Such questions were never raised before the Government was
committed to this risky undertaking. Furthermore, there was less determination
to succeed than to avoid involving U.S. forces in the landing.

The Cuban missile crisis was quite different. From the moment President Kennedy
and his advisers saw the aerial photography showing Soviet ballistic missiles
being emplaced, the objective was clear - to get the missiles out of Cuba by
whatever means necessary. There was no doubt about the determination to succeed.

What can the Reagan Administration learn from this? The President could
certainly profit by restating his policy objectives in simpler terms than has
been the case thus far. As for determination to pay the price to achieve these
objectives, the President has shown no lack of it. Congress, however, has been
niggardly in appropriating funds and quick to impose operational restrictions on
our personnel in Central America, thus recalling the spirit of the Bay of Pigs.






(Hilsman follows)


Both the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations were deeply divided about the
nature of the struggle in Vietnam. One group saw it as part of global Communist
expansionism. Although conceding that purely Vietnamese issues were also at
work, they insisted the Viet Cong was ultimately inspired by Moscow and Peking,
which would profit by a Communist victory strategically, economically and
politically. It followed that such an aggression could be met only by military
force.

The rival view agreed the insurgency was led by bona fide Communists, with full
support from Moscow and Peking. But, they argued, the insurgency was more
accurately described as an anticolonialist and essentially nationalistic
movement, feeding on social discontent in the South, such as the need for land
reform, and whose leaders just happened to be Communist Party members. A
Communist Vietnam, they conceded, would be troublesome politically to American
interests in Southeast Asia, but the economic implications were miniscule. And
not only was Vietnam of little intrinsic importance strategically but, they
argued, Hanoi's demonstrated determination to remain independent of Moscow and
Peking was ample assurance neither could turn Vietnam into a military base.

Since the insurgency was a nationalist, anticolonailist movement, they
concluded, sending foreign troops would be self-defeating. Foreign troops would
recruit more peasants for the Viet Cong than they could possibly kill. As
President Kennedy said, ''In the final analysis, it is their war.''

The Vietnam experience might at least lead us to ask the right questions about
places like Central America: What is the essential nature of the insurgencies?
Are they essentially the creatures of ''world Communism'' or are they
nationalistic, anti-oligarch, peasant revolts, feeding on social discontent,
whose leaders just happen to be Communist Party members? As for strategic
implications, would a Communist victory in a Central American country give
Moscow a vital military base or has the new missile technology rendered such
bases obsolete? Even if it has not, did not the 1962 Cuban missile crisis
discourage Moscow from trying that kind of move again? And finally, does the
long history of resentment of ''economic imperialism'' by the ''Colossus of the
North'' and its alliance with Latin American oligarchs mean that, as in Vietnam,
American troops would end up recruiting more Communists than they could kill?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of William P. Bundy, Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor; photos of Lieut.
Gen. Victor H. Krulak, Roger Hllsman; photos of Theodore C. Sorensen, U. Alexis
Johnson

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 21, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS MASS MARKET

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 708 words


Mass market paperbacks are soft-cover books sold at newsstands, variety stores
and supermarkets, as well as in bookstores. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from bookstores and representative wholesalers with
more than 40,000 outlets across the United States.  1

MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon.

(Warner, $3.95.) The secret behind a woman business tycoon's rise to power:
fiction. 2

DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror. 3

SPELLBINDER, by Harold Robbins. (Pocket, $3.95.) From soldier in Vietnam to
television evangelist: fiction.  4

THE CASE OF LUCY BENDING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $3.95.) The aberrant
behavior of an 8-year-old girl epitomizes the society of Florida's Gold Coast:
fiction.  5

LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Pocket, $3.95.) Life in the international glitter set:
fiction.  6

FRIDAY, by Robert A. Heinlein. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) The adventures on
Earth of an Artificial Person: science fiction.  7

TRULY TASTELESS JOKES TWO, by Blanche Knott. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor.  8

INDECENT EXPOSURE, by David McClintick. (Dell, $3.95.) The scandal at Columbia
Pictures and Wall Street's part in it. 9

DAKOTA!  by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam, $3.95.) Dangers await Toby Holt in the
Bad Lands, while his wife faces perils at home: historical fiction.  10

TRULY TASTELESS JOKES, by Blanche Knott. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor.  11

THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER, by Jeffrey Archer. (Pocket, $3.95.) The children of two
bitter business rivals marry: fiction.  12

CINNAMON SKIN, by John D. MacDonald. (Fawcett, $3.50.) Travis McGee investigates
a suspicious accident at sea: fiction.  13

THE LAW OF THE DESERT BORN, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $2.95.) Short stories
about the old American West. 14

FLETCH AND THE MAN WHO, by Gregory McDonald. (Warner, $2.95.) Murder on the
Presidential campaign trail: fiction.  15

THE MAN FROM ST. PETERSBURG, by Ken Follett. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) International
intrigue on the eve of World War I: fiction.TRADE

Trade paperbacks are soft-cover books usually sold in bookstores and at an
average price higher than mass-market paperbacks. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States .  1

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $7.95.) Three generations of a wealthy
San Francisco family: fiction.  2

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $5.95.)
Black men and women in the South: Pulitzer Prize-winner for fiction. 3

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson. (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.  4

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Inspirational
talks by a California professor.  5

BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon strips
featuring some very odd characters. 6

LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $10.95.) How to add
years to your life and life to your years.  7

LINDA EVANS BEAUTY AND EXERCISE BOOK, by Linda Evans. (Simon & Schuster/Wallaby,
$9.95.) How-to by the television personality.  8

ROYAL SEDUCTION, by Jennifer Blake. (Fawcett/Columbine, $5.95.) A New Orleans
belle, a European prince, international intrigue: historical romance.  9

GARFIELD EATS HIS HEART OUT, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) The latest
adventures of that gluttonous cat: cartoon humor.  10

WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?  by Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press,
$7.95.) Guide for job hunters and career changers.  11

THIN THIGHS IN 30 DAYS, by Wendy Stehling. (Bantam, $2.95.) How-to.  12

THE RAPTURE, by Hal Lindsey. (Bantam, $6.95.) Predictions about an approaching
global event based on an interpretation of the Bible.  13

FIT OR FAT?  by Covert Bailey. (Houghton Mifflin, $4.50.) Exercises for fitness.
14

GETTING TO YES, by Roger Fisher and William Ury. (Penguin, $4.95.) How to
negotiate equitably and happily.  15

BELOVED, by Bertrice Small. (Ballantine, $6.95.) A descendant of Cleopatra
relives the romantic destiny of her legendary forebear: fiction.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 21, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Rising Immigration Tide Strains Nation's Schools

BYLINE: By GENE I. MAEROFF

SECTION: Section 12, Education, Summer Survey; Page 1, Column 1; Education Desk

LENGTH: 2761 words


AMERICA'S classrooms, confronted by the biggest influx of immigrant students
since early in the century are once again feeling the heat that turned them into
melting pots for previous generations of newcomers.  The nation's face is hanged
by waves of fresh arrivals from Latin a, the Caribbean and Southeast Asia, as
well as a more traditional European sources.  The impact is especially apparent
in elementary and secondary which are struggling to absorb immigrant young- the
hundreds of thousands each year.

It is pervasive transformation.  In Boulder High School in Colorado, for
example, students celebrate the Hmong New Year with their new classmates from
Laos; at Abraham Lincoln High School in Brooklyn, new arrivals from the Soviet
Union teach a few words of Russian to their fellow students; in south Florida,
school districts search desperately for teachers who can speak the Creole French
used by Haitian refugees.  The development is also fueling a national debate
over the extent to which the schools are obligated to help children preserve the
Hispanic heritage that forms the background of the largest group of immigrants.

The speed with which some of the new arrivals are making their presence felt can
be seen at Kinlock Park Junior High School in Miami, where Sandra and Soledad
Arguelles, who arrived with their family just three years ago from Cuba not
knowing any English, were graduated this year as co-valedictorians with
straight-A averages.  The sisters, a year apart in age but in the same grade,
were part of an unexpected influx of 18,327 children from Cuba and Haiti who
surged into the Dade County public schools between April 1980 and January 1982.

Altogether in 1980, the United States officially received 808,000 immigrants,
more than in any year since 1914, according to the Immigration and
Naturalization Service.  In addition, the Federal Government estimates that a
total of 3.5 million to 6 million aliens have entered the country illegally.

Experts are not sure precisely how many school-age children are among the new
arrivals, legal and illegal, but they know that the numbers are large and that
the task of helping them fit into American society is falling primarily on the
nation's schools.  It is a responsibility that in some parts of the country,
notably Florida, Texas and California, has taken on overwhelming proportions.
The task has been complicated by the necessity of having to deal with large
numbers of other children, mostly of Hispanic background, who are unable to
pursue an education fully in English though their families have been in the
country for at least a generation.

THE implications of having to absorb both immigrants and native-born students
with limited English proficiency are enormous -- affecting curriculum, costs,
the availability of teaching jobs and educational and social philosophy.  "All
of this gives us tremendous diversity, but it is also one of the biggest
problems facing the schools," said Robert Alioto, superintendent of the San
Francisco public schools.  "All that diversity requires us to render special
assistance to help kids make the transition.  Some of them are right out of the
hills of Asia with little or no formal education.  It is a great challenge to
our staff."

While the situation evokes nostalgic images of the era when New York City's
Lower East Side or Chicago's Maxwell Street teemed with fresh arrivals speaking
a Babel of languages, there are notable differences.  A major one, authorities
believe, is that the effect on the schools is far greater today than in earlier
immigration waves.

A larger proportion of the new arrivals are of non-European background, and if
they are literate it is sometimes in a language that uses an alphabet alien to
American schools.  At the same time, the schools during the current tide of
immigration have committed themselves to respect the culture of immigrant
children and, often, to use their native language as a teaching vehicle until
they become proficient in English.

Whereas many immigrant children at the turn of the century never entered school
but went immediately to work at a time when child labor was accepted and menial
jobs were abundant, today's new arrivals are almost certain to enroll.  The
schools in turn are now more likely to try to dissuade them from dropping out.

"The truth is that the immigrant children dropped out in great numbers -- to
fall back on the customs and skills their families brought with them to
America," Colin Greer wrote in "The Great School Legend," a book challenging
traditional notions about immigrants and the public schools.

An effect of this newer policy of accommodation is that group-achievement scores
in schools with large numbers of new arrivals have suffered, contributing to
lower overall averages in ways that are seldom acknowledged by critics who cite
test scores as evidence of failure by the schools.

George Washington High School, at the northern end of Manhattan, for example, is
among the lowest in the city in test scores and also has an enrollment in which
recent arrivals from the Dominican Republic predominate -- hardly a coincidence.
"Many of them have had little or no formal education," said Samuel Kostman, the
principal, "and so we have a bilingual program just to give them remediation in
their native tongue since they can neither read nor write Spanish."

Two generations ago George Washington High was a haven for another large group
of immigrants, refugees from Nazi Germany -- such as Henry Kissinger, whose
parents settled in the same Washington Heights neighborhood that has now become
home to the Dominicans.

Angelo Falcon, executive director of the Institute for Puerto Rican Policy in
New York City, asserts that it is essential that school systems uncover and
disclose information on the progress of the newer Americans.  "Here in New York
City," he said, "we get information about scores going up and it looks like we
should be optimistic, but when you look at Hispanics as compared with whites and
blacks there is a different picture.  These kinds of breakdowns are needed for
policy decisions."

Much of the attention surrounding today's new arrivals focuses on language and
the best way to to teach them English.  Related to this issue is the controversy
over how much responsibility the schools have for helping newcomers preserve
their former language and culture.  "At the turn of the century, and even when I
was going to school in the 1930's and 1940's," said Jesse M. Soriano, head of
bilingual education for the United States Department of Education, "teachers
just assumed that you were going to become an American and they weren't
sensitive to cultural differences.  The attitude was, 'It is not up to us to
understand you, but it is up to you to understand us.' That isn't necessarily
the case now."

The greater openness to immigrants and their traditions comes at a time when the
social studies curriculum is putting a new emphasis on "multicultural
education," an approach that increases the attention given to non-European
nations.  Immigrant students are both contributing to and benefiting from this
change.

There are also efforts under way in some social studies classes to present
lessons that make immigrant students feel more comfortable, while promoting
understanding between American-born students and their classmates from abroad.
The National Council for the Social Studies will have several sessions at its
convention in November to help teachers build curriculum that pertains to the
latest wave of immigration.  One workshop, to be conducted in conjunction with
the American Bar Association, will be a simulation of a United States Senate
hearing on whether to grant refugee status to Haitians, aimed at teaching
students the difference between refugees from political oppression and other
immigrants.

THE schools are just starting to come to terms with the "Americanizing" of these
new immigrants and preparing them for the responsibilities of citizenship.  "I
hope it will lead to a whole new look at the old question of how to promote
citizenship and civic education while still recognizing the value of different
cultural backgrounds," said Lynn B. Iglitzin, executive director of the social
studies group.

A publication of the Council, "Curriculum Guidelines for Multiethnic Education,"
asserts that one role of the schools should be to help students "develop
improved self-concepts" by knowing more about their national origins.

The extra financial burden of enrolling large numbers of immigrants has required
additional funds that some school districts cannot easily generate.  In Texas,
where many youngsters and their families have illegally crossed the border from
Mexico, the State Legislature authorized schools to exclude illegal aliens.
However, the United States Supreme Court overturned the statute last year and
ordered the Texas schools to admit such children.

Higher education as well has been affected by the influx of immigrants, and some
colleges and universities are making allowances for gaps in the backgrounds of
prospective students who have had only a portion of their earlier schooling in
this country.

City College of the City University of New York had an enrollment of 13,500 last
year, of which 42 percent were not born in the United States.  They came from
more than 80 countries, and it was necessary to offer classes in English as a
second language to 1,812 of the students.

Officials expect to enroll more such college students as recent immigrants and
native-born Americans of limited English proficiency move through elementary and
secondary schools and seek admission to higher education.

Immigrant students have usually been absorbed without incident, but sometimes
animosity toward the newcomers has stirred tensions.  Thong Hy Huynh, who
emigrated from Vietnam three years ago, was stabbed to death during a fight with
white students at Davis High School in Davis, Calif., on May 4.  He was one of
six students from Vietnam in the school, and the friction, which first took the
form of name-calling by a small group of whites, increased.

A few days after the 17-year-old Mr. Huynh was killed, 1,200 students crowded
into the gymnasium at Davis High School, where David Murphy, the principal,
quietly asked them to imagine wait it would be like to live in a country with a
different language and a different culture.  "This might have been a conflict
between human beings without the immigrant aspect being a factor," Mr. Murphy
said.  "But I don't want to downplay the possibility of conflict between the
mainstream and new people."

Not only the public schools are affected by the mounting number of students from
other countries.  Parochial schools, too, are points of entry into American
society for immigrant children, and the pressures on parochial schools are much
like those on public schools.

Among the 90,000 students in the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn, for
example, which includes both Brooklyn and Queens, there are many recent arrivals
including 18,000 from Latin America, 10,000 from Italy, 7,000 from Haiti, 1,000
from Hong Kong and Taiwan and 750 from South Korea.

Mary Wei, an immigrant from Vietnam who arrived unable to speak English, was the
valedictorian this year at St. Frances Cabrini School.  In 4 of the 11 districts
that make up the diocese, the winners of this year's spelling bees were recent
immigrants from Asian countries.

Traditions that immigrant students bring with them are also shaping the
experiences of native-born American students, as can be seen in the Catholic
schools, where some holidays that formerly got little attention in the United
States are being accorded fresh importance.  Youngsters in the Brooklyn Diocese,
for instance, are now learning to celebrate the feast day of Our Lady of
perpetual Help, which is popular in Haiti.

Of all the questions involving immigrants, whatever their country of origin,
those related to bilingual education are the most controversial.  The Supreme
Court, basing its decision on the Civil Rights Act of 1964, ruled in 1973 that
such students were entitled to special attention.  The Court did not specify,
however, what form the aid should take.  In the years following that verdict
there has been constant debate over whether children are best served by teaching
them subjects in their native language until they learn English or by immersing
them in the regular program and giving them English lessons on the side, the
so-called English-as-a-second-language approach.

The debate is complicated by the absence of research data clearly indicating the
superiority of one method over the other.  Efforts to provide help to
non-English-speaking students have been assisted since 1968 by Title VII of the
Federal Elementary and Secondary Education Act, which gives the schools $138
million annually for the programs.  In addition, millions of dollars are spent
through state bilingual programs.

An example of such a program is the Center for Non-English-Speaking Students,
which serves 90 immigrants from Southeast Asia at Colorado's Boulder High
School.  A major focus of the center for the last two years has been a magazine
the students produce to hone their skills in English and then sell to other
students at Boulder High.  Each issue features interviews with their family
members about customs and traditions in their Asian countries of origin.

"Many of these students are Hmongs from the hill country of Southeast Asia,
where there is no written language," said Gary G. Cox, the principal, "and their
heritage has been transferred to them orally, so it is the first time that the
family stories are appearing in writing."

MOST Americans say they support special programs in the schools for students who
do not speak English, according to a recent survey by the Immigration Research
Program at Columbia University.  The survey also found, however, that most
people do not favor keeping students in the programs once they have learned
English.  Attitudes toward assimilation affected feelings about bilingual
education, according to a report on the survey.  "Those people who thought that
the United States would be better off if immigrants stopped speaking their
native language and learned English," the report said, "were less likely to
favor billingual education."

The "maintenance" approach allows students to be taught some subjects
indefinitely in their native tongue, while the "transitional" approach calls for
them to be transferred into the regular program as soon as they learn English.

Such districts as Dade County in Florida have staked out a middle ground,
allowing students of Hispanic or Haitian background to continue receiving 30
minutes a day of instruction in their native tongue even after attaining
proficiency in English.  "Our goal is not only to help a student learn English
but also to retain literacy in his native language," said Paul W. Bell,
associate superintendent of the Dade County school system.  "Native North
American students at times feel frustrated that they do not have the same
opportunity to be billingual."

Josh DeWind, director of Columbia's Immigration Research Program, praises the
efforts to help students retain their original language.  "Here we are talking
about trying to increase foreign-language enrollments among American students so
that we will have more billingual people in this country, and we are not trying
to keep this alive in the students who start with another language," Mr. DeWind
said.

The question of whether to encourage students to perpetuate fluency in their
native tongue has thrust the schools into a larger debate over the future of the
United States as a monolingual society.  Critics charge that the dominance of
English could be weakened and national cohesiveness could be threatened if
educators do not handle this issue carefully.

Sandra Arguelles, the co-valedictorian in Florida, who was taught mathematics
and science in Spanish for more than a year before shifting to a curriculum
entirely in English, now studies Spanish only as a foreign language, much as an
American-born student would.  She is grateful both for the original bilingual
instruction and for the chance to continue studying Spanish.  "All of the
teachers helped a lot," she said.  "They were always there for me when I didn't
understand something.  I owe a lot to my teachers -- and to this country."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustration, no caption, Michael David Brown; Picture, Sandra
Arguelles and Soledad Arguelles valedictorians of their junior high school in
miami, with older sister, Trinidad.  The New York Times/Susan Greenwood

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 23, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: SHORT-CHANGED LATIN ARMY

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 962 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR


El Salvador is impoverished, and so is its army. Some of the army's problems in
the war with leftist guerrillas stem from mundane military shortages.

It is the rainy season, and nearly three-fourths of the army has been in the
field since early June, but most of the soldiers do not have ponchos. These
waterproof, sleeveless rain garments are badly needed to maintain health as well
as comfort.

When Salvadoran troops were sweeping the high slopes of a 7,000- foot volcano in
June, there were many cases of respiratory illness from the wet cold, an
American military adviser said.

The United States Military Group, which provides training and counsels the
Salvadoran Army, has recommended that some ponchos be shipped here from the
United States. The most economical solution, however, some experts believe,
would be to help El Salvador set up a poncho factory.

In the four fiscal years since 1980, the United States has appropritated $184.1
million in military aid, but this amount has been stretched thin to supply such
basics as weapons and ammunition while the Salvadoran Army has grown from about
6,000 troops to more than 22,000. The air force is currently short of general-
purpose bombs, and artillery is scarce. There are also few military niceties,
like night-vision equipment.

Some soldiers have Vietnam-pattern United States jungle boots - very
satisfactory footwear. But some units have old, shoddy footwear.

Feeding the Troops

Another ''mundane'' problem involves the ancient question of feeding soldiers.
Salvadoran battalions did not, before the war, spend much time in the field. The
army has no canned or dried military field rations to be carried by individual
riflemen. Instead, groceries - often rice and beans - are carried in bulk to the
troops camped in the countryside of this rugged and mountainous nation. The
supplies usually come every third day, by truck or even bus.

The rebels have begun to try to ambush the food vehicles. Both Americans and
Salvadorans say they hope to develop a Salvadoran field ration.

Water is an even more basic military requirement for the infantry. Several of
the mountains and volcanoes that serve as guerrilla strongholds are ''dry,''
without any streams. A rich army can supply water with helicopters, but El
Salvador has only 18 helicopters in all and can only sporadically use them for
such a purpose. The guerrillas, of course, have no helicopters, but they have
civilian porters who carry supplies, sometimes on journeys of more than a 100
miles on foot.


The war has been an immense human tragedy for El Salvador's civilian population
- but it has also been a huge inconvenience.

One practice of the guerrillas has been to destroy the pylons that carry
electrical power lines to the countryside. Another practice has been to stop
civilian buses on the highways, force the passengers to get off and then burn
the buses.

American and Salvadoran officials tend to boast that such guerrilla tactics are
politically counterproductive and backfire against the insurgents. Some
Salvadoran civilians say it is not so simple. A national survey indicated that
in this extremely poor country, only about 18 percent of the population had
electricity in the first place. ''It makes very litte difference to those poor
campesinos if electrical power is disrupted,'' a Salvadoran said.

On the other hand, electricity is needed to power pumps that raise water from
deep gorges to villages situated on ridges. Salvadoran women who must climb
several hundred feet down a ravine each day, or twice a day, to fetch buckets of
water may be resentful. There is even more consensus that the bus-burning is a
political mistake. El Salvador is a small country, and a custom has developed in
recent decades of frequent travel to visit relatives and friends. The present
overcrowding on buses caused by the burnings is probably resented, most people
believe.


The small number of helicopters, some of which are usually being repaired, has
contributed to another serious problem for the army. This is the relatively
sluggish medical evaucation of wounded soldiers.

The Defense Minister recently announced that 2,292 Government soldiers were
killed in action and 4,195 wounded in the 12-month period ending June 30. These
are substantial casualties in an armed force that totals only about 33,000
regular troops and paramilitary security forces. And the ratio of slightly more
than one death to every two wounds is extraordinarily high in modern military
medicine.

A retired American military authority, Lieut. Col. Edward King, who sometimes
escorts visiting American delegations on trips here, said: ''There are
surprising numbers of amputees in the military hospitals - way too many for a
war in which artillery and mortar fire is not a very big factor. It is kind of a
mystery why the doctors take off so many limbs wounded by small arms fire.''
Colonel King also noted that a maimed Salvadoran soldier could count on little
in the way of Government benefits and compensation.



15% of Elite Unit Re-enlisted

This may help explain the problem of low re-enlistments, which has drawn
criticism from some United States Senators and Representatives. The enlisted
man's term of service in the army is 18 months, or 24 months if he is part of a
United States-trained ''quick reaction'' battalion. Only 15 percent of the first
such elite battalion re-enlisted. About 60 percent of the second battalion is
still in the army, but many of them have not reached the two-year mark.

United States lawmakers have complained about this situation, but Salvadorans
tend to be more tolerant. A Salvadoran colonel, in a nearly indisputable
opinion, said, ''Soldiers become tired.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of government soldiers; photo of wounded soldier

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 23, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT EDUCATION;
COLLEGE 'STARS' GO TO BAT FOR THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 949 words


PAJARO DUNES, CALIF. STATUS and prestige are the currency of progress in
American society. Let a lowly principal or an assistant professor come up with
the most sensible proposal, and you get a polite shrug. But get a star to speak
up, and the country listens.

This is why last week's three-day meeting on this secluded beach colony between
Monterey and Santa Cruz seemed a historic occasion: It was convened by two
academic stars, Donald Kennedy, the president of Stanford University, and Derek
Bok, the president of Harvard University. They were joined by the presidents of
Columbia University (Michael I. Sovern) and the Universities of Chicago (Hanna
H. Gray), Michigan (Harold Shapiro) and Wisconsin (Robert M. O'Neil). Their
agenda was to examine the question of what major universities, their leaders and
faculties should do to help the public schools.

The meeting was given added significance by the inclusion of the heads of four
major schools of education: Lawrence A. Cremin, president of Teachers College,
Columbia University; Patricia A. Graham, dean of Harvard's Graduate School of
Education; Bernard Gifford, dean of the School of Education at the University of
California at Berkeley, and J. Myron Atkin, dean of education at Stanford
University. Since the school of education is often low man on the university
totem pole, their participation in this meeting will send out signals to
academia not to sell education faculties short.


For 14 intensive hours of analysis, debate and soul-searching, the presidents
confirmed their determination to be involved in the elementary and high schools'
problems, and to try to take their institutions with them.

Occasionally, the soul-searching was painful. The presidents were aware of the
universities' past vulnerability to critics who sniped at the schools without
understanding or helping them. They were conscious, too, of the snobbery with
which professors often view schoolteachers. They were sensitive to the charge
that when professors act as school reformers, they tend to dictate rather than
to cooperate.

The university presidents took polite but emphatic exception to recent reports
that the schools were going to hell in a hand basket. Yes, they said in effect,
improvement is needed; but it distorts reform efforts when past progress is not
recognized, particularly the strides toward equality of opportunity. There is
special poignancy in the warning from the presidents of elite universities that
schools must not give up a fair deal for the many in return for excellence for
the few.

Referring to recent reports that lashed out at the schools' mediocrity, the
presidents said they understood the tactic of dramatizing in order to arouse
public concern. But Mr. Kennedy observed that, ''to use a Vietnam analogy, some
seem to feel that we have to bomb the village in order to save it.''


The statement that emerged from the discussions here made these points:


- The task cannot be accomplished unless the Federal Government joins with the
states and local governments in supporting the schools. (In the course of the
discussion, Mr. Kennedy called it ''outlandish'' for the National Commission on
Excellence in Education to make so many specific demands on the schools without
recommending Federal subsidies.)


- The universities must play an active part. ''We,'' said the presidents,
''therefore welcome a role as partners and advocates for our colleagues in
precollegiate public education.''


- But partnership and advocacy must not be on a temporary, one-shot basis, with
that short attention span typical of reform movements. Help needs to be
''consistent over time: episodic intervention, like volatile government support,
will merely raise expectations and then leave them unfulfilled.''

The presidents remembered the flurry of support for the schools in the wake of
the Sputnik scare in the late 1950's, when university scholars, with Federal
aid, helped schoolteachers, especially in science; but as the Government and the
scholars withdrew, the reforms faltered. The presidents cited examples of
actions already taken:

Stanford cooperates with six neighboring school districts.

Yale's faculty works with high school teachers in New Haven.

Harvard has established a Principals' Center to help school leaders perform
their task more effectively.

The University of Chicago runs a summer seminar with local school
superintendnets.

Columbia, through Teachers College, works with a network of some 50 schools and
sends its faculty members into classrooms to cooperate with teachers.

Still, current actions remain sporadic. The key question of this working,
soul-searching meeting was how the presidents and their elite institutions could
enlist their image as pace setters to turn current public interest into a
constructive, lasting efffort to improve the schools rather than merely the
fortunes of political candidates.

The presidents of key public and private universities are not just local
administrators, they are national leaders - or should be.

Those who met in here last week, sensing what was expected of them, concluded
their statement: ''Although the responses of our institutions will vary
according to their situation, our intention is firm that they will respond
positively. Recognizing the central importance of the nation's schools, we
further commit ourselves to assist, by personal advocacy, the cause of public
education.''

This may at times involve them in controversy; but leadership is never without
risk, and the greater risk is to deprive the schools of the leadership by the
academic stars to whom the public and the politicians are likely to listen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. WOULD COOL TIES WITH MARCOS IF GUILT IS FOUND

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 991 words


As Filipinos continued to pay their respects to Benigno Aquino, his widow,
Corazon, returned to Manila from the United States. Page A4.


WASHINGTON, Aug. 24 - The Reagan Administration is prepared to dissociate itself
from the Government of President Ferdinand E. Marcos if the Philippine leader or
any of his top associates are found responsible for the assassination of Benigno
S. Aquino Jr., Administration officials said today.

The officials said it was essential for Americans to recognize that United
States ties with the Philippines go beyond relations with the Marcos Government,
and that those ties have an importance for the United States and its allies that
must not be jeopardized because of the slaying of the leading opposition figure.

''What is critical,'' one official said, ''is the strategic and historic
relationship between our two countries. We have to avoid doing anything that
would do serious damage to that.''

Specifically, officials said that regardless of whether the Philippine
authorities had a role in the Aquino killing, the United States must try to
insure that it retains air and naval bases in the Philippines and that the
Philippine Government is not overthrown by the continuing insurgency of the New
People's Army, a Maoist group.

Visit by Reagan Scheduled

The Administration is prepared to take whatever steps are needed to demonstrate
its outrage if the Marcos Government is found responsible for the killing, a
senior State Department official said.

But he said such moves as the possible cancellation of President Reagan's
scheduled visit to the Philippines in November must not be allowed to undercut
the important long-term relations between the two countries.

Publicly and privately, Administration officials have been pressing Mr. Marcos
to hold an impartial and objective inquiry into the slaying Sunday of former
Senator Aquino. But American officials said today that if the Marcos Government
was itself involved in the killing they could not expect to get an honest
report, given the tight control that Mr. Marcos holds over political life in the
Philippines.

Mr. Aquino was shot dead moments after he stepped off an airliner in Manila
after returning from three years in the United States. The man the Government
says was the assassin was killed by security guards. Apart from a ring with the
initial ''R'' on it and the name ''Rolly'' on his underwear, Philippine
officials say they have no clues to the man's identity.

The State Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation said today that
they had received requests from the Philippine authorities for help in tracing
the origin of the pistol that was used in killing Mr. Aquino. The F.B.I. was
also asked for help in fingerprint analysis, they said.



Top Judge to Head Inquiry

Mr. Marcos today named the Supreme Court's Chief Justice, Enrique Fernandez, to
head an investigation. But as a result of political changes since the imposition
of martial law in the Philippines in 1972, all of the Supreme Court justices are
personal appointees of Mr. Marcos and, officials here said, are not thought to
have much independence.

There are also tight restrictions on the press, despite the formal lifting of
martial law in 1981, and this creates a poor atmosphere for an unfettered
investigation, the officials said.

The Reagan Administration has not said anything about who it thinks was
responsible for the assassination, but it has also not endorsed Mr. Marcos's
protestations of having had nothing to do with it.

Today, three Democratic Representatives called for a suspension of all American
aid to the Philippines. The three - Don Edwards and Fortney H. Stark of
California and Lane Evans of Illinois - also said President Reagan should cancel
his planned visit to Manila. So far, the trip is still scheduled, the White
House said, but officials said it could be canceled at a moment's notice.



Ambassador to Attend Funeral

The State Department said the Administration would be represented at Mr.
Aquino's funeral only by Ambassador Michael H. Armacost. One official said any
higher level of representation would be ''unprecedented'' and draw more
attention to the United States than to Mr. Aquino.

Mr. Aquino was regarded by the State Department as a political moderate and a
potential successor to Mr. Marcos if the Marcos regime decided to allow free
elections. But intelligence specialists, even before Sunday's assassination,
doubted that such elections would be held.

The prevailing view in Washington, officials said, is that Mr. Marcos will
remain in power until he is forced out for health reasons.  Intelligence
specialists believe that the Filipino military will eventually take power in the
country, perhaps with Mr. Marcos's wife, Imelda, as a figurehead president.

Serious Problems Foreseen

Administration officials said today that if there was no clearcut report that
credibly exonerated the Marcos Government, serious and lasting problems would be
created in Washington's relationship with Mr. Marcos.

For that reason, officials seemed to go out of their way in private discussions
to stress that American relations with the Philippines went beyond the Marcos
Government to the Philippine nation, which has had ties with the United States
dating from the defeat of Spain in 1898 and the Philippines' annexation as the
first American colony. The country has been independent since 1946.

Specifically, officials have been reminding reporters of the strategic
importance to the United States and its allies of continued base rights at Clark
Air Base and the Subic Bay Naval complex. These are the largest such American
installations outside the United States, and are regarded by the Defense
Department as particularly critical given a Soviet naval and air buildup in
Vietnam and the importance of protecting sea lanes to the Indian Ocean.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND SUIT DATA RELEASED

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 587 words


The libel suit brought against CBS by Gen. William C. Westmoreland has entered a
new phase, centering on previously undisclosed documents from the Central
Intelligence Agency. Lawyers for CBS said that one of them was ''the smoking
gun'' that would uphold a CBS program that charged General Westmoreland with
conspiring to suppress information on enemy troop strength in Vietnam.

In his $120 million libel suit, General Westmoreland said that the reporters and
producers of the program had deliberately ignored information that rebutted the
idea of a conspiracy.

What the CBS lawyers referred to as the ''smoking gun'' is a 1967 memorandum by
a C.I.A. official that says that ''a variety of circumstantial indicators'' had
led him to the ''inescapable conclusion'' that General Westmoreland had given
''instruction tantamount to a direct order'' to hold the estimate of Vietcong
strength to 300,000.

The memo, which was sent to Richard Helms, then the Director of Central
Intelligence, was written by George Carver, who was Mr. Helms's special
assistant for Vietnamese affairs.

Mr. Carver, who is now a senior fellow at the Georgetown University Center for
Strategic and International Studies, denied, however, that the memorandum was an
indictment of General Westmoreland. He said that it ''was jerked out of
context,'' and that it was only one of a series of communications between him
and Mr. Helms.

The memo was circulated to news organizations on Tuesday by David Boies of the
law firm of Cravath, Swaine & Moore, which is representing CBS. The firm served
a subpoena on the C.I.A. last Dec. 1, requesting, among other things,
information on how it arrived at estimates of Vietcong strength. Mr. Boies said
that he had finally received ''a stack of C.I.A. documents'' last weekend.

The television program, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' was
broadcast Jan. 23, 1982. Mike Wallace was the chief correspondent. Three days
after the program, Mr. Carver defended General Westmoreland at a news
conference. He said then that the C.I.A. and General Westmoreland had disagreed
on how to interpret troop estimates, but that there had been ''no suppression of
evidence.''

Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's attorney, responding to Mr. Boies's charge
of a ''smoking gun,'' noted that other memos by Mr. Carver to Mr. Helms
indicated that the C.I.A. and General Westmoreland were in substantial
agreement.

The Carver memo that Mr. Boies circulated was sent from Saigon on Sept. 10,
1967. However, a copy of another memo that Mr. Boies received from the C.I.A.,
this one dated Sept. 13, 1967, said that Mr. Carver had since talked to General
Westmoreland in Saigon and that the two appeared to have settled their
differences.

''Circle now squared,'' the memo begins. ''We now have agreed set of figures
Westmoreland endorses. Mission seems on verge of successful conclusion.''

''Westmoreland most cordial and receptive,'' the memo continues. ''Said he
agreed with most of my observations and could see the clear logic behind both
sets of figures, which were really not that far apart.''

In May 1967, another recently released document said, the C.I.A. estimated that
the total strength of the Vietcong ''may actually be in the half-million
range.'' That same month, however, General Westmoreland's command had estimated
the Vietcong strength at 292,000.

However, the documents also indicate that at least some of the disparity in the
two sets of figures may have had to do with interpretation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GETTING ORGANIZED FOR THE BIG MARCH

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN

SECTION: Section D; Page 20, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 642 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 24


The planners of the civil rights march here on Saturday are finding that the
logistics of mass demonstrations are easier to handle the second time around.

''We're not trying to re-invent anything,'' said Frank H. Hollis, the director
of operations and logistics. ''We're taking what we did in 1963, and we're
trying to improve upon it.''

The organizers, arranging an event that may involve as many as 250,000 people,
are working in an atmosphere much different from that of the march that the Rev.
Dr. Martin Luther King led in 1963, when there was fear there would be trouble,
possibly rioting.

The original march, which was peaceful, left an important legacy to the civil
rights movement and to the planners of this march.

By now, of course, Washington is far more accustomed to mass demonstrations than
it was when Dr. King and his fellow marchers crowded into the city for one of
the most enduring moments of the civil rights movement. Since then,
demonstrations against the Vietnam War and other marches have made the banners
and bullhorns of protest customary.

Two Years of Planning

''We work with demonstrations all the time,'' said Sandra Alley, a spokesman for
the National Park Service. ''This is a big one, but we can pretty well
anticipate what their requirements will be.''

Even so, organizers of the march, officially known as the 20th Anniversary
Mobilization for Jobs, Peace and Freedom, have been working for two years to
insure that the demonstration proceeds smoothly, and, just as important, that
the needs of television technicians are met.

There are to be 7,000 volunteer civilian marshals posted at train and subway
stations, at airports and along the route of the march. A security force of
2,400 volunteer police officers has also been assembled. Three area hospitals
have been alerted, 17 first-aid stations are being set up, 720 portable toilets
have been rented and parking space has been found for more than 4,200 buses.

Both the Metropolitan Police and the Park Police expect to have large
contingents on duty, but local law enforcement and health officials have, for
the most part, left the security arrangements to the organizers of the march.

The organizers are encouraging participants to use Washington's subway system
for transport in and out of the capital. The Washington Area Metropolitan
Transit Authority has scheduled subway cars to run at rush- hour intervals, and
more than 100 staff volunteers are to provide directions, assist in collecting
fares and pass out maps.

Fare Will Be Lowered

The usual 75-cent fare will be dropped to 50 cents, and the automated fare
system will be abandoned for the day in favor of large plastic barrels to
collect money. ''You lose a little on the fare, but you move them quickly,''
said Marilyn Dicus, a spokesman for the transit authority.

As its name suggests, the focus of the march for jobs, peace and freedom is
considerably more diffuse than its predecessor's. This time the various special
interest groups are to assemble under colored balloons and signs, with senior
citizens under pink signs, women's rights activists under under blue signs,
homosexual rights activists under brown signs, environmentalists under orange
signs and elected officials, including dozens of members of Congress but no
official representatives from the White House, under maroon signs.

Despite all the organization, the planners are confident that the march will
take on a life of its own.

''When you've got the number of people we're expecting, and when the singing
gets going, the marching starts and the people lock arms, there will be plenty
of emotion,'' said Marc L. Apter, a public relations executive who is a
spokesman for the 1983 march, as his father was for the 1963 one. ''We don't
have to plan for that. That will be there.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Amerasians Leave Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 34 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 25


Fifty-eight more Amerasians were flown out of Vietnam today, bringing to 553 the
number who have left for new homes in the United States since last September, a
United States Embassy official said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 27, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FOR RIGHTS RALLY, NOSTALGIA EDGED WITH DISILLUSION

BYLINE: By DUDLEY CLENDINEN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2917 words


Twenty years ago tomorrow , when a black American courted jail, a beating, or
even death if he took the wrong seat, insisted on the vote or marched a public
highway for the cause of equal rights, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. stood
up in Washington before 250,000 people, the largest crowd that had ever marched
in petition on the nation's capital.

''I have a dream,'' he told them, and then proceeded, in cadences that rolled
like waves across the Mall, to describe a future day of harmony, justice and
respect. It was not a long speech. It was one of many made that day. But it was
the thunderclap, in retrospect - the vision of that enormous crowd, the vision
of that dream, brought home to people everywhere what the civil rights movement
was all about.

It may have been the purest, broadest moment of the movement, and the march,
along with Dr. King's articulation of the dignity and aspirations of millions of
black Americans, is being marked by an anniversary march in Washington today.

''The role he played that day had a profound effect not only on black people and
the people there in Washington, but on the white people of the South,'' says
John Lewis, who had helped plan the march as chairman of the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee. ''For the first time, they saw a black man speaking to
the nation and to the world.''

Those who led the march and spoke there now express an unmistakable nostalgia
for those days of drive and progress. But it is a nostalgia edged with
disillusionment.

''It was the one day in this nation when people had to see what black people
were concerned about,'' says Floyd B. McKissick, who was there as chairman of
the Congress of Racial Equality. ''They could no longer hide from it.'' But 20
years later, the former CORE leader is critical of the direction of the movement
and the lack of drive he has seen in recent years, and he may not be in
Washington today.

He is not alone. After the initial successes in guaranteeing blacks the right to
vote, to send their children to integrated schools, and to eat, sleep, sit and
live where they pleased, the advance slowed. Assassination, riots, white
backlash, Vietnam, changing needs, clashing philosophies and the ravages of
industrial decline have all contributed to fracture and dissolve the unity and
promise of that day two decades past.  On the eve of the anniversary of the
march, many of its leaders are dead. And those still living find they have
survived the bombings, the beatings, the burnings and jails of that era only to
discover that too many young black Americans today have no conception of the
fight they made, the progress gained, or the pain it took. Proud of the past and
agreed that real equality is still unreached, they disagree about the proper
focus of the present effort, and they are uncertain of the future.

Bayard Rustin, who organized the march, is on a holiday in Barbados. Now 73
years old, 40 years after being driven from the Washington Y.M.C.A. restaurant
by a cooling system laced with ammonia, he will not come back to march again. He
considers the energies devoted to this march misspent. He says that ''to compare
1963 and 1983 is profoundly stupid,'' that the economic needs of blacks today
cannot be addressed in the same ways their needs for social freedom were
addressed 20 years ago.

Daisy Bates, now a director emeritus of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People and the only black woman who spoke at the march in
1963, will not be back. She endured thrown bricks, a burning cross placed on her
roof, and the ruin of her Little Rock newspaper to lead black students through
Federal troops into Central High School in 1957. Today, widowed at 69, she is
crippled by a broken hip.



'Out of Touch With Masses'

''Margaret Bush Wilson and some of the leaders of the N.A.A.C.P.  are out of
touch with the masses of the people,'' Mrs. Bates says softly, ''People are
using the N.A.A.C.P., to a large measure, as a great social club.''

Joseph L. Rauh Jr., a civil rights lawyer who was then a vice president of the
liberal Americans for Democratic Action, says he will march again at the age of
72. ''I'm going to walk, I don't care where,'' he says, but he is troubled by
the catch-all character of this march, which is designed to draw in almost all
the liberal minority groups.

''We had a focus: Pass the bill, pass the bill,'' Mr. Rauh says, referring to
the civil rights legislation before Congress in August 1963. ''This is a march
without a focus.''

The Rev. Martin Luther King Sr., known throughout the movement and the South as
''Daddy King,'' is now 83, lame and pained by arthritis. His eldest son was
slain in 1968. His younger son drowned in a swimming pool in 1969. His wife was
shot to death in their own church in 1974. ''I can't walk,'' he says, but he
will be there.

Farmer Will Be There

So will the Rev. Fred L. Shuttlesworth, 61, of Cincinnati, who was dynamited out
of his bed in Birmingham and arrested 25 or 30 times before he lost count in the
hot years of the civil rights battle in Alabama. He spoke 20 years ago, and he
misses the excitement of that time. ''I'm going this time with the highest hopes
and zeal,'' he says. ''I wish we could get America moving again like it did when
the fire bells rang.''

James Farmer, the president of CORE, was in jail in Louisiana that day in 1963,
and his message for the marchers was read by Mr. McKissick. Now almost blind and
working with special lights and magnifying lenses to finish his autobiography
(''It's got to be done,'' he says; ''it's my last hurrah''), Mr. Farmer will be
there to speak for himself this time.

He almost died at the hands of a deputized mob in the Louisiana town of
Plaquemine two nights after the 1963 march. He escaped in the back of a hearse,
and went on to become Assistant Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare under
President Nixon, a job he says he quit in frustration.

''What I am hoping,'' he says, ''is that this celebration will be a clear call
for a revitalized movement.''

No Sense of History

That is a hope shared by Mr. Lewis, the former S.N.C.C. chairman who estimates
that he was arrested ''maybe 40 times'' during the Southern civil rights
battles. The political gains since then have been immense. ''When I went to the
march on Washington 20 years ago,'' he says, ''there were less than 50 elected
black officials in the 11 Southern states. Today there are more than 3,000.''

But Mr. Lewis mourns the lack of knowledge among young blacks about the pain
invested to achieve those gains. ''If you travel the South, my part of the
country,'' he says, ''a lot of the young black men and women are without any
contemporary sense of the history of this country - the civil rights movement in
particular. It's shocking.''

Of the major leaders of the movement then, ''The Big Six,'' as they called
themselves, mostly Southerners and mostly trained as preachers or raised as the
sons of preachers, Mr. Lewis is the only one besides Mr. Farmer still alive.

A. Philip Randolph, president of the International Brotherhood of Sleeping Car
Porters, who conceived the march, died four years ago at the age of 90. Roy
Wilkins, head of the N.A.A.C.P., died two years ago at 80, of kidney failure.
Whitney Young, executive director of the Urban League, drowned off Lagos,
Nigeria, in 1971, at the age of 49. And Dr. King, who headed the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference, was shot to death in Memphis in 1968.

Meeting With Kennedy

Mr. Lewis of the S.N.C.C., now a City Councilman in Atlanta, was the youngest of
them all in 1963. At the age of 23, he had earned a bachelor of divinity degree,
been clubbed unconscious on a Montgomery, Ala., street as a Freedom Rider, and
met with the President of the United States in the Oval Office.  The date, he
recalls, was June 22, 1963, and the subject was the planned march. It was the
first conversation the leaders had had with President Kennedy about it, and Mr.
Lewis was worried and reluctant. ''He thought it would have a negative impact on
the civil rights legislation he planned to adopt,'' Mr. Lewis says. ''He was
afraid that there would be disorder and violence.''

''And then,'' he says, ''Mr. Randolph spoke up in his baritone voice, and he
said, 'Mr. President, the masses are restless - and we will march.' ''

So they did. This morning, another young man is one of the central figures in
the anniversary march. A boy of 5 when his father told the world of his dream,
Martin Luther King 3d is now a man of 25. Too young then, he does not remember
the original march or the speech that made the day electric. He does not recall
hearing it until about the time his father was killed.

30-Year Movement

''I grew up hearing it,'' he says now, ''from right before his death, when I was
about 10, and afterward. That's all I heard, from then on, until I became a
grown man.''

By the time the boy of 10 heard his father's dream, the nonviolent civil rights
effort was already 30 years old. ''The first sit-ins in New York City were
probably around 1938, 1939, by Adam Clayton Powell,'' Mr. Rustin says, and with
them the philosophy, the tactics, were defined. ''Inasmuch as we were like the
Indian nation, we would use the tactics Gandhi was using.''

With that nonviolent strategy, ''we broke down discrimination in restuarants and
hotels all over New York,'' he says. They took on Chicago, where, after they
waited six hours to order some soup, the manager brought a steaming tureen to
Mr. Rustin and Mr. Farmer, and poured it on them. They took on the Y.M.C.A.
restaurant in Washington, where the ammonia in the cooling system was used to
force them out.  The nonviolent demonstrators waited till 1947 for the first
foray deeper into the South, where they met a violent reaction. A white
supporter had to call on one of the members of his church, the captain of the
University of North Carolina football team, to fight off a mob of angry whites
in Chapel Hill.

Violence Hadn't Died

In the years that followed, the xenophobic quality of the resistance, as well as
its brutality, now seems hard to fathom. And by the time of the march on
Washington, the violence of white resistance in states like Mississippi, Alabama
and Louisiana had not lessened.

The achievement of the march, which impressed the nation with its dignity and
order, was a tremendous reassurance to blacks, and the black leaders felt that
concessions would be coming.

''The cause of 20 million Negroes has been advanced,'' President Kennedy said of
the peaceful demonstration ''so appropriately conducted before the nation's
shrine to the Great Emancipator.''

But the President who proclaimed discrimination a moral wrong was assassinated
just three months later, his civil rights legislation unpassed.

Changes Came Quickly

It was President Johnson who managed the tactical victories in Congress - the
public accommodations and equal employment opportunity laws in 1964 , the Voting
Rights Act in 1965, the Fair Housing Act in 1968.

The old ''whites only'' signs and practices came down with surprising speed.
When Mr. Rauh, the civil rights lawyer, went to Jackson, Miss., to meet with
black groups in 1963 and 1964, he remembers: ''We were so segregated, there was
only one place you could go - the black church on Lynch Street. When I went back
in 1968, we blacks and whites were sitting around the hotel swimming pool.
That's how quickly things changed legally. Four years earlier, we would have
been lynched for that.''

But by then, Mr. Farmer says, with the signs down in the South and their
symbolism lost as rallying points for the movement, the momentum had slowed, and
other factors were drying up the national reservoirs of interest and good will.

''Right after the march, polls showed that more than 75 percent of the American
people wanted strong, immediate civil rights legislation,'' Mr. Farmer says.
''But by the late 60's and early 70's, polls showed that the majority of people
thought that blacks had gotten too much too fast. They also thought that blacks
had acheived equality - and if not, that it was because of their own
inadequacies - in other words, the old inferiority argument.''

Goals Became Competitive

Additionally, the assassinations of Dr. King and Robert F. Kennedy had
shattering effects, and the black riots in 1967 and 1968 damaged the image of
deserving nonviolence that the movement's leaders had been so careful to employ.

The engine of the movement itself began to sputter. ''I think a number of things
took the vitality and cohesion out of the movement,'' Mr. Farmer says. Vietnam
and the antiwar movement drew away the attention of the young and of the
progessive and liberal communities and finally of the whole country.

And the broad alignment of the whole progressive-liberal community - which was
so evident in the march, when the goals were basic human rights - began to
sunder, Mr. Farmer says, when the goals became competitive. In the days when the
civil rights movement was trying to move to the front of the bus, Jews were arm
in arm with blacks in the effort. But blacks also wanted jobs, which resulted in
preferential hiring practices under Federal affirmative action laws.

''Today, people in the Jewish community are very uptight about affirmative
action,'' says Mr. Lewis. It reminds them of the quota systems historically used
to exclude, rather than include, Jews. And blacks, being only lately hired in
trades and municipal jobs, did not want to be the first fired. That, Mr. Farmer
says, ran afoul of the principle of seniority sacred to the labor movement,
which had been supportive in the past.

Economy Now the Issue

It is the lack of jobs that is now undermining the evident political, social and
educational progress of blacks, and the economy has now become the issue. In
Atlanta, which has become ''the hub,'' as Daddy King calls it, of black
leadership and progress, the visual image at street level downtown is of a
prosperous city, its work force and consumers more or less equally divided
between whites and blacks.

But the image is the exception. A recent study by the Center for the Study of
Social Policy, a private research group, found striking educational advances
among blacks, but also found that only 55 percent of black men over the age of
16 are employed today. ''On measures of income, poverty and unemployment, wide
disparities between blacks and whites have not lessened or have even worsened
since 1960,'' the center's report said.

The disparity could signal a growing polarity within the black community -
between those who have benefited from the movement, and those who have not. ''A
lot of people benefited from the movement,'' says Martin Luther King 3d, who
carries the burden of the dream. ''They acquired jobs and homes and cars,'' he
said, sitting in a conference room in the Atlanta center named for his father,
the Martin Luther King Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change.

''If you move from poverty to the middle class, you don't want to look back,''
he said. ''You don't want your children to know. So young people aren't taught.
It's not until you get to college that you begin to understand. And if you don't
go to college, you don't get it.''

Narrower Agenda for '83

At 25, this Mr. King's degree is in political science, not divinity. He is not a
preacher like his father and grandfather, like the old leadership of the
movement. He is still deciding on a career, he says - law, or perhaps the
pulpit, or politics.

He is working now to raise funds for the center, to register more blacks to vote
so that the black vote will be more important in the 1984 Presidential election.
And he has been traveling the country trying to energize blacks to march in
Washington today.

Twenty years later, it is a different agenda that the black element of this
march has set, a more narrow political agenda. One thing on it, Mr. King said,
is the passage of a bill introduced by Representative Augustus F. Hawkins,
Democrat of California, that would provide a million public service jobs for the
long-term unemployed.

''But the most important item on an agenda for blacks in America,'' Mr. King
said, ''should be to make sure that President Reagan is not re-elected.''

No Dr. King Now

In its purposeful broadening of the anniversary march to include other activist
movements, the old civil rights movement has become only one element of the
march. And in its narrowing of its goals, from basic human rights to particular
political and economic gains, it has become like other citizens' lobbies,
seeking their share of just rewards. And in the wake of Dr. King's
assassination, it is still a movement without a giant.

''There won't be another Martin Luther King Jr. for two or three generations,''
the senior Mr. King says solemnly. ''You see, they don't come that often.''

But it will be longer than that, Martin Luther King 3d thinks, before the day
dawns when racism is erased, when black children are judged, as his father
dreamed aloud, not ''by the color of their skin, but by the content of their
character.''

''That day may come only when there is no color,'' the young Mr. King says
quietly, ''when there's a pigmentation that's kind of neutral. That's the day
when racism won't exist.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Martin Luther King 3d; photo of Gwen, Andrea Brown, Anthony
Migliaccio; photo of workers assembling scafflding

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 27, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADORAN GUERILLA CHIEF SAYS REBELS CHANGED PLANS

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 536 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Aug. 26


Guerrillas in El Salvador were forced to alter their strategy in the face of a
Government military sweep through a central province, according to a spokesman
for the rebel coalition.

The spokesman, Ruben Zamora, a member of the political-diplomatic commission
that sets policy for the Salvadoran rebels, contended that the guerrillas had
not suffered a military setback.

''It was decided not to stand and confront the army,'' Mr. Zamora said in an
interview. ''But our forces have not retreated back to the north, which the army
had hoped for. Most of them are still in San Vicente or have crossed the Lempa
River into Usulutan. They are now beginning to resume fighting with classic
guerrilla tactics, using ambushes and night raids to hit the enemy.''

Says Neither Can Afford It

The American-sponsored plan to combine civic action and large military
operations as a way of clearing San Vicente of guerrillas is doomed to failure,
Mr. Zamora said.

''In the first place,'' he said, ''the plan is predicated on forcing the
guerrillas out of the area, and this has not succeeded. Besides that, the cost
of the San Vicente plan, counting both military and civilian expenses, is over
$30 million, and neither the Government of El Salvador nor the United States can
afford it.''

Mr. Zamora said guerrillas were slowly expanding their ''zones of control'' in
the central and eastern parts of the country.

Mr. Zamora said he did not think a rebel victory was imminent in El Salvador,
but predicted the insurgents would win ''in the medium or long term'' if there
is no political solution to the conflict. He said the rebel fighters had made
''steady progress'' and could think of seizing power ''a year or more from
now.''

''The objective signs we see in the area tell us that the United States
Government does not favor dialogue and a political solution in El Salvador,'' he
said. ''They are still pursuing military victory. But policies do change, as the
United States changed its policy in Vietnam after sending half a million
soldiers there.''

Military victory for the Salvadoran Government is impossible, Mr. Zamora said,
because ''guerrilla movements can only be wiped out by regimes that have the
support of their people.''

''The Salvadoran regime lacks this key to victory,'' he said.

According to Mr. Zamora, international sympathy for the Salvadoran rebels has
surged since President Reagan's recent decision to stage land and sea maneuvers
in the area. ''Sending the fleet was a serious tactical error,'' he said. ''We
see it as an advantage, because it generates a strong reaction in the United
States and internationally.''



Salvador Asks Delay in Visit

SAN SALVADOR, Aug. 26 (Reuters) - President Alvaro Magana has said the United
States special envoy, Richard B. Stone, should postpone his talks with El
Salvador's leftist rebels, scheduled for next week, until the country's own
peace commission has met with the insurgents' representatives.

Mr. Magana said the three-man peace commission, which is trying to persuade the
rebels to participate in elections, would meet with guerrilla representatives
for the first time within a few weeks.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By JOHN NOBLE WILFORD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1590 words

DATELINE: CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla., Aug. 27


The countdown began this afternoon for the next space shuttle mission, one that
will include a nighttime launching and landing, the deployment of a satellite
for India, tests of a new air-to- ground communication system and a black
astronaut.

The five astronauts who will fly the space shuttle Challenger arrived here this
morning for final briefings before the flight. Officials of the Kennedy Space
Center said preparations were proceeding smoothly toward a scheduled liftoff
Tuesday at 2:15 A.M., New York time.

Commanding the planned six-day mission, the eighth in the shuttle program and
third for the Challenger, will be Capt. Richard H. Truly of the Navy, who was a
pilot on the second test flight of the Columbia in 1981. The other crew members
will be going into space for the first time. They are Comdr. Daniel C.
Brandenstein of the Navy, Lieut. Comdr. Dale A. Gardner of the Navy, Lieut. Col.
Guion S. Bluford Jr. of the Air Force and Dr. William E. Thornton, a physician.

For one of them, Colonel Bluford, it will be more than just one man's first
space journey. He will be the first American black to travel in space. Beyond
his duties, which include deploying India's communication satellite on the
second day, Colonel Bluford will be performing a symbolic role much as Dr. Sally
K. Ride, the first American woman in space, did on the previous flight in June.

With these two missions in the third decade of space flight, the all-male, all-
white image of the American space program is beginning to fade into history.

Colonel Bluford, a quiet 40-year-old Air Force officer from Philadelphia who
holds a doctorate in aerospace engineering, insists that his overriding desire
is simply to fly in space and that he feels no unusual pressure because he is
black. But he is not unmindful of his historic role.

As he said recently, ''I recognize the fact that I'm the guy who's setting the
pace for the people who are going to fly behind me, but I don't feel as if I
have to be perfect as well.''

The 78-member astronaut corps includes three other blacks: Lieut. Col. Frederick
P. Gregory of the Air Force, Maj. Charles F. Bolden of the Marine Corps and Dr.
Ronald E. McNair, a physicist. Dr. McNair is assigned to a shuttle flight next
year.

The blacks joined the corps, along with eight women, when it was expanded in
1978 and 1980 in preparation for the shuttle era. Colonel Bluford will not be
the first black in space. That distinction belongs to a Cuban of black heritage,
Arnaldo Tamayo Mendez, who flew on a Soviet mission in 1980.

Asked by reporters if he felt his flight fulfilled the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration's pledge to erase its white-dominated image, Colonel
Bluford said: ''I wouldn't say they have completely attained that, but I think
they're working hard in that direction. You must remember that blacks have been
held up an awful long time, and they're trying to catch up in earning all the
opportunities that are out there. It takes time to do that.''

He further noted, in a news conference at the Johnson Space Center in Houston
last month, that in the early years the requirements to be an astronaut included
being an experienced test pilot.

Opening of New Opportunities

''Really, there are just very few blacks that are in that particular
profession,'' said Colonel Bluford, who is not a test pilot but did fly 141
combat missions in Vietnam. ''It's only been since the development of the
shuttle, where you don't have to be a pilot or a test pilot in order to become
an astronaut, that the field has opened up considerably to other people who want
to fly in space. That has opened up more opportunities for women as well as
minorities in the program. And also since the last 20 years, we have more blacks
in the test-piloting business, so we have a larger pool to choose from.''

Lieut. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA's associate administrator in charge of the
shuttle program, recalled in an interview Friday that, but for a tragedy, a
black astronaut probably would have flown in space earlier.

In the mid-1960's, the general said, Maj. Robert Lawrence was in his class of
pilots training to be astronauts in the Air Force's Manned Orbiting Laboratory
program. When the program was canceled in 1969, many of the astronauts
transferred to NASA and have since made it into space. Major Lawrence was a
''superb guy and would surely have flown by now,'' General Abrahamson said. He
was killed in a plane crash long before he had his chance. His widow will be
among NASA's guests watching the Challenger blast off with Colonel Bluford
aboard.

Also on hand will be several dozen of the black Tuskegee Airmen from World War
II, witnesses to a past when the armed services were as segregated as American
society in general was, and the only way blacks could fly was in a segregated
squadron. They were trained at a segregated base at the Tuskegee Institute in
Alabama and, as members of the all-black 99th Fighter Squadron and the 332nd
Fighter Group, they distinguished themselves in combat over North Africa, Sicily
and Italy.

The first black American aviator, according to the Encyclopedia of Black
America, was Eugene Jacques Bullard, known as the ''Black Swallow of Death.''
But to enter aviation he had to go to France and join the Foreign Legion. He
gained fame in World War I as a member of the legendary Lafayette Escadrille,
the group of American volunteer aviators in the French air service, and did not
return to the United States until 1940.

Launching of Satellite

Captain Truly said Colonel Bluford would be ''primarily responsible on board for
the correct and safe launch of the Insat satellite'' and for assisting the two
pilots in the ascent and landing phases of the flight. At those times, Colonel
Bluford will occupy a seat just behind the pilots, the same seat occupied by Dr.
Ride on the Challenger's most recent journey.

Insat-1B, a combination telecommunications and meteorology satellite, is to be
deployed from the Challenger's cargo bay in the same manner as other commercial
satellites on previous space shuttle missions. Early Wednesday morning, about 45
minutes after its release from the cargo bay and after the shuttle has moved
away a safe distance, Insat's attached rocket should fire automatically to
propel the satellite toward its desired position 22,300 miles over the Equator.

At that position, over the Indian Ocean, the satellite is to provide telephone,
television and other forms of telecommunications throughout India. Two
especially powerful channels will be capable of relaying television
transmissions to small dish antennas set up in remote Indian villages.

The satellite was built by Ford Aerospace and Communications Corporation in a
joint venture with India's Department of Space. India is paying NASA $12 million
to deliver its satellite to orbit.

The Challenger will be traveling light this time because what would have been
its largest payload, the space agency's second Tracking and Data Relay
Satellite, was grounded. Engineers wanted more time to solve the rocket
malfunction that left the first relay satellite in the wrong orbit last April.

Tests With Relay Satellite

By early July, after a long sequence of thruster-firing maneuvers, the $100-
million relay satellite was finally placed in its proper orbit 22,300 miles over
Brazil. Communications tests between the Challenger and the ground, using the
relay satellite as a link, will be conducted throughout this mission.

Harold Draughon, the chief flight director at the Johnson Space Center, said the
astronauts would not be involved in most of these tests. But he said they would
be asked on several occasions to check the onboard communication systems and
maneuver the shuttle to break the link intentionally between the shuttle's
antenna and the satellite. This would serve to test the shuttle's ability to
re-acquire the link automatically. Eventually most communications with shuttles
and other spacecraft will be handled through a network of such relay satellites.
To fill up some of the area in the cargo bay that had been set aside for the
second relay satellite, mission officials added a 7,460-pound dummy spacecraft
shaped like a dumbbell. The object will be grappled and lifted as a further test
of the shuttle's 50-foot-long robotic arm, which will be operated primarily by
Commander Gardner. The structure will not be deployed outside the cargo bay.

A diverse mix of other cargoes have also been loaded on the Challenger. There
are containers carrying 260,000 philatelic covers to be sold for $15.35 each by
the Postal Service. A machine for processing medicines in weightlessness will be
making another trip, this time equipped to separate live animal cells in an
experiment that might lead to transplants of insulin-producing cells for
diabetics.

6 Rats in Cage

Six rats will also be on board, riding in a cage designed for future animal
experiments in space. The space agency said it wanted to demonstrate that the
new cage would house the rats ''without compromising the health and comfort of
either the astronaut crew or the rats.''

The Challenger's nighttime launching will be the first for a shuttle, but not
the first for American astronauts. The last mission to the Moon, Apollo 17, took
off in darkness in December 1972. The timing of the Challenger's liftoff was
dictated by requirements to deliver the Insat satellite to the proper orbit at
the right time.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of technicians preparing for countdown; photo of crew for eighth
mission of space shuttle

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Abigail Homans Is Married

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 64, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 298 words


Abigail Homans, daughter of Mrs. J. Hampton Barnes of Edgemont, Pa., and
Darkharbor, Me., and the late Robert Homans of San Francisco, was married
yesterday to Henry L. B. Wilder of San Francisco, son of Mr. and Mrs. Fessenden
Wilder of Essex, Conn., and MacMahan, Me. The Revs. Lesley Wilder and John
Easton performed the cermony at the Christ Episcopal Church in Darkharbor.

Lucy Bangasser was her sister's matron of honor. Nicholas Wilder was his
brother's best man.

The bride is an associate in the San Francisco office of McKinsey & Company,
management consultants, and is a trustee of the Crystal Springs and Uplands
Schools in Hillsborough, Calif. She graduated cum laude from Radcliffe College
and received a master's degree from the Stanford University Graduate School of
Business, as did Mr. Wilder.

The bride's father was in the San Francisco law firm of Morrison, Holloway,
Schuman & Clark. Her mother, Mary Aldrich Barnes, is a member of the board of
managers of the New York Botanical Garden. The bride is a granddaughter of the
late Winthrop W. Aldrich, a chairman of the Chase National Bank and Ambassador
to Britain. She is a great-great- granddaughter of Senator Nelson W. Aldrich,
Republican of Rhode Island, and of Charles Crocker of San Francisco, a founder
of the Central Pacific Railroad. She is a descendant of Presidents John Adams
and John Quincy Adams.

Mr. Wilder is a partner in the San Francisco venture-capital firm of Dougery,
Jones & Wilder. He is an alumnus of the Brooks School in North Andover, Mass.,
where his father, who is retired, was senior master and professor of English and
religion. He studied at the Schools in Shrewsbury, England, graduated from the
United States Naval Academy and served on a guided-missile destroyer in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Abigail Wilder

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

5 COUNTRIES VYING OVER AN ASIAN ARCHIPELAGO

BYLINE: By ROBERT TRUMBULL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 499 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, Aug. 27


Specialists in Pacific and Asian affairs here are concerned by the potential for
conflict in a five-way territorial dispute over the Spratly Islands in the South
China Sea.

Vietnam, the Philippines and Taiwan have landed troops on a dozen of the islands
to reinforce their assertions of sovereignty over the group, which is also
claimed by China and in part by Malaysia.

The archipelago, consisting of 33 islands, cays and rocks situated between
Vietnam and the Philippines, lies in an area that geological surveys have
indicated may be rich in oil. The islands thus ''could become as familiar to the
world as the Falklands if the governments that claim them can't reach
agreement,'' according to an analysis of the problem of the Spratlys published
by the East-West Center, a federally financed educational and research
institution in Honolulu that seeks to advance relations between the United
States and Asian and Pacific countries through scholarly interchanges.

A meeting to discuss proposals for development of resources in disputed areas of
the South China Sea, including the Spratly Islands, was attended by more than 50
government officials, representatives of major public and private oil companies
and other experts from a dozen countries at the East- West Center this week.

Cooperative development by rival claimants to places like the Spratlys, leaving
the sovereignty question to be settled later, ''is an innovative idea whose time
may have come,'' according to Dr. Mark J. Valencia of the East- West Center, who
helped organize the meeting.

A report presented by Dr. Valencia and Dr. C. Y. Li, also of the East-West
Center staff, who was the conference coordinator, cited precedents in agreements
between Thailand and Malaysia and between Japan and South Korea for joint
programs in disputed sea areas a few years ago.

Dr. Valencia described the Spratly Islands as uniformly low and flat, lacking
vegetation except for a few trees on some of them.

The uninhabited islands first came to international attention, Dr. Valencia
said, when a Filipino businessman visited them in 1956 and proposed to set up an
independent country to be called Freedomland. Manila refused to have anything to
do with the project, but the Government later asserted Philippine sovereignty
over the group. The Philippine Government now maintains that the islands are
needed as a defense position.

The Philippine claim was disputed by China, Taiwan and Vietnam, each declaring
that its fishing fleets had made use of the islands ''since time immemorial,''
Dr. Valencia said.

Malaysia asserted ownership of the southern islands in the group on the ground
that they belonged to the continental shelf of Malaysia's Borneo territories.

Taiwan has landed a military force on the largest island, called Namyit. The
Philippines has stationed about 1,000 marines on a half dozen other islands, and
Vietnam has occupied five others with 350 soldiers, according to Dr. Valencia's
information.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Spratly archipelago

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Corporate Spies

SECTION: Section 3; Page 12, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 383 words


To the Business Editor:

''Boom Days for Political Risk Consultants'' (Aug. 7) did a disservice to many
of us in the field of political risk consulting. Its subtitle, ''C.I.A. alumni
have flocked to the profession,'' and concentration upon that segment of our
profession failed to do justice to what is a far more diverse pool of skilled
individuals.

In my own experience, political risk consultants are an eclectic group; for
every Central Intelligence Agency alumnus or alumna that I have met, I can name
several political risk consultants with backgrounds in academia, private
business or branches of government other than the intelligence agencies.

What is most offensive to me and, I would argue, to many of my colleagues in the
profession, is the constant suspicion on the part of our clients, neighbors and
students that our credentials must somehow go beyond what we claim them to be.

The article was, however, correct in pointing out a number of problems in the
field of political risk consulting; because it is a relatively young and totally
unregulated profession, risk consulting has attracted more than its share of
self-professed experts and influence peddlers.

While there is no irony in the fact that many former intelligence personnel have
gravitated toward risk consulting, it is not indelicate to wonder aloud: Of what
value are the field qualifications of former intelligence personnel whose
credentials stem from experience in Iran, Afghanistan, Egypt, Chad, Vietnam,
Liberia or Zaire - all areas where United States intelligence has suffered
dramatic and costly setbacks in recent years?

What the article failed to note, and what many of us in the field of political
risk consulting would like to see emphasized more in public discussion, is the
fact that successful risk consulting calls for far more than episodic
acquaintance with several influential individuals overseas who might come or go
with the next coup d'etat.

It calls for a distinct methodology, particular research skills, competence in
relevant languages and, finally, a willingness to place one's professional
reputation on the line with frank and committed opinions about constantly
evolving situations.

NICOLAS P. KULIBABA Nicolas P. Kulibaba Associates Howell, N.J., Aug. 7

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KOCH'S SIDE OF THE STREET IS THE MIDDLE

BYLINE: By MAURICE CARROLL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 853 words


Weary from a 37-hour swoop to the West Coast, Mayor Koch, usually the most
reactive of politicians, offered only a wan wave of the hand in response to a
well- wisher's shout as he trudged through Kennedy Airport last weekend. But his
exhaustion did not shake a belief that he had ''touched a very sensitive nerve''
on his foray into national politics with the first of six speeches to try to
guide the Democratic Party to what he calls the ''mainstream.''

Never mind that most journalists treated the trip as a one-day story or, for
that matter, that The San Francisco Examiner gave an account of the speech less
prominence than a longer item on the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who spoke about his
potential Presidential candidacy in a local jail. Mr. Koch professed
satisfaction that he had won a hearing for a practical political point that he
thinks has been overlooked as aspirants for the White House try to please
Democratic activists: In a middle-class nation, candidates succeed by moving
toward the middle.  To an audience that was said to be predominantly Republican,
he recited a list of what he considers Democratic deficiencies. Signs of ''a
relapse into the follies of the McGovern-Carter era'' were rife, he said.
''There has to be something amiss in a party that seems to remember all of
America's mistakes in Vietnam but blanks out the lessons of Afghanistan and
Poland and Cambodia. We seem to be letting ourselves drift toward a point of
view that sees the United States as the major cause of the world's ills. A
candidate who appears to believe that America is what's wrong with the world may
win some delegates to the Democratic convention. But he is not likely to be
reviewing an inaugural parade up Pennsylvania Avenue.'' A Lucky LoserIn a
refrain familiar to those who have spent time at City Hall during his tenancy,
he took as his target those ''extremists'' who took positions outside the
''mainstream.'' ''There is nothing wrong in catering to special interests,'' he
said. ''The Democratic process quite naturally involves special interests
contending for influence and support. The question is, how much catering should
we do? Instead of narrowing our base, we need to expand it. Instead of listening
only to those who push the hardest and yell the loudest, we need to once again
reach out, especially to the great mainstream of America.''

He did not map with any specificity the banks of the mainstream. His approach
was anecdotal. Mr. Koch said he was free to act as a critic because he was free
of the pressures of candidacy. ''I am,'' he said, ''the spiritual grandson of
General Sherman.''

It is now his expressed opinion that he was lucky Democrats rejected him for the
nomination for Governor and picked Mario Cuomo instead. But it may be that Mr.
Koch's latest mission has less to do with the debate over national priorities
than with his own position as the state's number two Democrat and, perhaps more
to the point, Governor Cuomo's ascension to the top spot.

What he is doing now for his party, he says, is what he failed to do for himself
when he ran for Governor. Mr. Cuomo ran right, he says; he ran wrong. ''I did
not talk philosophy. And that was a terrible mistake. My opponent did talk
philosophy.'' The Mayor thought about it some more. ''I honestly believe if my
campaign had been more philosophical and dealt less with pragmatic matters, I
could have won.'' There are many in Albany and City Hall who say the defeat
still rankles, even if Mr. Koch does not admit it. They wonder whether the San
Francisco speech and the others he has planned are an attempt to win for himself
the sort of attention that has been conferred upon Mr. Cuomo, who has scheduled
a series of public meetings in which the party's Presidential candidates will be
quizzed on what they plan to offer New York, and who has also been mentioned as
a possible keynote speaker - and even a candidate - at next year's national
convention.  That theory may have gained adherents two mornings after his return
when the Mayor summoned subordinates to City Hall to draft a response to state
charges about the welfare hotels. The squabble with Mr. Cuomo over whether some
children in the hotels were undernourished continued all week.  It followed
arguments between the Cuomo and Koch administrations over plans for the revival
of 42d Street, a huge development plan in Queens and the state's transportation
bond issue. And midway through the week, the Mayor criticized the ''fiscal
juggling scheme'' that has enabled Albany to slash funds for mental-health care.
To a degree, this sort of bickering is endemic. All Mayors and Governors fight.
In the case of Mr. Koch and Mr. Cuomo, the hostility is deepened by the grating
differences in their styles and by the punch-counterpunch habit left over from
last year's campaign.  Both men insist there is nothing personal in their
differences. Each applauds the other's forays into national affairs. But, as
tryouts begin for the Presidential pageant, the Governor and the Mayor are
pressing, in very different ways, to play a role.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR U.S., GLOBAL NEEDS CAN OVERSHADOW HUMAN RIGHTS

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1181 words


WASHINGTON FOR weeks, President McKinley had procrastinated over whether to
annex the Philippines. In 1898 Washington was divided between those who saw the
islands, one of the spoils of the Spanish- American War, as strategically vital
to American political and commercial interests and those who were unhappy with
the concept of colonization. Finally, as he later related, he chose humanitarian
reasons to justify the strategic decision.

''I walked the floor of the White House night after night until midnight,'' he
said, ''and I am not ashamed to tell you that I went down on my knees and prayed
Almighty God for light and guidance more than one night. And one night, late it
came to me this way - I don't know how it was, but it came, that there was
nothing left for us to do but to take them all, and to educate the Filipinos,
and uplift them and civilize and Christianize them.''

The problem of reconciling human rights and strategic considerations was newly
evident last week after the assassination of Benigno S. Aquino Jr., the top
Filipino opposition leader, moments after he returned from three years in exile
in the United States. There was indignation on Capitol Hill from members of
Congress who felt that President Ferdinand E. Marcos had gone too far and that
the United States must curtail its ties to his Government if it wanted to
maintain self-respect.

''To lend your moral and political support to the Marcos Government at this
critical time will be interpreted as a sign that America is indifferent to the
assassination and condones the violation of human rights in the Philippines,''
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said in a letter to
President Reagan urging him to cancel a planned trip to Manila.

But at the same time, the Administration cautioned that vital American strategic
interests were at stake in the Philippines, particularly with the buildup of
Soviet air and naval power in Vietnam.  State and Defense Department officials
said that no matter how repugnant the Marcos regime, the United States could not
afford either to abandon the Philippines or become so embroiled with Mr. Marcos
that he abrogated military base agreements. The President's trip to Manila might
be called off, officials said, if Mr.  Marcos is not credibly exonerated. Until
then, he intends to go. In any case, the $900 million five-year aid package, the
payment for continued use of Clark Air Force Base and the Subic Bay Naval
complex, stands.  They are the largest American bases outside the United States.
Two F-4 tactical fighter squadrons are stationed at Clark, whose runways can
handle any size aircraft. Subic Bay has enormous repair facilities and a
specialized work force manning them.  Americans have always argued whether this
country should be concerned about making the world safe for democracy or just
for the United States. From this question flows the obvious ones: Can, in fact,
the United States do much to bring about change in other countries? Is there a
risk in being overly critical of an ally or friendly country?

For instance, was the United States, because of its criticism of the Shah, in
part responsible for the advent in Iran of the radical Islamic regime of
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini? The Ayatollah's record on human rights and
democratic values has been so much worse than anything blamed on the Shah, whose
downfall was a major strategic loss to this country. Or did the Shah bring his
troubles on himself by paying little attention to human rights while ruling with
an iron hand?

Have American interests been served in Central America by the decision to
abandon the Somoza regime in Nicaragua and permit the Sandinistas to take power?
Or are American interests endangered in Latin America by the perception that the
United States cares too little about the welfare of the people in those
countries?

Many of the same Americans who detest the Marcos regime are also concerned about
the Administration's strong backing for South Korean President Chun Doo Hwan,
who seized power in a 1979 coup, and by its support for the Government in El
Salvador, where human rights have also been at a premium. In these cases, too,
security interests dictate support for good relations with the regimes,
regardless of their internal policies, while historic American values encourage
a more vigorous effort to bring about internal change or at least to distance
the United States from such Governments. Considerable energy has been expended
by Administrations in recent years to evolve a policy that maintains security
links while allowing concerns for human rights to be expressed.

Avoiding Distinctions

''We do not believe a line should be - or can be - drawn between human rights
interests and strategic interests,'' Thomas P. Shoesmith, Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, told a Congressional
committee last year. His argument was that if a government did not have
widespread support and was depriving its people of their human rights, it would
eventually become weakened internally as well as strategically.

But he added that American influence, to be effective, had to be used in such a
way that a working relationship is maintained. In other words, the United States
should say or do nothing that could lead to a negative response from the
Government concerned.

The situation in the Philippines brings together all these problems. The
Philippines, located at the north- south axis in the Pacific, close to important
American allies in Asia, and providing a good springboard to the Indian Ocean,
are undoubtedly of crucial strategic interest. But the assassination of Mr.
Aquino, by forces that clearly did not want him to undertake a political
campaign against Mr. Marcos, underscores the undemocratic nature of the country
that for years was trumpeted as ''the showcase for democracy in Asia.'' The
Reagan Administration, prior to the assassination, had been reluctant to deal
directly with the human rights issues in the Philippines. It preferred quiet
diplomacy and public shows of support, such as Vice President Bush's visit in
1981 that resulted in his astounding speech in praise of Mr. Marcos's support
for democracy, and President Reagan's embrace of Mr. Marcos on a state visit
here last year.

Of all the commentators in recent days, one of the more thoughtful was
Representative Ben Yatron, Democrat of Pennsylvania, who is chairman of the
House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on human rights. He wrote Mr. Reagan saying
he was concerned that the American policy of seeming to endorse Mr. Marcos ''not
only compromises our own values but in the long run will encourage
anti-Americanism.''

''The ultimate outcome could well be to force us to withdraw our bases from the
Philippines,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of F-4 Phantom jets

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GEORGE VECSEYSports of The Times Historian at First Base

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1064 words


AS soon as the baseball season ends, Keith and Sue Hernandez will drive south
and west from New York toward the Civil War battlefields of Pennsylvania and
Virginia. Hernandez has been given the name of a historian who may take him on a
walking tour of Gettysburg, whose bloody fields he knows only from dozens of
history books.

''One thing I've learned from reading,'' Hernandez says, ''is that people fight
better on their home ground. The North fought better when the war moved north;
the South fought better when the battles moved south.''

Baseball teams also perform better on their home grounds but individual players
cannot let themselves get too attached to one piece of turf. Keith Hernandez,
who grew up a few miles from San Francisco's Candlestick Park, always wanted to
play for the St. Louis Cardinals because his father and brother had played in
the Cardinals' minor league system. He was drafted by them and by his third
professional season he was playing first base in St. Louis.

Hernandez became an All-Star in St. Louis, built a home for his family and his
library of more than 1,000 history books. Then on June 15, the world champion
Cardinals traded Hernandez to a rag-tag last-place outfit, the New York Mets.

''The first night in Montreal,'' Hernandez doesn't mind admitting, ''I cried in
the shower.''


But the internal battle has turned for Hernandez in two months. He no longer
feels like an itinerant foot solider looking to move on as soon as his hitch is
up. The self-taught historian sees an esprit de corps developing in the home
clubhouse at Shea.

Instead of talking of playing out his contract with the Mets through next year,
Hernandez is now hoping to negotiate a longer contract with them. He is,
arguably, the best regular they have ever had in their 22 seasons. He will not
turn 30 until Oct. 20, and he thinks he would like to grow old gracefully
watching Darryl Strawberry, a few lockers over, reaching even more of his
potential.

''This club isn't that far away,'' Hernandez says, with more optimism than he
ever believed possible when he arrived in June, fearing that whatever the Mets
had might be contagious.

He has learned a thing or two about the morale of an army from his reading of
history. He says: ''It's the best way to understand the world today. Everything
that happens today is the result of the past.''

He says he did not have much time for reading in the minor leagues but when he
was around 23, ''I picked up the American Heritage's pictorial history of the
Civil War. That did it for me. I was fascinated by the Eastern theater, by Lee's
army. I always wanted to go into the wilderness and see where they fought.''


His own roots are in the beautiful and historic fishing port of Malaga, Spain,
which his grandparents left ''when there were some problems with Franco.'' He
knows when he goes to Spain for the first time there will be second cousins
eager to show him the history of Spain's Civil War. But his own specialty has
been a Civil War far from his native northern California.

''I've read Douglas Southall Freeman's books, 'Lee's Lieutenants,' a history of
the Army of Northern Virginia, and the four-volume biography of Lee, a
fascinating book. To me, it's the most interesting phase of America: the
slavery, the reconstruction, the birth of the industrial revolution.

''The tactics were outdated. The soldiers were using Napoleonic Era tactics
against weapons that were too advanced, but they kept charging anyway.''

As he became established in St. Louis, Hernandez gained a reputation as a reader
of history books. He recalls being invited on a radio show with several members
of the local Civil War Society: ''I think I shocked 'em. We had a great time and
later they asked me to join. I never got around to joining but I know I'm always
welcome.''

Although he spent a few semesters in junior college, he feels he is ''more or
less educating myself.'' A few years ago he joined to the History Book Club and
began to taper off on the Civil War.

''I've read about Alexander the Great, Europe, a couple of books by William
Manchester, he's a terrific writer, particularly on MacArthur and 'The Glory and
the Dream,' about America right up before Vietnam. I love Leon Uris's novels
about Europe and the Jews: 'Mila 18,' about the last block left in the Jewish
section of Warsaw. And right now, believe it or not, I'm reading 'Tom Jones' by
Fielding.''

Hernandez has read about generals relieved of their command, rulers exiled to
foreign islands, but he was not prepared for the disruption in his own life.
There had been tension with Whitey Herzog, the chest- puffing Emperor for Life
of the Cardinals, but Hernandez had thought that was ancient history. However,
on the trading deadline, the Cardinals shipped him and his .299 lifetime average
to the Mets for Neil Allen and Rick Ownbey.

''I figured the Mets got a steal,'' Hernandez says, adding that nothing prepared
him for the spiritlessness of the Met dugout. ''It was drudgery, a team waiting
to get beat.''

He saw his contract ending after 1984 and he wondered where he might go next. In
the meantime, neither sulking nor crusading, Hernandez applied himself to
playing baseball that way he had in St. Louis: ''above average or way above
average in every aspect of his game,'' says Frank Howard, the manager.


With Hernandez on first base instead of Dave Kingman, Strawberry and other young
Mets could now take their cues from a winning player. At the same time, Jesse
Orosco turned into one of the best pitchers in the league.

''There's been a complete turnaround in attitude,'' says Hernandez. ''These guys
believe they can win. If the Mets were contenders, you'd see 40,000 fans in the
ball park. I know what kind of fans the Mets have.''

The itinerant ball player and his wife have come to enjoy Connecticut - ''the
best of both worlds,'' Hernandez says. ''It's quiet where we live and we're only
an hour from the shopping and the theater district. Most guys have the wrong
concept of New York. I know I did.''

Hernandez is planning to drive to the battlefields the morning after the season
ends. With memories of a world championship in his personal history book, Keith
Hernandez would like to think that next fall he might be occupied a little bit
longer in New York in early October.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Keith Hernandez

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS MASS MARKET

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 718 words


Mass market paperbacks are soft-cover books

sold at newsstands, variety stores and supermarkets, as well as in bookstores.
This listing is based

on computer-processed reports from bookstores

and representative wholesalers with more than

40,000 outlets across the United States. 1

MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon.

(Warner, $3.95.) The secret behind a woman business tycoon's rise to power:
fiction. 2

DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King.

(NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four novellas with mainly

nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror. 3

SPELLBINDER, by Harold Robbins. (Pocket,

$3.95.) From soldier in Vietnam to television

evangelist: fiction. 4

THE CASE OF LUCY BENDING, by Lawrence

Sanders. (Berkley, $3.95.) The aberrant behavior

of an 8-year-old girl epitomizes the society of

Florida's Gold Coast: fiction. 5

LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Pocket, $3.95.) Life in

the international glitter set: fiction. 6

FRIDAY, by Robert A. Heinlein. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) The adventures on
Earth of an Artificial Person: science fiction. 7

CLOAK OF DARKNESS, by Helen MacInnes.

(Fawcett, $3.95.) A counter-terrorist agent finds

himself on an assassination list: fiction. 8

TRULY TASTELESS JOKES TWO, by Blanche

Knott. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor. 9

TRULY TASTELESS JOKES, by Blanche Knott.

(Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor. 10

INDECENT EXPOSURE, by David McClintick.

(Dell, $3.95.) The scandal at Columbia Pictures

and Wall Street's part in it. 11

DAKOTA!  by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam, $3.95.)

Dangers await Toby Holt in the Bad Lands, while

his wife faces perils at home: historical fiction. 12

THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER, by Jeffrey Archer. (Pocket, $3.95.) The children of two
bitter

business rivals marry: fiction. 13

CINNAMON SKIN, by John D. MacDonald.

(Fawcett, $3.50.) Travis McGee investigates a

suspicious accident at sea: fiction. 14

THE LAW OF THE DESERT BORN, by Louis

L'Amour. (Bantam, $2.95.) Short stories about

the old American West. 15

THE MAN FROM ST. PETERSBURG, by Ken

Follett. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) International intrigue on the eve of World War I:
fiction.  TRADE

Trade paperbacks are soft-cover books usually

sold in bookstores and at an average price higher

than mass market paperbacks. This listing is

based on computer-processed reports from about

2,000 bookstores in every region of the United

States .  1

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell,

$7.95.) Three generations of a wealthy San Francisco family: fiction.  2

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $5.95.)
Black men

and women in the South: Pulitzer Prize-winner

for fiction. 3

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson.

(Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for women.  4

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Inspirational
talks by a

California professor.  5

BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little,

Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon strips featuring some

very odd characters. 6

LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy

Shaw. (Warner, $10.95.) How to add years to your

life and life to your years.  7

ROYAL SEDUCTION, by Jennifer Blake. (Fawcett/Columbine, $5.95.) A New Orleans
belle, a

European prince, international intrigue: historical romance. 8

LINDA EVANS BEAUTY AND EXERCISE

BOOK, by Linda Evans. (Simon & Schuster/Wallaby, $9.95.) How-to by the
television personality.  9

GARFIELD EATS HIS HEART OUT, by Jim

Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) The latest adventures

of that gluttonous cat: cartoon humor.  10

THIN THIGHS IN 30 DAYS, by Wendy Stehling.

(Bantam, $2.95.) How-to. 11

WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?  by

Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press, $7.95.)

Guide for job hunters and career changers.  12

THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $4.95.) Philosophical humor. 13

FIT OR FAT?  by Covert Bailey. (Houghton Mifflin, $4.50.) Exercises for fitness.
14

THE RAPTURE, by Hal Lindsey. (Bantam,

$6.95.) Predictions about an approaching global

event based on an interpretation of the Bible. 15

BELOVED, by Bertrice Small. (Ballantine,

$6.95.) A descendant of Cleopatra relives the romantic destiny of her legendary
forebear: fiction.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Long Island Journal

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 3, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1378 words


"As you well know, I left my heart in Garden City, which I still call 'Our
Village,'" wrote a former Garden City resident to Robert L. Schoelle, the
village's administrator.  "I hope this gift to Garden City may remind our
friends there of my love for 'Our Village.'"

The gift in question was $27,000 for the construction of a gazebo on an expanse
of village-owned land adjacent to the Village Hall.  The benefactor is Edward M.
Cameron Jr., a retired attorney now living in Hempstead.

Mr. Cameron presented the gift to the village in memory of his late wife, Honora
B. Cameron.  He has asked that the gazebo, which is nearly complete, be
dedicated "to the citizens of the village who have given generously and
unselfishly in volunteer service to Garden City," Mr. Schoelle said.

During his 50 years as a Garden City resident, Mr. Cameron volunteered his
services to numerous committees and boards, including the school board, a
property owners' association and various zoning boards.

His example, Mr. Schoelle said, reflects the community's "strong spirit of
volunteerism."

The gazebo was designed by Theodore Bindrim, the principal architect of the new
Garden City Hotel across the street.  The cupola stop the gazebo is a smaller
version of the hotel's cupola.

A ramp will provide wheelchairbound visitors with access to the gazebo.  The
structure will be used for open-air concerts and public gatherings.  An official
dedication is scheduled for late September.

Representative William Carney was the single Long Island Congressman to vote
against a House resolution May 4 calling for a nuclear freeze.  Therefore it
came as a surprise to the North Fork Peace Group when Mr. Carney wrote in his
summer newsletter to residents of the First Congressional District that he had
voted in favor of the freeze.

Harper LeCompte, acting chairman of the peace group, said he checked the
Congressional Record and Congressional Quarterly, both of which confirmed the
"no" vote of Mr. Carney.

At Mr. Carney's office in Farmingville, his press aide, Tim Kelly, said that it
had been an error in the newsletter and that Mr. Carney had not changed his
position on a nuclear freeze.  "I haven't been able to find out who made the
mistake and no one's spoken up," he said.

Mr. Carney was traveling to Connecticut, Florida and Kansas on vacation last
week and was unreachable.

Three Long Islanders were among the officials named to high posts in last week's
reorganization of the state's Division of Housing and Community Renewal.

Vincent J. Sama of Garden City was named first deputy commissioner and counsel.
The State Housing Commissioner, Yvonne Scruggs-Leftwich, said that she had
chosen Mr. Sama because he had broad experience in law and housing.  Before
joining the division, he was on the legal staff of the New York Housing Finance
Agency, served as assistant counsel to the New York State Temporary Commission
on Rental Housing and was chief of the New York State Department of State's
bureau of neighborhood preservation.

The division's new assistant commissioner for urban development is Bette Segal
of East Hills.  She had been the director of the Office of Intergovernmental
Coordination and the Arewide Clearinghouse at the Tri-State Regional Planning
Commission.  In those posts, she had responsibility for developmental assistance
for 600 municipalities in the metropolitan area.

Myron Holtz of Plainview, a member of the division since 1961, was named housing
financial management officer.  His previous title was deputy commissioner for
finance and administration.

Reaching out to someone can be tricky these days because of the telephone
strike.  Take the case of the Beethoven Festival, which the Friends of the Arts
are holding at Planting Fields Arboretum in Oyster Bay the weekend of Sept. 9,
for example.  Although the strike has been settled on a national basis, the
telephone company has a backlog of repairs to make and the Beethoven Festival
box office number, which has been out of commission for a while, isn't top
priority.

But lovers of Ludwig can still make reservations to hear his works performed by
a host of musicians, including the Kalichstein-Laredo-Robinson Trio and Gerard
Schwarz and the "Y" Chamber Symphyony.  Alternate numbers are 922-0056 and
922-0487.

It's a long way from the battlefields of Vietnam to the State University of New
York at Stony Brook, but a Ron Kovic it's rather like cming home.  The
37-year-old Massapequa-born veteran of the Vietnam War, who served as the
inspiration for the 1970's film "Coming Home," starring Jane Fonda and Jon
Voight, begins teaching this fall as the univensity's first writer in residence.

It was back in 1968 when Mr. Kovic already a war hero after one tour of duty,
was permanently paralyzed from the waist down by gunfire.  Returning to the
United States, he shared his pain openly with the publication of his
autobiography, "Born on the Fourth of July."

His antiwar activities over the last decade have included hunger strikes,
debates and his nomination of a draft resister for Vice President from the stage
of the 1976 Democratic convention.

At Stony Brook, Mr. Kovic will lecture about disability, the war in Vietnam and
survival.

He will be preparing a three-volume work, "After the War: An American Eulogy,"
which he hopes to have published next July 4.  In October, Mr. Kovic will
portrary a Vietnam veteran in a film written by Sam Shepard.

Since he has been back on the Island, Mr. Kovic has heard from an old wartime
buddy -- "a guy who actually saw me go down," he said.

"It was the first time I had spoken to anyone in my unit since I was shot," he
said.  "I hope to find out what happened to me that day.  I want to get that
experience across both to my students and in my writing."

To all appearances, James O'Neill's hands are those of a young journeyman, not a
journalist.  The pencil he holds, when he is not holding a hammer or lathe, is a
stubby carpenter's pencil, about as close as he has come this summer to the No.
2 variety he uses in other seasons to build sentences.

"My hands aren's writers' hands now," he said.  "They're all calluses."

For Mr. O'Neill, a Rockville Centre resident who is about to enter his junior
year in college, carpentry is only a summer job.  Writing is his full-time
interest, and journalism a probable career choice.

His most ambitious journalistic effort to date stems from a sprint of activity
last winter.  During his Christmas vacation, Mr. O'Neill, who is 20 years old
and who has attended Roman Catholic schools all his life, holed up in the study
of his parents' home and wrote a 60,000-word book.  The result is the history of
Long Island's St. Agnes Parish, which will be privately published in hardcover
at the end of next month, to coincide with the 50th anniversary of St. Agnes
Cathedral in Rockville Centre.

Mr. O'Neill's project began two and a half years ago as a pictorial record of
$1.5 million in imprevements to the cathedral.

"My first thought was to take pictures of all the renovations and make a gift of
them to the church," he said.

At the suggestion of his father, Nicholas O'Neill, an employee of WINS radio in
New York City, he began to research the church's entire history.  He culled his
reference materials from among the personal papers and journals of some of the
40 priests who have served the church, as well as old newspapers and church
bulletins.  He studied the church's archives and baptismal records.  He searched
attics for old photos.  Last summer, he recorded interviews with 25 of the
oldest members of the church.

Mr. O'Neill has titled his book "To Believe in a Vision." It is significant, he
said, because of "the vision and foresight of so many of the priests at St.
Agnes who saw the need for this church."

The book traces the history of St. Agnes from its first mass on the present site
in 1887 in a blacksmith shop (the huge, century-old anvil now stands on a
pedestal outside the cathedral), to the more architecturally conventional
structures that followed, culminating in the present-day cathedral.

The 160-page book includes more than 200 photographs.  It will be sold for $50 a
copy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Picture 1, The newly constructed gazebo, adjacent to Village Hall, in
Garden City, The New York Times/Susan May Tell; Picture 2, Ron Kovic, Ron De
Christoforo

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

5 LEADERS EMERITUS TAKE A LOOK AT THE WORLD

BYLINE: By TERENCE SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1296 words

DATELINE: VAIL, Colo., Aug. 28


An extraordinary gathering of former leaders, all involuntarily retired from
office, assembled here this weekend to consider the state of the world and the
transient quality of political power.

At one point, Helmut Schmidt, the former Chancellor of West Germany, gestured
toward four men seated with him on a deck in the bright Colorado sunshine.

''What we have here,'' he said half in jest, ''is a beautiful experience: a
conspiracy of former world leaders against present world leaders. But thank God
none of us has the power to alter anything anymore.''

In addition to Mr. Schmidt, who dominated West German politics until he was
turned out of office last year, the former leaders gathered at the mountain home
of former President Gerald R. Ford included Valery Giscard d'Estaing, President
of France from 1974 to 1981; James Callaghan, Prime Minister of Britain from
1976 to 1979, and Malcolm Fraser, Prime Minister of Australia for eight years
until he lost an election he called last March.



Reminiscing and Contemplating Among them, the five governed a large slice of the
industrialized world through the mid- and late-1970's. They presided over the
advent of what has been called the age of limits, the period that followed the
1974 oil shock, the energy crisis and the end of the Vietnam War. Together at
Vail, they reminisced about the past, lamented the present and contemplated the
future.

The former leaders came here at Mr. Ford's invitation to take part in three days
of discussion with nearly 100 economists, diplomats, political figures and
corporate executives. The meeting, which was held in a hotel and conference
center in this ski resort, was the second annual World Forum, sponsored by the
American Enterprise Institute, a Washington-based public- policy research
organization at which Mr. Ford is a distinguished fellow, and the Vail
Foundation.

The leaders discussed the fragile nature of political power with the shared
understanding that only those who have held power can have.

On Saturday morning, for example, after they had sat up late the night before
talking about the problems of the world and how they would handle them, Mr.
Callaghan said with a grin, ''I had to pinch myself last night and almost punch
the rest of them to remind ourselves that we were no longer in power.''



'How Does It Feel?'

Mr. Giscard d'Estaing, asked in a news conference how it felt to be out of power
and unable to determine French policies, declined to answer before the
microphones. A moment later, he drew a reporter aside and whispered with a
smile: ''How does it feel? About the same way you feel when you write a story
that doesn't get in the paper.''

Different as they were politically - Mr. Schmidt and Mr. Callaghan to the left
of center, Mr. Ford, Mr. Giscard d'Estaing and Mr. Fraser to the right - the
five became friends during their tenure. The clearly enjoyed being together
again this weekend, kidding each other and - away from the conference - trading
reminiscences in the living room of Mr. Ford's sprawling $2.5 million home
nestled among the aspen and fir trees of Beaver Creek, a luxurious new resort
just west of Vail.

Mr. Ford seemed especially at ease in his role as host. Neither his speech nor
his manner was marked by the kind of hesitation and stumbling that sometimes
marked his Presidency. Mr. Ford conceived the idea of the gathering two years
ago with William J. Baroody Jr., the president of the American Enterprise
Institute



Kissinger and Burns Attend

Other guests at the World Forum included former Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger; the United States Ambassador to West Germany, Arthur F. Burns; the
economists Alan Greenspan and Paul W. McCracken; Special Trade Representative
Bill Brock, and several members of Congress. The conference participants from
the private sector, who paid $4,000 each to attend, included the chief executive
officers of some 50 major American corporations.

Mr. Ford explained that he had invited foreign leders whose terms in office had
coincided with his. Hence, former Presidents Richard M. Nixon and Jimmy Carter
were not included.

The purpose of the forum was to assess long-term trends in world politics. But
taken together, the comments of the former Presidents and Prime Ministers in the
forum discussions and in private interviews over the last three days amounted to
a broad indictment of the Reagan Administration for its huge budget deficits and
high interest rates, its preoccupation with Central America and its arms-length
approach to arms control and relations with the Soviet Union.

The leaders warned in forceful terms that the Reagan Administration's projected
budget deficits of nearly $200 bilion, combined with high interest rates and
high unemployment, threatened to bring about a world economic disaster unlike
anything seen since the 1930's.



'As Bad as 1931'

Mr. Schmidt went even further. ''In my country,'' he said at an outdoor news
conference at the outset of the forum, ''Hitler never would have come to power
had we not had five to six million unemployed workers. Today, we have some three
million unemployed. It's not as bad as 1933, but it is as bad as 1931. I'm not
comparing the two periods, but I'm saying that unemployment is not something
that can be shrugged off.''

Mr. Fraser and Mr. Callaghan both expressed concern that the current recovery in
the United States might serve to obscure some of the more basic problems
afflicting the world economy. ''In the longer term,'' Mr. Fraser said in an
interview at the private home in which he was staying, ''this recovery might not
be serving a good purpose if it distracts people from some very basic problems,
like the mounting international debt and increasing protectionism.''

Although Mr. Reagan's name was rarely mentioned, his policies came under
consistent attack. Even Mr. Ford argued that the Administration should stretch
out its planned increases in military spending over the next several years and
defer the indexation of the income tax in order to increase revenues. He also
proposed that the President consider a tax on imported oil to help close the
deficits.



'Something Has to Be Done'

''In my years, when we had a deficit of $65 billion,'' Mr. Ford said,
''everybody thought it was the end of the world. Now the deficit is closer to
$200 billion, so clearly something has to be done.''

On foreign policy issues, the leaders all seemed to feel that the Reagan
Administration was excessively preoccupied with Central America and insensitive
to more important problems, like arms control and relations with the Soviet
Union.

''The Reagan Administration is trying to tackle too many problems at once,'' Mr.
Schmidt said in an interview. ''Chad, for example. Why not leave that to the
French? Keep your Awacs home.''

Despite the bad notices given Mr. Reagan's policies by the former leaders, Mr.
Schmidt insisted that they were not hostile to the Administration. ''We're
critical, yes,'' he said, ''but not unfriendly.''



Avoiding Sour Grapes

And the leaders did try to avoid comments that would seem like carping or sour
grapes.

Commenting about this, Mr. Kissinger said, ''One of the professional diseases of
former officials is that they inevitably believe that the world has gotten worse
since they left office.''

Mr. Callaghan, for one, implicitly pleaded guilty to that charge.

''I don't think we did too badly when we were in office,'' he said with a smile.
''I think the world was a better place. We got along well because we were all
like-minded.'' Then, with a teasing glance at his European colleagues, he added,
''And, of course, Helmut and Giscard had the good sense to speak English.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Henry Kissinger (page A4); photo of Helmut Schmidt with Betty
Ford

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
JUDGE IN BRINK'S KILLINGS: DAVID SMITH RITTER

BYLINE: By ROBERT HANLEY

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 968 words

DATELINE: GOSHEN, N.Y., Aug. 25


Midway through jury selection last month in the Brink's robbery and triple
murder trial here, Judith Clark, one of three defendants, rose to question a
prospective juror.  He was a retired dairy farmer with a seventh- grade
education, about 65 years old, with small, intense eyes, no teeth and a
weathered face.

''My name is Judith Clark,'' she said. ''I'm an anti-imperialist freedom
fighter. Do you have any feelings about that?''

''About what?'' the farmer snapped back.

The two were staring at each other. Things seemed ready for a clash.

But the judge, David S. Ritter of Orange County Court, interceded.

He Explains the Point

''I don't want you to answer about your feelings,'' Judge Ritter told the
farmer. ''That's not the issue. The issue is not whether you approve or
disapprove, but if it interferes with your ability to give her a fair trial.''

Time and again during the month of jury selection, Judge Ritter stepped in to
keep the focus of the proceedings on what he often called a ''trial of specific
criminal charges.''

He interviewed 1,180 potential jurors to weed out those who seemed hostile
toward Miss Clark and her co- defendants, Kuwasi Balagoon and David J. Gilbert.
All three are representing themselves.

On days they were not boycotting jury selection, Judge Ritter barred their
questions about the right to fight ''racist regimes'' and resist ''unjust
laws,'' about napalm bombing of Vietnamese villages and unrest in South Africa
and El Salvador, about black separationists, fascism, imperialism and
revolution.

''This is not a trial of political beliefs,'' he told one potential juror.
''This is not a trial of racism.''

Reputation for Firmness

To another, he said, ''The people on trial are not on trial for their views,
however popular or unpopular they may be.''

In his two and a half years as Orange County judge, and in four years before
then as the county's District Attorney, the 48-year-old jurist has developed a
reputation for being strict and always firmly in control.

When he served as District Attorney from 1976 to 1980, his office was at the
rear of those of his aides.

''When you went back there, it was clear he was the boss,'' recalled a former
assistant district attorney. ''There was no question about that. God forbid you
should disagree with him.''

Courthouse workers say he is more reserved than most county and state judges in
Goshen and less inclined than others to open his chambers to subordinates for a
cup of coffee.

Comfortable in Small Talk

Yet during jury selection Judge Ritter often slid easily into small talk with
potential jurors, speaking with traces of a country twang.

The judge is one of the Republican Party's strongest vote-getters in the county.
He was elected District Attorney in 1975 by about 5,200 votes out of 65,800
cast. He doubled that plurality in his re-election in 1979 before running
unopposed for his $57,298-a-year county judgeship in 1980.

During jury selection, an old man who wanted to be excused for heart trouble
offered a doctor's note.

''I had bypass surgery, same as you, Judge,'' the man said, referring to the
open-heart, arterial bypass surgery the judge underwent in 1980.

''Same doctor, too,'' Judge Ritter said as he read the note. ''And I still can't
read his writing.''

Ruling Is Delayed

After seven days of testimony the prosecution rested its case last Monday, and
the defendants asked Judge Ritter to allow testimony by two former Black
Panthers and a man accused of participating in the Brink's robbery. He put off
ruling on the request until Monday.

''He's very capable, even-tempered, well qualified, and has a good judicial
demeanor,'' said Angelo J. Ingrassia, a supervisory judge in the state's Ninth
Judicial District, which takes in Orange County.

Judge Ritter has been unflappable during the trial. He seems angered only when
the defendants interrupt him, or when the prosecutor, Kenneth Gribetz, District
Attorney of Rockland County, where the Brink's robbery and slayings occurred in
October 1981, persists with repetitious questions.

Early Ambition

David Smith Ritter was born in the Orange County city of Middletown on Nov. 25,
1934. His father owned a real- estate and insurance agency. From age 12, he said
in a recent interview, he wanted to be a lawyer.

He said his deliberate, judicial nature could be traced to an uncle, Henry T.
Dorrance, a lawyer in Utica, and Samuel W. Eager, a late state appellate judge
and father of a friend. Often as a youth he talked law with the judge at his
cottage on Yankee Lake in Sullivan County.

He graduated from Union College in 1956 and Cornell University Law School in
1959. Immediately after leaving Cornell, he was hired by the United States
Attorney General's office in Washington.

In 1962, Judge Ritter, then married and the father of five young children,
decided to leave Washington and return to his birthplace with his wife to set up
a private law practice.

3 Years in Private Practice

''I wanted to establish myself as an individual,'' he said. He did not want to
be ''beholden to somebody else with a power base.''

He was in private practice for three years, then served four years as a
confidential law secretary to the late Clare J. Hoyt, a State Supreme Court
justice. In 1970, he joined the District Attorney's office and remained there
until his election as a judge in 1980.

He and his second wife, Janet - his first marriage ended in divorce - are
remodeling a century-old dairy barn.

They live in it as work goes on. All the carpentry and landscaping involved
prevent him from playing golf.  ''The only athletic thing I've done lately is
the Y.M.C.A. fitness class,'' he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Judge David Ritter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

5 ASTRONAUTS SET FOR LIFTOFF TOMORROW

BYLINE: By JOHN NOBLE WILFORD

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla., Aug. 28


The machines and astronauts, including the first American black selected to fly
in space, were reported ready today for the nighttime launching of the space
shuttle Challenger early Tuesday.

Preparations at launching pad 39-A proceeded without a hitch, according to
Charles Henschel, the countdown conductor. The weather is expected to be
favorable. And the crew members had apparently adjusted their biological clocks
to the schedule of working nights and sleeping days that they are to keep
through the planned six-day mission.

After rehearsing landing procedures in a training plane early this morning, the
five astronauts ate dinner and went to bed before noon. The unusual hours are
dictated by timing requirements for the Challenger's primary cargo, a
communication satellite for India. It must be deployed early Wednesday morning
to reach its desired orbit over the Indian Ocean.

The mission is the eighth in the shuttle program and the third for the
Challenger. The launching, set for 2:15 A.M., will be the first night liftoff of
an American manned spaceship since Apollo 17 in 1972.

Oldest American in Space The commander of the mission is Capt. Richard H. Truly
of the Navy, a 45-year-old astronaut who was a pilot on the second shuttle
flight in 1981. The pilot is Comdr. Daniel C. Brandenstein of the Navy, who is
40. The other crewmen are Lieut. Col. Guion S. Bluford Jr. of the Air Force, 40;
Lieut. Comdr. Dale A. Gardner of the Navy, 34, and Dr. William E. Thornton, a
physician who, at 54 years of age, would be the oldest American to go into
space.

Colonel Bluford, whose nickname is Guy, is one of four blacks in the astronaut
corps and the first in line for a flight in space. He is a pilot with combat
experience in Vietnam and a doctorate in aerospace engineering. He will not,
however, be the first black in space. That distinction belongs to Arnaldo Tamayo
Mendez, a Cuban who flew on a Soviet mission in 1980.

On the first day in orbit, the Challenger astronauts are scheduled to activate
an instrument for processing biological materials in the micro-gravity
environment of space and check out the spaceship's 50-foot-long robotic arm.
Engineers on the ground are to begin a mission-long sequence of tests of a new
system for communicating with the shuttles through a $100-million Tracking and
Data Relay Satellite, now in position over Brazil.

Importance of Test

The test is critical to plans for the next space shuttle mission, in late
October. That shuttle will be carrying the European-built Spacelab, a laboratory
to be operated by two engineers in the nine-day flight. Only with the smooth
operation of the new relay satellite will it be possible to handle the flood of
Spacelab data that must be transmitted to earth.

Eventually, such data relay satellites are expected to replace most ground
tracking stations for communicating with traffic in near-earth orbits.

On the second day, early Wednesday, Colonel Bluford, assisted by Commander
Gardner, is to release the Insat satellite from the Challenger's cargo bay.
Later, the satellite's attached rocket is to fire it toward its higher orbit.
Jay Honeycutt, manager of shuttle operations integration, said that if for any
reason the Insat was not deployed then, there would be time in the schedule to
try again on the third morning.

Trials for Robotic Arm

The major tasks for the third and fourth days of the flight involve tests of the
robotic arm. Commander Gardner is to practice grappling and lifting a
7,460-pound dummy spacecraft, the heaviest load the arm has had to contend with
in its trials so far.

The fifth day should be free for final tests on the relay-satellite
communication link and for cleaning up and stowing the spaceship for its return
to the earth.

The landing is scheduled for Labor Day at 3:25 A.M., New York time. Captain
Truly is to steer the Challenger to a touchdown on a runway, outlined by
high-intensity xenon lights, at Edwards Air Force Base in California.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Prof. U.R. Rao

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 30, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STUDY OF 85,000 VETERANS CALLS PESTICIDE EFFECT VAGUE

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 600 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 29


The Veterans Administration reported today that medical examinations and
laboratory tests of 85,000 Vietnam veterans who fear they may have been exposed
to Agent Orange have revealed no adverse health effects clearly related to the
chemical defoliant or to its toxic contaminant, dioxin.

''There were a wide variety of health problems,'' Alvin L. Young, an Agent
Orange expert at the agency, told a news conference at the national meeting of
the American Chemical Society, ''but they were of the sort that one sees in a
population of males growing older.''

''Nothing stands out as related to dioxin or Agent Orange exposure,'' he added.


'Slight Increase' in Lymphomas

Dr. Young acknowledged that the medical examinations, conducted since 1978, did
find ''a slight increase'' in one form of cancer, known as lymphomas, but he
said it was too early to know ''if the lymphomas are important.'' He said that
20 lymphomas had been found among the 85,000 veterans, whereas 15 might have
been expected in a comparable population of young males who had not been exposed
to the herbicide.

However, soft tissue sarcomas, a rare form of cancer often attributed to dioxin,
actually showed up in smaller numbers than expected. There were only 11 cases
where 16 might have been predicted in a population of comparable size and
characteristics, he said.

Dr. Young said there was no scientific consensus on whether dioxin can cause
soft tissue cancers. A Swedish medical study has suggested it could, he said,
but studies in New Zealand and Finland found no strong correlation with soft
tissue cancers.

Brief Time for Development

Dr. Young said it had been only 10 to 15 years since many of the veterans were
exposed, a period that ''may not be long enough'' for some cancers to develop.
But ''at this point in time,'' he added, ''we don't see anything'' that confirms
a health problem.

The agency's report appeared to have only limited significance in scientific
efforts to determine whether exposure to Agent Orange has caused illness among
Vietnam veterans.

A number of groups representing thousands of Vietnam veterans contend that Agent
Orange exposure caused serious health problems, and they say Government studies
indicating there is no link between health problems and the defoliant are
inconclusive and inaccurate.

Dr. Young said the study was not a true epidemiologic study in which a group of
veterans known to be exposed to Agent Orange were compared with a carefully
matched control group of males not so exposed.

Uncertain About Exposure

He said many of the 85,000 veterans who feared they were exposed to Agent Orange
may not have been; about three-fourths of them said they were not sure.

Many of the people in the control population who were supposedly not exposed to
dioxin or similar chemicals may have been exposed at some time.  Other papers
delivered at the convention reported that dioxins and related chemicals have
been found in the fatty tissue of people in the United States and Canada who had
not served in Vietnam.

Alastair Hay, a lecturer in chemical pathology at the University of Leeds, in
England, noted that if the number of veterans exposed to Agent Orange was
significantly fewer than 85,000, then the finding of 11 soft tissue sarcomas
might actually be significant.

The Federal Government is sponsoring major epidemiological studies designed to
measure whether troops exposed to Agent Orange have suffered more cancer, birth
defects or other ailments compared with control groups that were not exposed.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 30, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TUESDAY, AUGUST 30, 1983 International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 868 words


Two American marines were killed and 14 were wounded as savage fighting between
the Lebanese Army and Moslem militiamen turned Beirut into an arena of exploding
shells, machine-gun fire and snipers' bullets. The Lebanese Army met stiff
resistance as it sought to gain control of Shiite Moslem neighborhoods in South
Beirut. (Page A1, Column 6.)

No change in the U.S. peace mission in Lebanon is called for, according to a
Cabinet-level panel headed by Vice President Bush. The panel also told President
Reagan, who is on vacation in California, that there was no need to increase the
size of the 1,200-marine peacekeeping group. (A8:1.)

Shock and grief at the deaths of the two American marines was expressed by the
Reagan Administration. An official suggested that Syria and the Soviet Union
bore some blame for the incident. (A9:1-3.)

Leaders of Menachem Begin's coalition met with the Prime Minister for two hours
in an effort to persuade him to abandon his plan to resign. Participants at the
meeting said the 70-year- old Prime Minister had listened to their arguments and
had promised an early decision. (A1:2.)

Salvadoran Government officials met with rebel representatives for the first
time in the three-year-old civil war. A United States official said the
five-and-a-half-hour meeting took place in Bogota, Colombia. (A1:4-5.) National

The Challenger was poised to embark on a six-day flight in which five American
astronauts are to test the space shuttle's ability to maneuver heavy cargoes and
transmit greater volumes of scientific data. The Challenger is also to launch an
advanced satellite aimed at sharply improving communications and weather
forecasting in India. (A1:3.)

Agent Orange was ruled out in having adversely affected the health of about
85,000 Vietnam War veterans who fear they may have been exposed to the chemical
defoliant or its toxic contaminant, dioxin, according to the Veterans
Administration. The agency issued the tentative finding after carrying out
medical examinations and laboratory tests. (A14:1-2.)

The Vietnam Memorial is still the most emotional place in Washington nine months
after its opening. Each day more than 10,000 people walk past the monument,
which is second only to the Lincoln Memorial in the number of visitors it
attracts, according to the National Park Service. (B6:3-6.)

A retiree lost most of his savings when he copied his $100,000 United States
Treasury bearer bond and left the original in the copying machine. He got the
bond back yesterday and was happy to pay a $25,000 reward to two men who helped
him. (A14:1-4.)

When Barbara Honegger denounced President Reagan's commitment to equal rights
for women as a ''sham'' and resigned from the Justice Department last week, she
became a heroine to some women's rights groups. But some of her new allies have
winced as she has linked her beliefs about women's rights to her beliefs about
the occult and the supernatural. Her friends say she is eccentric but sincere.
(A16:1-4.)

The anchor of the Monitor, the Civil War ironclad that changed the history of
naval warfare before sinking in a gale in 1862, was recovered from the ocean
floor off Cape Hatteras, N.C. The 1,300-pound anchor was the first major element
of the Monitor to be salvaged since the Union gunboat was found 10 years ago,
230 feet below the surface of the Atlantic. (A1:5-6.)

An expert on the origins of life reported that his laboratory has found all five
of the chemical bases of human genes in a meteorite and has synthesized all five
in a single laboratory experiment. The experiment, according to the expert,
Cyril Ponnamperuma, is designed to show how the chemical bases might have been
formed in the primitive conditions on Earth billions of years ago. (C4:3-4.)

A sense-of-humor test that may eventually shed light on the basic nature of
human personality has been developed by a team of California psychologists. The
test, which they say is similar to an intelligence test, is designed to operate
on the premise that if we understand who will laugh at what and why, we can
learn more about our differences. (C1:1-3.) Metropolitan

Richard Ravitch is resigning after four years as chairman of the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority. In a letter to Governor Cuomo, the 50- year-old Mr.
Ravitch said he would return to private business and ''resume a more normal
life.'' At a news conference, he cited the long hours the post demanded, the
frequent criticism of the transit system and the pressure on his family. (A1:1.)


A three-year contract was ratified by members of the New York City Opera
orchestra. The vote, which followed what was said to be an impassioned,
sometimes angry meeting, was 32 in favor of the settlement and 21 against. The
company plans an abbreviated season. (A1:2-4.)

The Treaty of Paris, which marked the successful end of the American Revolution,
is in Manhattan and will be displayed at the Museum of the City of New York,
beginning Thursday. It is said to be the first time that a British treaty has
ever been allowed outside the British Isles. (A1:1.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 30, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM MEMORIAL: TOUCHING, TEARS, ROSES, RAIN

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 880 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 29


Even now, nine months after it opened amid controversy over its design, the
Vietnam Memorial is still the most emotional spot of ground in Washington.

Each day more than 10,000 people, coming at all hours of day and night, walk
past the glossy black marble wall on which are carved the names of 57,939
Americans who died in Vietnam.  In the number of visitors it attracts, according
to the National Park Service, the war monument is second only to the Lincoln
Memorial, a nearby symbol of another war that divided the country.  But in one
sense, the Vietnam Memorial, a trench-like slash in the earth, is like no other
in the nation's capital. Even the children, who can be seen romping around other
Washington landmarks, fall quiet as they approach the V-shaped wall that bears
the grief of mothers, fathers, widows, children, comrades and friends.

On Sunday, a World War II veteran came to attention and saluted; a farmer paused
in front of a name, removed his John Deere cap and stood there fighting back
back tears; a mother placed a Polaroid shot of her two small children near the
name of her husband and, drawing the children around her, quietly wept. Others,
as they do almost every day, left behind a single rose, a wreath, a cross, a
small American flag.

Flashlights and Rubbings

And, as they have done from the first day, many of the visitors indulge in the
simplest human memorial, touching the cold, stony texture of the engraved names
of the dead. For them, it is not enough just to read the names. They must touch
them, even at night, when they show up by flashlight and in the flickering glow
of matches struck in the dark.

There is something new these days. Some visitors place a piece of paper over a
name and rub a pencil over it. Then they take the rubbing back home to some next
of kin who has not yet made the journey to Washington.

These scenes are particularly wrenching for the Park Service volunteers who are
stationed at the memorial to assist visitors in finding names.

One of them, Elaine Shriber, on the job only a few weeks, said every day was
like the first. ''Some don't want any help in finding the names,'' she said,
''so I always step back and let them be. They want to be alone.'' Referring to
Vietnam veterans who come looking for the names of comrades, Mrs. Shriber said:
''The buddies are the ones that stand out. They stare at the names the longest,
rubbing the letters with their fingers and trying not to cry, but nearly always
breaking down.''

'We Cry With Them'

Gertrude Gerber, who has been working as a volunteer since she retired from her
job at the Department of Commerce, said: ''A lot of the people I help are here
to take pictures of the names or to do rubbings that they can take back home to
somebody who lost a son or brother in Vietnam. They cry and we cry with them. I
go home at times and tell my husband about it and start crying again.''

Mrs. Gerber said there was a scene recently that she cannot soon forget. ''We
had a severe rainstorm the other day and I took shelter in the kiosk,'' she
said. ''This man and woman came up drenched to the skin and said they had a son
killed in Vietnam and could I help them find his name. I invited them to step
under the shelter and wait out the rain, but they refused. They went back to the
wall and just stood there in the soaking rain staring at their son's name.''

The impact of the wall is felt even by those who never served in Vietnam or lost
a family member there. John Armstrong, 15 years old, a blond-haired boy in a red
T-shirt and blue jeans, was looking for the name of a friend's brother. The
youth, who is from Oakville, Mo., was seven years old when the war ended with
the fall of Saigon. He said, ''I just want to go home and tell him and I found
his brother's name. It's really awesome. I had seen the wall on television, but
it's different when you walk up to those names.''

'I Remember Being Frightened'

Dean Meservy was searching for the name of Hyrum B. Port, ''a friend of ours
from Washington State.'' With his wife and 2-month-old son at his side, Mr.
Meservy tiptoed to reach the name and rub his fingers across the letters. ''I
didn't know him that well,'' he said, ''but I remember his family had a lot of
tragedy. His oldest brother drowned while swimming in the Pacific Ocean, then a
few weeks later the word came that Hyrum's helicopter had been shot down in
Vietnam.''

Mr. Meservy, who moved to the Washington area recently from Utah, said the wall
brought back memories of the anxieties he had felt in the 1960's. ''I just
remember being frightened,'' he said. ''I knew sooner or later, if the war kept
going, I would probably be called up. It was a frightening time. This wall shows
just how frightening it was.''

And so it goes, day after day.

Sunday, as a mother and father led their two small sons past the wall, one of
the boys was overheard asking his mother, ''Why are all those names on the
wall?''

''Those are the names of Americans who died in Vietnam,'' she told him, stooping
to his ear level as they walked.

''Why were they killed?'' the boy asked.

''Sometime, I'll try to explain it to you,'' said the mother. ''Now what do you
say we go find an ice cream.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Vietnam Memorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 31, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Editorial Notebook;
Funny, Silly and Cyclical

BYLINE: JACK ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 426 words


It used to be, until the Sense of Humor Inventory, that when you told people a
joke they divided into three categories: those who laughed, those who didn't and
those who said ''That's funny.''

Now, using their Humor Inventory, some California psychologists define four
categories of jokes on the theory that the kind of joke you like demonstrates
something about your personality. It's a plausible notion, yet it seems
incomplete.

Just as explanations of the personality can lie outside the individual,
explanations of what makes people laugh in a given period can lie outside the
personality, shaped by fashions and social cycles. The moron jokes of the 40's,
for instance, became, with little alteration, the Polish jokes of the 70's, just
as the sick jokes of the 50's became the dead-baby jokes of the 80's.

A young acquaintance who's about to leave for college has a bolder cyclical
theory, distinguishing humor as Preferences in Humor May Tell About Eras As Well
as Individuals either funny or silly. He contends that which kind most young
people prefer depends on the optimism or pessimism of the time. The humor of his
parents' youth was funny: that is, cerebral, topical, like Lenny Bruce's
scathing jokes needling the affluent, omnipotent America of the 50's. By
contrast, today's college generation, in the wake of Watergate, Vietnam, oil
shocks and recession, prefers silly humor, like Monty Python's Bureau of Silly
Walks.  Funny or silly, what is clearest about American humor at the moment is
the vast demand for it. ''Saturday Night Live'' has become an institution.
National Lampoon writers are creating a whole sub-in- dustry of movies.
Off-color joke books (denominated Truly Tasteless or Outrageously Offensive)
probably were eagerly passed around in every bunk of every summer camp.

Four years ago, there were maybe 20 comedy clubs around the country. Now, as
William Geist reported recently in The Times, there are probably 200. Some of
the routines are political, like Mitch Gilbert likening Uncle Sam to Crazy
Eddie: ''His arms sales policy is in-sane!'' Some are social, like Carol Siskind
describing the image men now strive for: warm, caring, sensitive - the image,
that is, of women. And others are, like Steve Martin stuffing ice cream and a
live cat into his trousers, silly.

Do people's preferences in humor reflect the psychology of the individual, or of
a whole generation? We don't know, but there's no need to get complicated about
it. There's a humor boom in America and that's worth a secure smile.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 31, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BACKGROUNDS OF 4 ON SHUTTLE

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1031 words


Capt. Richard H. Truly of the Navy, commander of the eighth flight of the space
shuttle, will be at the controls of the spacecraft Challenger when it makes the
first night shuttle landing Monday, but it will not be the first time he has
landed an aircraft in darkness.

A naval aviator who has made many landings on a carrier deck in darkness,
Captain Truly admits that at first it seemed that landing the 102- ton craft at
night might be ''a very difficult thing to do in a safe manner,'' as he put it
in an interview. But after many practice runs in a space shuttle simulator, he
said the procedure seemed to promise ''what I think is going to be a very
routine operation.''

The 45-year-old astronaut, who was born and raised in Mississippi, had little
interest in aviation when young. ''I wanted to be a fire truck driver,'' he
recalled. ''That seemed like an exciting thing to me when I was a kid and, as a
matter of fact, it still does.''

After attending schools in Fayette and Meridian, Miss., he received a bachelor
of aeronautical engineering from Georgia Institute of Technology in 1959. He
earned his Navy wings in 1960 and became a NASA astronaut in 1969. After making
two flights from the back of a 747 aircraft in a shuttle prototype, Captain
Truly made his first actual space shuttle flight on Columbia's second space
mission in November 1981.

He is married to the former Colleen Hanner of Milledgeville, Ga. They have three
young children and live in Houston.

The pilot of the Challenger for its five-day mission is Cmdr. Daniel C.
Brandenstein, a 40-year-old naval aviator who wanted to be an astronaut from the
time he was a high school student in Watertown, Wis. America had just begun
poking its nose into space, and the young student, whose boyhood heroes included
the seven original United States astronauts, decided on a career in aviation.

To get into flying, Commander Brandenstein concentrated on physics and
mathematics at the University of Wisconson in 1961 and received his bachelor's
degree in those subjects in 1965. Joining the Navy as an aviation cadet that
same year, he earned his gold wings two years later and in a few months was
patrolling the skies over Vietnam.

Flying from the decks of the aircraft carriers Constellation and Ranger, he
completed 192 combat missions and was later selected to attend the Navy test
pilot school at Pawtuxent River, Md. After another overseas tour of duty and
service as a flight instructor, he was selected as an astronaut in 1978.

He married Jane A. Wade of Balsam Lake, Wis. They have an 11-year-old daughter,
Adelle. Both wife and daughter plan to be present for the night landing at
Edwards Air Force Base in California.

The astronaut is taking ''something special'' into space for his wife and
daughter. ''He's got a real surprise lined up,'' Mrs. Brandenstein says, ''and
he won't tell us what it is.''

Dr. William E. Thornton, who is a mission specialist on the space shuttle
Challenger, hopes that sometime during the flight he will get sick. He is one of
the world's leading authorities on space sickness and he will use himself as a
guinea pig in his first flight in space. He reasons, ''I will have more time to
examine myself than anyone else will.''

Dr. Thornton, a 54-year-old medical doctor, is the oldest person to fly in
space. His selection as a crew member for the shuttle's eighth flight is the
culmination of a 17-year wait. Dr. Thornton, picked as a scientist-astronaut in
1967, played a key role in developing science and medical experiments for the
Apollo, Skylab and Apollo-Soyuz missions but was never named to a flight crew.

For a while, in 1969, Dr. Thornton had a vision problem that slowed his
astronaut flight training progress and threatened his future as an astronaut.
But special glasses solved the problem and his training continued apace.

His mission on the flight will be to study the effects of weightlessness and to
gather information on why astronauts get sick in zero gravity. He hopes that
what he learns may someday help to perfect medical or training techniques to
prevent space sickness.

Born in Faison, N.C., he attended primary and seconday schools there and then
attended the University of North Carolina, where he received a bachelor's degree
in physics in 1952. He returned to the same campus nearly a decade later and
received his medical studies in 1963.

He is married to the former Elizabeth Jennifer Fowler of Hertfordshire, England.
They have two grown sons.

Dale A. Gardner, a 34-year-old Navy lieutenant commander, is making his first
flight into orbit on the Challenger. As one of the three mission specialists on
the flight he will spend a good part of his time operating a mechanical arm
programmed to pick up and move a four-ton object in space. It is a complex job
that the astronaut had to master in a simulated test with only two months of
practice.

But Commander Gardner has faced similar challenges before during his relatively
short career as an astronaut and is regarded as one who has an unusual number of
varied skills. In addition to being an able pilot, as all astronauts must be, he
is an engineer, an avid photographer and a building craftsman who planned and
constructed an addition to his house by himself.

Born in Fairmont, Minn., he grew up in Sherburn, Minn., and Savanna, Ill., and
now considers his home town to be Clinton, Iowa, where his parents live. A
graduate of Savanna Community High School in 1966, he received a bachelor's
degree in engineering physics from the University of Illinois in 1970.

He joined the Navy that year and pursued a career as a naval aviator, performing
a number of assignments so adroitly that the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration selected him to be an astronaut in 1978. The following year he
completed a training and evaluation period that made him eligible for assignment
as a mission specialist on future space shuttle crews. He served as a support
crew astronaut for the fourth shuttle flight.

The astronaut is married to the former Sue Grace Ticusan of Indianapolis. They
live with their two small children near the Johnson Space Center in Houston.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Space Shuttle astronauts

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 31, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
FIRST U.S. BLACK IN SPACE

BYLINE: By WILLIAM J. BROAD

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 904 words


The first black American to soar into space, Lieut. Col. Guion S. Bluford Jr.,
has in his career followed a trajectory as sure and graceful as that of the
Challenger. Fascinated as a child with things that fly, he pursued his interest
to the point of taking a doctorate in aerospace engineering.  A reluctant hero
on the issue of racial barriers, the 40-year-old Air Force officer acknowledged
his pioneering role at a recent news conference, but he stressed that he was
more excited about being able to fly on the Challenger.

He has nonetheless gone out of his way to share with black students his devotion
to the art of aerospace engineering.

This year he visited a predominantly black high school in Camden, N.J., which
built an experiment to be carried aboard the Challenger. ''The students went
wild when Colonel Bluford came,'' said one teen-ager who worked on the
experiment. ''He said: 'I'm an engineer, and I'm black and I'm lonely out
there.' ''

He Says He Loves Airplanes

On another occasion he described himself as ''quietish person who loves
airplanes.''

Guion Stewart Bluford Jr. was born in Philadelphia on Nov. 22, 1942. His
all-American childhood included a paper route, Ping-Pong, chess and the Boy
Scouts, in which he achieved the rank of Eagle. While growing up in West
Philadelphia, the oldest of three boys, he built model airplanes and upon
entering junior high school he decided to become an aerospace engineer.
Encouraging the hopes were his father, a mechanical engineer, and his mother, a
special education teacher in the public school system.

Not everyone shared his dreams. Counselors at Overbrook High School said he was
not college material and suggested that he instead enter a technical school.

Nevertheless, after graduation in 1960 he was accepted into the Aerospace
Engineering program at Pennsylvania State University. There he met his future
wife, Linda Tull. He graduated in 1964 with a bachelor of science degree and
joined the Air Force.

A Period of Honing

About that time he became fired with an unassuming kind of ambition. School and
military records suggest he went through a determined process of honing, a quiet
fight for career advancement that eventually landed him among the aerospace
elite.

In Arizona he attended pilot training at Williams Air Force Base, and he
received his pilot wings in January 1965. He then joined an F-4 fighter squadron
in Vietnam, flying 144 combat missions, 65 over North Vietnam.

After combat service, Colonel Bluford taught cross-country and acrobatic flying
at Sheppard Air Force Base in Texas. In 1972, beating stiff competition, he was
accepted into the Air Force Institute of Technology, and graduated with
distinction in 1974 with a master's degree in aerospace engineering. He then
went to the Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory at Wright-Patterson Air Force
Base in Ohio, working his way up to chief of the Aerodynamics and Airframe
branch.

Studying all the while, he graduated in 1978 with a Ph.D. in aerospace
engineering and a minor in laser physics from the Air Force Institute of
Technology. His dissertation was titled ''A numerical solution of supersonic and
hypersonic viscous flow fields around thin planar delta wings.''

With almost no hope of success, Colonel Bluford in 1978 applied to the astronaut
program, along with 8,078 others. He said he was puzzled when an official of the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration called to chat about the Texas
sunshine, until he was asked if he would like to be an astronaut.

'Hobby Is Going to Work'

The next year he became eligible for a mission. ''It really proved to be better
than I expected,'' he said after entering the program. ''It gives me a chance to
use all my skills and do something that is pretty exciting. The job is so
fantastic, you don't need a hobby. The hobby is going to work.''

Colonel Bluford, who prefers to be called Guy, is a mission specialist, one of
the new breed of scientific pioneers who are taking an increasing share of the
limelight from the pilot astronauts.

Aboard the Challenger, he will perform experiments with electrophoresis, a way
to separate biological materials according to their surface electrical charge by
passing them through an electric field. The technique may yield new drugs. He
will also help launch a communications and weather satellite for India and put
the shuttle's mechanical arm through tests with an 8,000-pound weight.

3 Other Blacks Await Flights

Though he is the first American black in space, he is not the first black; the
Soviet Union placed Arnaldo Tamayo Mendez, who is Cuban, into orbit in 1980
aboard Soyuz 38. Waiting to follow Colonel Bluford into space are three other
black American astronauts.

The comedian Bill Cosby said the historic flight was a breakthrough for the
Federal Government. ''This is someone who had earned the mission,'' he said.
''Our race is one which has been quite qualified for a long time. The people who
have allowed him to make this mission are the ones that have passed the test.''

Colonel Bluford lives in Houston with his wife, an accountant with an oil
concern. Both his sons are science students in college. ''I try to keep them
from feeling pressured that they have to accomplish more than I have,'' he said.
''I want them to be happy. That's what is most important.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 31, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE MOVIE 'DANIEL': HOW CLOSE IS IT TO HISTORY?

BYLINE: By PETER KIHSS

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1793 words


Much of the movie ''Daniel,'' which opened in New York last Friday, derives from
the case of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, who were executed for atomic espionage
conspiracy in 1953. How close is the film to history?

E. L. Doctorow and Sidney Lumet, executive producers of ''Daniel,'' say that the
Rosenberg case ''inspired'' both the film and Mr. Doctorow's 1971 novel, ''The
Book of Daniel,'' on which the film is based. But they assert: ''There is no
attempt here to be historically accurate.''

Many artists have created a fictional work borrowing from - or changing -
history. Shakespeare and Tolstoy, among others, did so. However, the Rosenberg
case is still close to the present, still has political impact and still arouses
passions - witness current interest in two new books about the Rosenbergs with
differing interpretations of recently released documents - and consequently it
is especially important to separate fact from fiction in this instance.

Three questions come up: First, where does the film parallel or differ from the
actual case? Second, does the film offer its own verdict of innocence or guilt?
Third, does the film make any political statement?

Number of Factual Differences

To begin with, the movie tells the story of Paul and Rochelle Isaacson, who are
executed after conviction for their conspiracy to commit atomic espionage. This
drama is seen largely through the eyes of their children. The result is that the
film is emotionally charged from the very start. But there are also a number of
factual differences.

One major departure in the movie is the portrayal of the chief witness against
the Isaacsons.

The Rosenbergs, the only Americans executed on a conspiracy conviction, had as
their main accuser David Greenglass, Ethel Rosenberg's youngest brother. Mr.
Greenglass testified that he gave Julius Rosenberg notes and sketches in January
and September 1945 on the design of the implosion-principle atomic bomb, which
was later exploded over Nagasaki. Ethel, he said, typed up his handwritten notes
in September. Before the trial he had denied any complicity by his sister.

Mr. Greenglass served nearly nine and a half years of his 15-year sentence. He
was freed in 1960.



Chief Accuser Is a Dentist

In the movie, the chief accuser is a dentist, who is a neighbor, and the
audience is given no detailed information about what he testified concerning the
alleged spying. We are told that the dentist, who is not a relative, names the
fictional Isaacsons as principals after his own arrest.

Also in the movie, the Federal prosecutor and trial judge refer to the
defendants' backgrounds as Communists - an inflammatory label at that time - to
show ''motivation.'' At their trial, the Rosenbergs invoked Constitutional
privileges against self- incrimination and refused to talk about Communist
affiliation.

There are also a number of major and minor differences between the Rosenbergs
and the fictional Isaacsons. Julius Rosenberg had been a City College student
during the Depression, as had the movie character, Paul Isaacson. Julius
Rosenberg graduated with a degree in engineering in 1939. Ethel Rosenberg was
not a fellow collegian as the character of Rochelle is in the movie; she went to
work after graduating from high school.

In World War II, Julius Rosenberg was a civilian electronics inspector for the
Army Signal Corps, rather than a uniformed pro-Soviet soldier, as is the movie
character.



Dismissed From His Job

Julius Rosenberg was dismissed from his job in February 1945 as a security risk
because he had been a member of the Communist Party, which he denied in the Army
investigation. No such episode or reference appears in the movie.

After the war, Julius Rosenberg became the co-owner of a Lower East Side machine
shop with David Greenglass and two other men. The movie character is the lone
operator of a tiny radio sales and repair shop in Astoria, Queens.

Both the Isaacsons of the movie and the Rosenbergs lived in poverty. The
Rosenbergs had an 11th-floor apartment in Knickerbocker Village, instead of the
movie family's flat above the store.

There are significant differences between the real and the fictional children,
too. The Rosenbergs had two sons - Michael, born in 1943, and Robert, born in
1947. Michael earned degrees from Swarthmore, Cambridge University in England
and the University of Wisconsin. He is now a college teacher of economics.



Recently Changed Careers

Robert earned degrees from the University of Michigan and taught anthropology.
Recently, he changed careers and began studying law.

The real sons use the surname Meeropol. They were legally adopted in 1957 by
Abel Meeropol, a writer, and his wife, Anne, a teacher.

The brothers identified themselves publicly as the Rosenberg sons in 1973 when
they sued the lawyer Louis Nizer over his book, ''The Implosion Conspiracy.''
Their suit - later settled on terms not made public - charged copyright
violation in the use of their parents' death-house letters, defamation and
violation of privacy.

In the movie, one child is a girl, who becomes involved in antiwar
demonstrations during the Vietnam war, and later advocates revolution. The older
child, Daniel, is only moved to reexamine his parents' lives after his sister
attempts suicide and later dies.

There are other differences and similarities between the movie and the actual
case.



Defense Effort Was Decried

The Rosenbergs' trial counsel was Emanuel H. Bloch. His defense effort was later
decried by Rosenberg sympathizers for, in effect, agreeing that there had been a
theft of important atomic secrets and for failing to cross-examine Harry Gold.
Mr. Gold earlier had confessed to being a spy courier for Klaus Fuchs, a British
physicist who admitted spying for the Soviet Union. Mr. Gold testified to once
having received material from Mr. Greenglass.

In the movie, the defense lawyer's widow contends that the fictional Isaacsons
used and destroyed other people. She also says that they stymied her husband,
who defended them at their trial, by refusing to let other witnesses be called.
The Rosenbergs, at their trial, were their only defense witnesses.

In the movie, the daughter of the chief prosecution witness says that the
Isaacsons headed a spy network involving many things never disclosed at the
trial. In the actual Rosenberg case, Federal atomic agency officials barred Mr.
Greenglass from testifying about experiments on using smaller quantities of
uranium or plutonium to make bombs. Federal investigators tried to find proof of
wider espionage, but were not able to get sufficient proof to introduce it at
the trial.

Does the movie decide on the innocence or guilt of the Isaacsons?



Theory of Another Couple

In the film, Daniel Isaacson tries but fails to find out if his parents were
innocent of plotting to get defense secrets for the Soviet Union. He comes up
with a theory that another couple might have been real spies, and that they were
somehow protected and able to flee. The film leaves the issue unanswered.

The real Rosenberg sons wrote a book in 1975 called ''We Are Your Sons: The
Legacy of Ethel and Julius Rosenberg.'' In it, they insisted that their parents
were innocent and ''framed.''

Since 1975, Michael and Robert Meeropol and their counsel, Marshall Perlin, have
been suing various Government agencies under the Freedom of Information Act. The
Government has released some 200,000 pages of documents so far, and the
Meeropols have contended in Federal Court in Washington that perhaps 100,000
more pages remain to be released.  The film depicts a fictional reporter for The
New York Times. He tells Daniel Isaacson that the trial case against his parents
had no substance. The reporter says that an internal Justice Department
memorandum - never released publicly - ''favors the defense.''



Rested on a Few Witnesses

Some such document actually did get released. But its conclusion was the reverse
of the one referred to in the movie. The actual report, dated Nov. 7, 1957,
analyzes challenges to the trial and sentence. Its author, Benjamin F. Pollack,
a Justice Department attorney, wrote that the record ''establishes the guilt of
the Rosenbergs beyond a reasonable doubt,'' even though it rested on only a few
witnesses.

A new book, ''The Rosenberg File: A Search for the Truth,'' by Ronald Radosh and
Joyce Milton, makes use of some of the 200,000 pages of documents recently
released. It contends that Julius Rosenberg was ''coordinator of an extensive
espionage operation.'' Ethel Rosenberg, it argues, ''probably knew of and
supported her husband's endeavors.''

The book also says that another couple, Morris and Lona Cohen ''vanished'' from
their New York apartment after the Rosenbergs' arrest, and later turned up in
London as Peter and Helen Kroger. The Krogers were convicted by a British court
in 1961 as part of a spy ring. They were traded to the Russians in 1965 in
exchange for a British spy.

Mr. Radosh and Miss Milton say that the Federal Bureau of Investigation refuses
to release files on the Cohen-Kroger couple.

On the other hand, Walter and Miriam Schneir, in a new version of their book,
''Invitation to an Inquest,'' use the latest released Government documents to
insist on the Rosenbergs' having been wrongly convicted.



Three Successive Shocks

The movie ''Daniel'' depicts electrocutions similar to those of the Rosenbergs.
Julius Rosenberg collapsed and was dragged to the death chair. Ethel Rosenberg
underwent three successive shocks, only to have two amazed physicians report her
still alive. She was given two more high- voltage shocks, and then she died.

As to the film's aim, Mr. Doctorow and Mr. Lumet say that they want to show
''three decades in the life of American dissent.'' They say that they explore
''the effects of parents on children, of ideologies on life.'' They call their
film ''the story of two generations of a family whose ruling passion is not
success or money or love, but social justice.''

Politically, the movie harks back to Communist and other leftist demonstrations
in 1938. It moves on to anti- Vietnam war protests of the 1960's. It winds up
showing the half-million or more persons rallying in Central Park in 1982
against nuclear weapons.

Dissent gets a good play. The Communist demonstrations of the 1930's get equated
with those of the Vietnam era. The film inevitably omits much history and
ignores political or moral distinctions between various protest movements.

The movie's fictional Daniel starts out as a character disinterested and out of
politics. At the end, Mr. Lumet says, ''Daniel's salvation lies in a return to
political action.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of the Rosenbergs; photo of Mandy Patinkin; photo of Lindsay
Crouse

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

STRATEGIC SOVIET REGION

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 705 words


BFMilitary

 Analysis

Soviet sensitivity over foreign radar penetration of defenses guarding La
Perouse Strait south of Sakhalin may have been the motivation for the reported
destruction of a South Korean airliner by a jet fighter, according to American
officers. In war the strait would be the direct route for the deployment of the
Soviet Pacific Fleet into the northwest Pacific, the officers said.

Over the last 27 months United States and Japanese intelligence services have
reported the expansion of Soviet military power on Sakhalin, on the Siberian
mainland and on the island of Etorofu of the Kuril island chain. Etorofu lies
150 miles northeast of Hokkaido, the northern Japanese island. The entire area,
one officer said, is of major importance to Soviet strategic planning.

A squadron of MIG-23's was deployed on Etorofu about a month ago, according to
intelligence sources.

Impulsive Act Is Doubted

American and NATO intelligence analysts rejected the idea that the shooting down
of the Boeing airliner could have been the impulsive act of a Soviet pilot. They
cited the rigid, centralized command system of Soviet forces and said an attack
on a civilian airliner, even when it was in Soviet airspace, could not have been
carried out without the approval of a higher headquarters.

They noted that the elapsed time between the first Soviet radar sighting of the
airliner and the attack was sufficient for an exchange of messages between the
local commander and headquarters either in Vladivostok, headquarters of the
Pacific Fleet, or in Moscow.

Air Force sources were puzzled by the fact that the stricken South Korean
airliner issued no distress signal. One interpretation is that the first missile
destroyed the cockpit and with it the communications system.

Air Force Units Reinforced

Reinforcement of the Soviet Air Force in the Far East accompanied the expansion
of the Pacific Fleet's bases. Soviet military writings emphasize the importance
of adequate fighter forces to cover the emergence of the fleet into the Pacific.
The writers appear aware that American planes strewing mines in La Perouse
Strait could impede or perhaps halt that operation. One Soviet Army division has
been located on Sak halin. It is equipped with antiaircraft missiles and guns.

There are four naval bases in the region. The main fleet base at Vladivostok has
shipbuilding and repair yards. Submarines, destroyers and smaller craft are
based at Sovetskaya Gavan on the mainland. Korsakov, at the southern end of
Sakhalin, was originally a minor naval base with a small airfield. In recent
months the pace of expansion there, according to American and British naval
officers, has been more rapid than elsewhere in the region.

Petropavlovsk on the Kamchatka Peninsula is another naval base with a number of
naval air stations in the vicinity. Petropavlovsk is about 570 miles west of the
westernmost of the Aleutian Islands.

Deployed to Eastern Pacific

Recently the Soviet Union has begun to deploy some of the Pacific Fleet's 25
nuclear missile submarines into the eastern Pacific. Such submarines normally
pass through La Perouse Strait on their way to their stations, another reason
for the strong air and ground defenses on the Soviet side of the strait.

The fleet also has 95 other nuclear- and diesel-powered submarines, 85 major
surface combatants, including a carrier equipped for antisubmarine warfare.
Soviet deployments in the Indian Ocean and at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam are drawn
from the Pacific Fleet.

To make these deployments or, in war, to carry out military operations, the
fleet would first have to go through La Perouse Strait, which has been
identified by the United States Navy as a so- called chokepoint. Ships at
Petropavlovsk would be freer to move but would be under surveillance by American
forces in the Aleutians and Alaska.

American fighter strength in the region is concentrated at Kadena Air Force Base
on Okinawa. There are no United States Air Force combat aircraft on the main
Japanese island of Honshu. Aircraft from the wing of F-15's based at Kadena fly
routine exercises to Misawa Air Force base in northern Hokkaido.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 6; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 178 words


uf812Film 'Don't Look Back,' On Dylan, at Embassy

''Don't Look Back,'' the D. A. Pennebaker film portrait of Bob Dylan's 1965
English concert tour, has been rereleased and can be seen starting today at the
72d Street Embassy Twin, at Broadway. The film, which was withdrawn from
distribution more than a decade ago, follows the folk singer-songwriter on the
eve of fame.

In it, Dylan sings ''It's All Over Now, Baby Blue'' and ''The Times They Are
a-Changin','' which became an anthem of the anti-Vietnam War movement that was
just awakening into consciousness. Mr. Pennebaker's cinema-verite camera is
present as Dylan meets a not-always-sympathetic press and in the singer's more
relaxed moments with Joan Baez, Donovan and Alan Price.

''What I wanted to do was just be present when Dylan enacted his whole life and
show you what he deals with and what interests him,'' the film maker later said
of ''Don't Look Back.''

Shows are at noon, 1:50, 3:40, 5:30, 7:20, 9:10 and 11 P.M. today, tomorrow,
Sunday and Labor Day, and the information number is 724-6745.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 422 words


A Lifetime in Congress Who, in 1956, was a leading candidate for the Vice
Presidential spot on the Democratic ticket?

Who, in 1960, almost beat out Lyndon Johnson to become John Kennedy's running
mate?

Who, in 1972, came in second behind George McGovern for the Democratic
nomination?

Which Democrat, at the start of 1976, was running dead even in the polls with
President Ford?

Whom did senators once choose, overwhelmingly, when asked which of them was best
qualified to be President?

The answer, in each case, is Henry M. Jackson, the Washington Democrat who died
Thursday at the age of 71 after 42 years in Congress, 30 of them in the Senate.
Indeed, Scoop (thus dubbed, in childhood, for a cartoon character) Jackson was
so much and so long in the forefront of national politics that one wonders why
he was not better known.

In recent years he was thought of as a neo-conservative, or as just
conservative, or as the Last Cold Warrior. He surely was a leading Democratic
hawk. He opposed the 1963 test-ban treaty, for instance. Of Vietnam he said,
''If we don't stop Russia in Southeast Asia, we might as well sign a quit-claim
deal to the rest of Asia and grant Soviet entry into the United States.''

But he was not a political primitive. Yes, he started out as a hard-bitten
prosecutor who pushed liquor out of Snohomish County, Wash. But he also quit the
Senate Investigations subcommittee to protest Joseph McCarthy's red-baiting.
Yes, he pushed for the United States to build a supersonic transport. But he was
a sensitive conservationist who also pushed for the first Environmental
Protection Act. Yes, he campaigned against school busing. But he was a father of
conservation corps programs for disadvantaged youth.  Scoop Jackson personified
the industry and practicality of working people in his home town of Everett.
Small wonder he was re-elected so often and so overwhelmingly. Still, as a
national candidate, people judged him wooden, lacking charisma, and, what may
have stung most, rigid.  ''I'm not that,'' he said in 1975. ''My ideology is
very simple: 'Let's see what the problem is and what we need to do.' . . . I've
been called a conservative by some, a liberal and a radical. But the main thing
is, what are you getting done. I believe in trial and error. If something won't
work, let's try something else.'' Scoop Jackson did not make it to the White
House, but his own words describe, proudly and honorably, the next best thing: a
lifetime of industry and excellence in Congress.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 356 words


Questions appear on page 16.

1. Processed waste from the radioactive water released in the 1979 nuclear plant
accident at Three Mile Island.

2. False. It is a member of the organization.

3. He announced that the Federal Bureau of Investigation had opened its first
major drive against the five oldest and most powerful crime groups in the New
York City area.

4. The Defense Department.

5. A statement by the Administration that the marines are in combat or in
hostilities would set off the mechanism by which Congress could force them to
leave within 90 days.

6. The anchor of the Monitor, the Civil War ironclad. The Treaty of Paris, by
which George III recognized the United States as an independent nation.

7. Willie Stargell, a star on the world championship Pittsburgh Pirates of 1979,
rejoined the team for the current road trip.

8. True. The Soviet Union placed Arnaldo Tamayo Mendez, who is Cuban, into orbit
of the earth in 1980.

9. Four.

10. Columbia College.

11. The Vietnam Memorial.

12. Cardinal Sin, the head of the Roman Catholic Church in the Philippines,
turned down a request from President Ferdinand E. Marcos to serve on a special
committee investigating the assassination of Benigno S. Aquino Jr., noted
opposition leader.

13. ''Whistler's Mother.'' 14. Bates Motel is the favorite in the Woodward
Stakes at Belmont Park. The horse was named after the lodge where Tony Perkins
took a knife to his guests in Alfred Hitchcock's ''Psycho.''

15. The Government will pay uniform prices for the treatment of particular
ailments.

16. Opposed; supports.

17. They have gone to see a rare African Western Reef heron, or egretta gularis
gularis, a bird ordinarily restricted to the tropical portions of coastal
western Africa.

18. Nebraska defeated Penn State, 44-6.

19. Poland. The third anniversary of the accords that permitted the formation of
the independent trade union Solidarity.

20. Former President Gerald R. Ford; Valery Giscard d'Estaing, former President
of France; James Callaghan, former Prime Minister of Britain, and Malcolm
Fraser, former Prime Minister of Australia.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SENATOR HENRY M. JACKSON IS DEAD AT 71

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2201 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 2


Senator Henry M. Jackson, the Washington Democrat who served in Congress for
more than half of this century, ran for President twice and was regarded as one
of the nation's leading voices on military affairs, died Thursday night in
Everett, Wash., after suffering a massive heart attack. He was 71 years old.

Mr. Jackson died hours after he called a news conference in Everett to deplore
the downing of a South Korean airliner by a Soviet fighter plane.

Senator Jackson's death signaled the end of a political era in his home state of
Washington and altered the political landscape of Capitol Hill. It gives Gov.
John Spellman, a Republican, an opportunity to make a temporary appointment that
will increase the Republicans' majority in the Senate.

The death also and removed a staunch advocate of military preparedness nine days
after Senator John Tower, a Texas Republican who is another leading supporter of
the military, announced that he would not seek re- election next year.

Arms, McCarthy, Soviet Jews

In nearly 43 years in Congress, Mr. Jackson was involved in the major themes of
American political life, from the issues of the early years of the nuclear age
to the arcane details of strategic arms treaties, and from the drama of the
Army-McCarthy hearings in 1954 to efforts in the 1970's to the freedom for
Soviet Jews.

Senator Jackson died less than an hour after he was taken to Providence
Hospital, only a dozen blocks from his home in Everett. The Senator, who had
been considered in good health and was known as an energetic man, had just
returned from a two-week trip to China and talks with Chinese leaders.

Shortly before President Reagan left California this morning to return to
Washington, he said he and Mrs. Reagan were ''deeply saddened'' to hear of
Senator Jackson's death. ''He was a friend, colleague, a true patriot, and a
devoted servant of the people,'' Mr. Reagan said.

Sought Out by Presidents

Mr. Jackson was John F. Kennedy's choice to head the Democratic National
Committee in 1960. Presidents of both parties sought his counsel, particularly
on military and diplomatic matters.

Over the years, he defended Adm. Hyman G. Rickover and the nuclear submarine; he
spoke out for the survival of Israel; he strove to win military contracts for
the Boeing Company, his state's largest employer.

He was a strenuous supporter of organized labor and civil rights. In the last
decade he emerged as a leader of a strain of Democrats committed to a strong
national defense and skeptical of their party's impulses in foreign affairs.
These Democrats, some of whom called themselves neoconservatives, often regarded
Mr. Jackson as the symbol of the party's traditional center. They supported him
vigorously when he campaigned for the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1972
and 1976.

Remembrances by Colleagues

Mr. Jackson suffered a string of primary defeats in the 1972 race, but in 1976
he won important victories in the Massachusetts and New York primaries before
his campaign languished.

In later years he confined his energies to the Senate, concentrating on his role
in the Senate Armed Services Committee and urging colleagues to resist the
entreaties of the political action committees that proliferated in the wake of
the campaign financing laws prompted by the Watergate scandals.

His death brought expressions of sadness and tributes from Democratic and
Republican colleagues. Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the Senate majority
leader, termed Mr. Jackson ''a seasoned politician who understood the need for
bipartisan cooperation on issues of vital national interest.''

Senator Strom Thurmond, Republican of South Carolina, characterized him as a
''great statesman'' and ''guiding force for democracy'' who ''never wavered in
his dedication to the true principles of peace, liberty and freedom.''

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said that he felt a ''deep
and personal loss'' and added, ''The Senate has lost one of its great leaders.''


'Labor Had No Stauncher Friend'

Senator Jackson's death was also seen as a loss for the labor movement, which
had given him considerable support in his Presidential campaigns. ''Labor had no
stauncher friend,'' said Lane Kirkland, the president of the American Federation
of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations. ''He shared our commitment to
social and economic justice and to a strong national defense adequate to protect
those values against totalitarians of the left or the right.''

Henry Martin Jackson was born in Everett May 31, 1912, the son of Norwegian
immigrants. His father was a building contractor, his mother a devoutly
religious woman, and on the wood-plank streets of his hometown the young Henry
Jackson drew from their examples of hard work and demands for achievement. As a
newspaper delivery boy he once set a record by delivering 74,880 copies of The
Everett Herald without a single complaint.

Sister Named Him 'Scoop'

His sister called him ''Scoop'' because she thought he resembled a character in
a cartoon strip and the name remained with him, even on the floor of the Senate.

At Everett High School he managed the basketball team and was a member of the
debating team. He earned his way through college, graduating from the University
of Washington and taking a law degree there. As a young lawyer, he became a
prosecutor in Snohomish County and won a reputation as a foe of prostitutes,
slot machine operators and bootleggers.

Mr. Jackson was a vigorous supporter of President Roosevelt, catapulted into
prominence by his success as a prosecutor, Mr. Jackson was to Congress in 1940.

He was 28 years old and one of the youngest members of the House. He became
something of a specialist in nuclear energy and military affairs. He was
re-elected five times before he challenged the Republican incumbent Harry P.
Cain in 1952 for a Senate seat. He won a plurality of 135,000 votes.  Dwight D.
Eisenhower, the Republican Presidential candidate, took Washington State by more
than 100,000 votes.

Thus began a tenure of three decades as his state's junior senator. Mr. Jackson
and Warren G. Magnuson, who was elected to the Senate in 1944 and served until
he was unseated in 1980 by Slade Gorton, a Republican, made up perhaps the most
formidable team in the Senate.

Together, ''Maggie and Scoop,'' as they were called, accumulated 64 years of
Senate seniority by 1980. They played decisive roles, Mr. Magnuson as chairman
of the powerful Appropriations Committee, Mr. Jackson as an expert in armed
services issues.

''We worked together so many years for the benefit of the state and nation,''
Mr. Magnuson, who is 78 years old, said today. ''We were in intimate contact. We
were in so many contests together on the same side.''

The Jackson Personal Style

In manner Mr. Jackson was quiet, contemplative, a bit ascetic, and just short of
unfashionable in his demeanor. But in many ways he was a political figure from
the old school. It was the new force in politics, television, that put him on
the national stage.

In 1954, a year after he and two other Democrats, Senators Stuart Symington of
Missouri and John L. McClellan of Arkansas, left the Permanent Investigations
Subcommittee, Mr. Jackson charged that the committee was ''hunting headlines
instead of hunting Communists,'' in part because of a dispute over committee
staffing and in part as a protest against the techniques of Senator Joseph R.
McCarthy, Republican of Wisconsin.

But he and the others returned to the committee, and as television sent the
Army-McCarthy hearings across the nation, Mr. Jackson came across as sober and
fair-minded, by one account a ''clean-cut James Stewart type.'' The hearings
were an outgrowth of Senator McCarthy's charges of Communist infiltration of the
Army.

Mr. Jackson voted for the censure of Senator McCarthy in late 1954. He became a
leading critic of the military policies of the Eisenhower Administration. He
pointed out deficiencies in the nation's infant missile program and spoke out in
favor of the nuclear submarine ideas advanced by Admiral Rickover.

Key Party Role, Then Marriage

In 1960, Senator John F. Kennedy considered Mr. Jackson for the Vice
Presidential nomination that eventually was given to Senator Lyndon B. Johnson
of Texas. Shortly afterward Kennedy, who had pledged to select a Protestant to
head the party, chose Senator Jackson to become chairman of the Democratic
National Committee.

A year later, Mr. Jackson, a regular on Washington society writers' lists of
bachelors, married Helen Eugenia Hardin of Albuquerque, who was working in the
office of Senator Clinton P. Anderson of New Mexico.

Mr. Jackson was a longtime supporter of American involvement in Southeast Asia.
In 1962 he urged that the United States ''draw the line'' in Laos. Later, though
he muted his views on Vietnam as the nation grew weary of American involvement
there, and even voted against President Ford's request in 1975 for emergency aid
for the deteriorating Government of South Vietnam, Senator Jackson retained his
belief that the United States had been correct in entering the Vietnam War.

''The basic decision to go into Vietnam was right,'' he said in April 1975, when
such a position was unfashionable.

He also was a leading advocate of the antimissile missile, arguing that the
Soviet Union was a ''dangerous, unpredictable opponent.'' He held up approval of
the first treaty on limiting strategic arms, insisting that future treaties not
limit the United States to missile levels inferior to those of the Soviet Union.
He was perhaps the most vociferous Democratic opponent of the second strategic
arms pact.

Defense and Conservation

Through his years in the capital, Mr. Jackson's commitment to the national
defense has been coupled with his dedication to winning military contracts for
Boeing. He was sometimes referred to in the capital as ''the Senator from
Boeing,'' which he resented bitterly. He was, however, criticized for permitting
a Boeing lobbyist to operate out of his Senate office in the unsuccessful battle
for a Federal subsidy to build the supersonic transport plane.

The aircraft failed to win Congress's support. Senator Jackson's support of the
measure angered some conservationists. But he regarded himself as a protector of
the environment and was identified with Congressional battles over strip mining
and land-use questions. He was a major architect of the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969, the first modern statement of the nation's environmental
goals. It created the Environmental Protection Agency.

Senator Jackson won perhaps his greatest attention for his efforts in behalf of
Israel and Soviet Jews. He dated his repugnance to anti-Semitism to lectures
from his mother. He solidified his support for the survival of Israel after a
visit to a Nazi concentration camp.

Easing Curbs to Free Jews

In 1974 he prevailed in persuading Congress to tie an easing of trade barriers
to provide freer passage of Jews out of the Soviet Union. The arrangement
collapsed a year later, but it won Mr. Jackson the support of many influential
American Jews.

Today, Howard I. Friedman, president of the American Jewish Committee, said Mr.
Jackson was ''a man whose name will ever be associated with American legislation
that already has helped more than a quarter of a million Jews emigrate from the
Soviet Union to freedom.''

Although his two Presidential campaigns failed to win widespread support, Mr.
Jackson, one of the last remaining New Dealers in Washington, remained an
influential figure on Capitol Hill. Late this spring he was the leading voice in
the successful effort to limit the amount of honorariums given Senators.

''There is growing and, I think, justifiable criticism that this has undermined
the integrity of the Senate,'' said Mr. Jackson, who for years donated all his
income from honorariums to charity. ''This is a scandal waiting to happen.''

Jackson Urged Latin Panel

Less than a week later, Mr. Jackson, along with Senator Charles McC. Mathias
Jr., Republican of Maryland, urged President Reagan to appoint a commission on
Central America, an idea that took form in Mr. Reagan's special commission on
Central America.

Mr. Jackson was a member of the Board of Overseers of both Harvard University
and Whitman College in Walla Walla, Wash., and a member of the Board of Advisers
for the John F. Kennedy Institute of Politics at Harvard. He was also a member
of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution.

In addition to his wife, Mr. Jackson is survived by a daughter, Anna Marie
Jackson, a student at Stanford University, and a son, Peter Hardin Jackson, a
student at the St. Alban's School in Washington.

Memorial services are to be held Tuesday evening in Washington's National
Cathedral and in the Everett Civic Auditorium, Everett, Wash. A private service
for the family and for a Congressional delegation is scheduled for noon
Wednesday in the First Presbyterian Church in Everett.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Henry M. Jackson

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

KEY QUESTIONS IN TUG OF WAR ON WAR POWERS

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 908 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 2


With the death of United States marines in Lebanon this week, the long-standing
debate between the executive and legislative branches over the War Powers
Resolution once again preoccupied the capital. At issue in the dispute is
whether the fighting involving the Marines in Lebanon constitutes
''hostilities'' under the law and if so, whether Congress has the power to call
the troops home. Some questions and answers about the law follow:

Q. What is the War Powers Resolution?

A. Enacted into law over a Presidential veto in 1973, the act requires the
President to notify Congress within 48 hours after he sends U.S. troops into
certain combat situations. It prohibits him from keeping those troops in those
areas for more than 90 days unless Congress declares war or passes a joint
resolution approving such an action.

Q. Why was the resolution enacted?

A. Congress resented what it considered the unilateral actions of Presidents
Johnson and Nixon in waging the Vietnam War. Congress believed that its
constitutional power to declare war had been eroded by the actions of these and
previous Presidents who committed U.S. troops to warlike actions without benefit
of a declaration of war. ''It is the purpose of this joint resolution to fulfill
the intent of the framers of the Constitution of the United States and insure
that the collective judgment of both the Congress and the President'' will apply
to the introduction of U.S. troops into hostilities, according to the
legislation.

Q. Have Presidents complied with the resolution?

A. Presidents Reagan, Carter and Ford all have submitted reports under the law.

Q. Under what circumstances must Congress be notified?

A. Congress is required to be notified after the President sends U.S. troops
''into hostilities or into situations where imminent involvement in hostilities
is clearly indicated by the circumstances,'' or ''into the territory, airspace
or waters of a foreign nation, while equipped for combat, except for deployments
which relate solely to supply, replacement, repair or training of such forces,''
or ''in numbers which substantially enlarge U.S. armed forces equipped for
combat already located in a foreign nation.''

Q. Under what circumstances must the troops be withdrawn?

A. If the President cites the first circumstance, that is, the introduction of
troops into hostilities or situations of imminent danger, he must withdraw the
troops within 60 days unless Congress has delcared war, extended the 60-day
period, authorized the stationing of the forces, or is unable to meet because of
an attack on the United States. The President may extend the stay of U.S. troops
for 30 additional days, however. In the other two circumstances, Congress has no
automatic right to review the presence of troops on foreign soil.

Q. Was the War Powers Resolution affected by the Supreme Court decision that
struck down the legislative veto?

A. While experts disagree, the decision appears to have nullifed one of three
major provisions, one that would allow Congress, by passing a concurrent
resolution, to force the withdrawal of U.S. troops that were engaged in
hostilities. The two other major provisions will probably remain intact because
the law contained a ''separability clause'' intended to separate any part of the
law found unconstitutional by the courts from the rest of the law. However, some
legal experts including Stanley M. Brand, legal counsel to the Clerk of the
House, believe that the entire resolution has been nullified.

Q. Has President Reagan complied with the act, with regard to the stationing of
U.S. forces in Lebanon?

A. That is a matter of dispute between the President and Congressional critics.

Q. What is the President's position?

A. Mr. Reagan contends that he fulfilled the requirements of the act by
informing Congress last September that ''I have authorized the armed forces of
the United States to paricipate'' in a multinational peacekeeping force in
Lebanon, ''to assure the safety of persons in the area and bring to an end the
violence which has tragically recurred.'' Last Monday, Mr. Reagan sent a status
report to the Speaker of the House and the President pro tem of the Senate.

Q. What is the position of Congressional critics?

A. They contend that the President is required to do more than inform the
Congress. They say that the 60-day clock should be running, because, ''our
troops are clearly in a combat situation as defined by the War Powers Act,'' in
the words of Senator John Glenn, Democrat of Ohio, a contender for his party's
Presidential nomination.

Q. Does the President deny that U.S. troops are not in a combat situation?

A. Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, told reporters Tuesday that the
President was opposed to invoking the war powers provision because the fighting
was ''an isolated incident.'' ''If we were conducting combat operations, then it
would be different,'' Mr. Speakes continued. ''But we're not. The role there is
as a peacekeeping force.''

Q. What is the outlook on Capitol Hill?

A. Most members of Congress are still on vacation, but there are indications
that the issue will be hotly debated when Congress returns Sept. 12.

Q. What is the outlook at the White House?

A. Mr. Reagan's track record indicates he is unlikely to change his position
unless forced to do so by the Congress or public opinion.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

OUR REAL BICENTENNIAL

BYLINE: By T.D. Allman ;
T. D. Allman, who recently visited Central America for Harper's and the Pacific
News Service, is author of the forthcoming book ''Unmanifest Destiny,'' about
United States foreign intervention.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 772 words


Though you'd never know it, today is the real bicentennial of our nation's
freedom.

Exactly 200 years ago today, following years of protracted war and equally
frustrating negotiations, Great Britain finally granted us our independence,
though even then we were not yet entirely free. The calendar lesson for the
modern world is that freedom doesn't come easy. It takes a long time.

Two centuries ago today, British troops still occupied New York City and other
parts of the country. What, retrospectively, was one of the longest and most
divisive wars in American history had failed to drive the foreign oppressors
out. But diplomacy and great power politics finally had fulfilled the Founding
Fathers' dream: In 1783, the negotiations in Paris, which involved the French
and Spanish as much as the British and us, finally led to Americans at last
becoming masters of their own land.

What about 1776? The truth is that each July 4 we shoot off fireworks more in
honor of our illusions than the facts of history. The War of Independence had
begun more than a year earlier. The text of the Declaration of

Independence, following endless debate, was published in Philadelphia that day.
But it was signed only months later.  Most important, as the Founding Fathers
fully realized, no declaration, however stirring, could make us free. Not even a
war that tried men's souls could do that. Britain was defeated at Yorktown in
1781, by forces that were more French than American. But not even Britain's
losing a battle could win the war for us. Only two years later did the ordeal
finally end at the negotiating table, and a new ordeal begin.  Soon our offshore
waters were full of ''boat people'' - Loyalists fleeing to Canada and the
Caribbean to escape our patriotic wrath. For years afterward, our Government,
under the Articles of Confederation, was an unstable as any in the third world
today. Only in 1788, 12 years after the Declaration of Independence, was the
Constitution adopted and the ''United States'' we know today finally a
historical fact.  What difference does it make that July 4 is a great festival
of nationalism, and that on Sept. 3, every year, no bands play, no politicians
orate?

We Americans have had a lot of problems in the world. Sometimes our leaders call
the problem Vietnam; other times they call it El Salvador. But the real problem
is that we have forgotten how history, even our own history, really works.

The historical fact is that our own revolution was ''taken over'' by radicals
whom many upstanding Americans found far more subversive than the British.

We ceaselessly denounce ''outside interference'' and liberation struggles,
little appreciating that if the Founding Fathers hadn't accepted
''interference,'' we might never have won our independence at all. We are
appalled when the Vietnamese or the Nicaraguans, in a year or two, don't confer
the millenium on their peoples, mindless of the historical fact that our
progress and freedom didn't come from writing down fine words on parchment. They
flowed from blood and bitterness and division and countless failures.

Like most Americans, I look back on the 1976 Bicentennial with fondness. But
what about our failure today, seven years later, to honor, even with a minute of
silence, all the Americans who bled and suffered and died between 1776 and
1783?One of our great problems with ourselves is that over the last 200 years
our national success has led us into the fantasy that liberty not only is
inevitable but easy - a matter of Woodrow Wilson's proclaiming ''14 Points'' to
the world or Ronald Reagan's declaring there should be land reform in El
Salvador.  For the record, it isn't just that July 4, 1776, is not our day of
independence. Our history reveals what events in places like Central America
also reveal: Declarations don't determine history; things are always a lot more
difficult, more compromised, than that.  The Vietnam veterans aren't the only
ones we Americans, in our haste to forget that history is not easy, have
forgotten. Tonight, I'll light a sparkler, left over from July 4, in honor of
both George Washington and Benedict Arnold, both the Continentals who froze at
Valley Forge and the Loyalists whose liberties we traduced so complaisantly once
independence was won. I'll also give Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette their due.
Those autocrats gave us guns, money, ships and troops - just as we accuse the
Russians and Cubans of giving them to liberation movements today - and it's good
they did. For if they hadn't, July 4, 1776, might never have led to Sept. 3,
1783, at all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Anne Bransford Married in Ohio

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 60, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 203 words


The marriage of Anne Lynne Bransford, an account executive for the Burroughs
Corporation in New York, to Lawrence Johnson Newhall Jr., a manager at the Dun &
Bradstreet Corporation, also in New York, took place yesterday at St.
Christopher's- by-the-River Episcopal Church in Gates Mills, Ohio. The Rev.
William Shively performed the ceremony.

The bride, daughter of Mrs. John H. Morrish of Gates Mills and the late Wallace
Leonard Bransford of Salt Lake City, graduated from Wheaton College in Norton,
Mass., having studied at Loyola University in Rome and at Dartmouth College. Her
father was an investor and banker. Her stepfather is a vice president of an
engineering consultants' concern in Cleveland.

Mrs. Newhall is a granddaughter of the late Wallace Milford Bransford, a
founding director and a vice president of the Silver King Mining Company in Park
City, Utah, and a great- granddaughter of John Bransford, Mayor of Salt Lake
City from 1907 to 1912.

The bridegroom, son of Mr. and Mrs. Newhall of Granby, Conn., graduated from the
South Kent (Conn.) School, attended Boston University and served with the Marine
Corps in Vietnam. His father is retired headmaster of the Watkinson School in
Hartford.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Census Bureau Lists 25 Populous Nations

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 36 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 3


Following is a list of the world's 25 most populous nations and their growth in
the past year ended in mid- June as released by the Census Bureau this week:

** *Country

Population

Change

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DEBRIS OF A PLANE FOUND, SOVIET SAYS

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 891 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Sept. 3


The Soviet Ambassador to Japan reported that debris from an aircraft had been
found in waters where a South Korean passenger airliner was reported shot down
Thursday by a Soviet fighter plane, the Japanese Foreign Ministry said today.

The Ambassador, Vladimir Y. Pavlov, did not specify that the plane fragments
were from the missing Korean Air Lines jet, according to the Foreign Ministry.
Nor did he comment on reports in the United States that Soviet searchers had
recovered some bodies from the plane, which went down with 269 people aboard in
the northern Sea of Japan west of Sakhalin island.

Nevertheless, it was the first Soviet statement that something had been
discovered from what presumably was the Korean jet, a Boeing 747 on the
Anchorage-to-Seoul leg of a flight that had begun in New York.

For the last two days, Japanese ships have been patrolling the same general
area, near Moneron Island southwest of Sakhalin, but have found nothing
conclusive.

Insulation Material Found

The Japanese Maritime Safety Agency reported tonight that one of its patrol
boats had discovered some sort of insulation material that would be tested to
see if it had come from the downed plane. Plastic bags containing bread and
materials with Korean writing on them reportedly were also retrieved from a
point 18 miles north of Moneron Island.

The Maritime Agency said some of the 14 boats it had sent out on a search
mission were buzzed today by Soviet planes, but how serious the incident was
could not be determined.

In the meantime, the Japan Broadcasting Corporation said tonight that the
Government had evidence that an order to fire on the South Korean plane had been
given from a Soviet ground control station.

Quoting ''multiple Government sources,'' the broadcast said the Soviet fighter
pilot who fired an air-to-air missile at the jetliner had not relied on his own
judgment but had responded to instructions from the ground.

Pilot's Message Reported

Earlier today, the Japan Broadcasting Corporation quoted unidentified Government
officials as saying that Soviet planes had not properly warned the Korean
airliner before firing. The broadcast said the following message was radioed by
a Russian pilot minutes before the missile attack:

''It is now within sight. We have approached within two kilometers. The plane is
not yet aware of us. We will continue pursuit.'' Afterward, the pilot reportedly
said, ''Missile fired'' and ''Shot down.''

The authenticity of these reports could not be independently verified. Japanese
Government officials declined to comment on what recordings had been made of
conversations between Russians - or even to say whether any recordings existed
at all.

However, it is believed that Japanese military stations, like their American
counterparts, closely monitored the Korean Air Lines flight and that their data
was the basis for a conclusion that the jetliner was shot down.

This morning the Japan Broadcasting Corporation reported that conversations
between Soviet pilots and ground control stations had been taped throughout the
two and a half hours that Soviet planes reportedly tracked the passenger
airliner.

Ministry Declines to Comment

The Japanese Government is prepared to make these tapes public if it is unhappy
with Soviet handling of the crisis, according to the report. But Foreign
Ministry officials declined comment and again refused even to acknowledge they
had such tapes.

The statement by Ambassador Pavlov that airplane debris had been found in the
waters off Sakhalin did not satisfy the Japanese Foreign Minister, Shintaro Abe,
who protested that the Russians were not providing enough information.

It was the third time that Mr. Pavlov had been summoned to the Foreign Ministry
but the first time that he had met with Mr. Abe since the plane disappeared.
Japanese officials said they were increasingly frustrated with their inability
to get many details from Moscow and with the continued refusal to allow Japanese
boats to press their search into Soviet territorial waters.

At a news conference after his 40- minute meeting with the Ambassador, Mr. Abe
warned that ''the Soviet attitude will influence relations between Japan and the
Soviet Union.''

28 Passengers Were Japanese

The Japanese feel they have a special stake in this crisis, both because the
plane went down near their territory and because 28 Japanese were on board.  An
accounting by Korean Air Lines today said that, besides the Japanese, the
passengers were 81 South Koreans, 55 Americans, 22 Taiwanese, 16 Filipinos, 14
Chinese from Hong Kong, 10 Canadians, 6 Thais, 4 Australians and 1 person each
from Sweden, Malaysia, India and Vietnam.

Soviet-Japanese relations have rarely been good, but even before the downing of
the Korean plane they had become noticeably strained in recent weeks. Officials
here were especially troubled by the Soviet deployment of advanced MIG-23
fighters on Sakhalin island, whose southernmost tip lies less than 30 miles from
the northern Japanese island of Hokkaido.

U.S. Planes Based in Japan

In turn, the Russians said they had acted only because United States F-16
fighters were being stationed at an air base at Misawa in the northern part of
Honshu, Japan's main island.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PERSONALITIES PUT FIRST IN CONGRESS

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 874 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Sept. 3


Senators and House members select their institutions' leaders more on the basis
of personal compatibility than because of political ideology, as is often
assumed, according to several leading scholars.

The scholars made their report to the 79th annual meeting of the American
Political Science Association here, which ends Sunday.

They raised the issue because of the pending retirement of Senator Howard H.
Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the majority leader of the Republican-controlled Senate.
They also predicted a possible leadership challenge to Senator Robert C. Byrd of
West Virginia, the Democratic leader, if the Democrats regain control of the
Senate next year.

They also said the Speaker of the House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.,of Massachusetts,
who is 70 years old, is in his waning years in Congress.

Value of Feeling Comfortable

The scholars said they had found that members of Congress placed a high value on
those with whom they feel comfortable, and who they thought would protect their
political interests regardless of differences on key issues. Ideologues often
become too involved in issues to provide the rapport, political support and
day-to-day services that the rank-and-file Congressmen need, the scholars added.

''It's hard to know what these guys want, or who they'll feel comfortable with,
'' said Prof. Richard Fenno of the University of Rochester, who is conducting a
study of eight Senators. ''What they want to know is, 'What will my life be like
with him as a leader? Is he the kind of guy I can work with? Is he the kind of
guy I can approach?' ''

The consensus of the scholars was that Senators Richard G. Lugar of Indiana and
James A. McClure of Idaho are the front-runners to succeed Mr. Baker as
Republican leader, mostly because of their nonthreatening personalities. The
scholars also generally agreed that, although Mr. Byrd may face some challengers
if the Democrats take the Senate, he is unlikely to be defeated because he has
demonstrated the ability to take care of his colleagues' political needs,
regardless of their ideologies.

Dark Horse Republicans

On the Republican side, Senator Pete V. Domenici of New Mexico, chairman of the
Budget committee, is considered a dark horse candidate, as is Senator Bob Dole
of Kansas, chairman of the Finance committee. Although both men have
demonstrated leadership in the Senate, they have been caustic at times, and
abrasive personalities are seldom elected to leadership posts.

Prof. Robert Peabody of Johns Hopkins University said that when senators select
a leader, ''the highest priority is somebody they feel comfortable with.''

''They really don't want somebody too far out in front, too dazzling,'' he said,
referring to Mr. Dole, who is known for his caustic wit. ''That's where a Bob
Dole might run into some difficulties. On the other hand, Dole probably has more
chits than anyone else.''

''Dole is the wild card,'' said Prof. Norman J. Ornstein of Catholic University
and the American Enterprise Institute. ''In many respects he's the logical
choice, but he's a loose cannon. They don't want a leader to get them in
trouble. But he has more chits out than everyone else combined.''

''The Senate is a funny place, a strange place,'' Mr. Ornstein told an audience
of 200 people. ''Senators know their colleagues in ways that House members
don't. But there are very few durable friendships in the Senate. Senators know
their colleagues on a superficial basis, while House members develop durable
friendships.''

Senators Are Inaccessible

Like other scholars, Mr. Ornstein lamented what he considered the increasing
inaccessibility of senators. ''Access has become much more difficult,'' he said.
''It requires going through layers of staff. It's as difficult to get to
administrative assistants today as it was to get to the senators themselves 10
years ago.''

Roger Davidson, a senior fellow with the Congressional Research Service, agreed
that ''compatability and the ability to perform the function of leadership is
somewhat more important than ideology'' in the selection of a Senate leader.

Mr. Fenno offered some initial findings of his Senate study.

Because there are only 100 senators, compared with 435 House members, the Senate
has a ''small town'' sense of community. Paradoxically, he said, the smallness
of the Senate also creates prima donnas.

''It's like a colony of movie stars,'' Mr. Fenno said.

The senators' six-year terms allows them to be more courageous than House
members. ''Senators have time to think of other things besides campaigning -
governing, for example,'' Mr. Fenno said.

But unlike House members, who are engaged in continuous campaigning, senators
often regard campaigns as strange and unwarranted intrusions into their lives.

''When you go out campaigning with a senator, you feel like he's doing something
he hasn't done lately,'' Mr. Fenno said. ''The guy who ran when Vietnam was a
hot issue runs again when Vietnam is forgotten. Their campaign staffs are always
new.''

''The great difference between Senate and House campaigns is the media,'' he
continued. ''A Senate campaign depends on the media. A House campaign depends on
handshakes.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
WEIGHING THE FACTS IN WESTMORELAND VS. CBS

BYLINE: By John Corry

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1213 words


The libel suit brought by Gen. William C. Westmoreland against CBS, seldom
quiescent since its inception last September, recently grew heated again.
Lawyers for CBS said they had discovered the ''smoking gun'' that would destroy
the general's case, and although this was debatable, it did in its way return
the argument to what it was supposed to be all about in the first place. The
general said that ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' broadcast Jan.
23, 1982, had libeled him when it said he had deliberately suppressed
information about the strength of the Vietcong. CBS had answered by saying it
would prove the charge was true. At issue was a question of journalism: What are
facts, and what do facts mean? It is a more complicated question than it seems.

The ''smoking gun'' the CBS lawyers referred to was a newly discovered 1967
memorandum by an official in the Central Intelligence Agency. ''A variety of
circumstantial indicators,'' the official wrote from Saigon, led him to the
''inescapable conclusion'' that General Westmoreland had given ''instruction
tantamount to a direct order'' to limit the estimate of Vietcong troop strength
to 300,000.

On the face of it, the memorandum, which was sent to Richard Helms, the Director
of Central Intelligence, by George Carver, who was his special assistant for
Vietnamese affairs, upholds the contention of the CBS program - that General
Westmoreland and his command were manipulating the intelligence figures.

Mr. Carver, however, sent the memorandum before he had spoken to General
Westmoreland. After they met, Mr. Carver sent a new memorandum, this one saying
that ''we now have agreed (on) set of figures Westmoreland endorses.'' Mr.
Carver went on to say that General Westmoreland ''agreed with most of my
observations and could see the clear logic behind both sets of figures (the
C.I.A's and the Army's) which were really not that far apart.''

Whether the original memorandum is indeed a smoking gun presumably will be
determined when the $120 million libel suit is finally settled in court. At the
moment, the only thing that is certain is that both memorandums are facts. What
they mean, however, and what all the other facts in the case mean, is under
dispute. Truth depends on where its proponents stand.

General Westmoreland's legal case, for example, is being financed by
conservatives, some of whom seem genuinely persuaded that the libel laws should
be rewritten, and some of whom have been accused, probably correctly, of being
revisionists, eager to rewrite the history of American foreign policy.

Meanwhile, CBS, a powerful entity in itself, is being backed by other news
organizations, which see the suit as a legitimate cause for concern, and by a
claque of supporters, some of whom, it may reasonably be supposed, have
ideological considerations, too.


Therefore, each side, examining the same facts, is interpreting them
differently. Each side is also saddled with moralists to whom facts are less
important than what they perceive as higher truths. Higher truths are what
publicists, ideologists and polemicists deal in, and as a rule they are not a
matter for journalists. General Westmoreland may indeed have manipulated
intelligence figures, consciously and deliberately, trying to prove the war in
Vietnam was being won. But one suspects that CBS would not be the defendant in a
libel suit if it had accused the general only of incompetence. The facts, after
all, indicate that Army intelligence figures were a mess. ''The Uncounted
Enemy,'' however, moved past the charge of incompetence into one of immorality.
It was pursuing what might be considered a higher truth. ''There was a conscious
effort - indeed, a conspiracy,'' as Mike Wallace, the program's principal
correspondent, said, to lie.

Vietnam has been troublesome to television journalists before. In the 60's, it
was no longer enough for some of the press, both print and electronic, to simply
report the news; it insisted on telling us how it felt about it, too. It was not
enough to believe that Vietnam was insane or illegal; the belief had to be
publicly implied. A reporter's moral position was important. In ''Media
Unbound'' (Houghton Mifflin), a penetrating and intelligent book about
television journalism, Stephan Lesher points out that ''observers as disparate
in their views as Henry Kissinger and Frances FitzGerald'' agree that the Tet
offensive ''was a serious military and political defeat for the Communists.''
Nonetheless, most of the reporting on television described Tet as an American
and South Vietnamese disaster.

It is likely that implicit in this reporting was a moral position: Tet had to be
a disaster; to see it as a victory might mean approval of the war. No one has
ever accused Walter Cronkite of lying, but on Feb. 27, 1968, while Tet was
winding down, Mr. Cronkite declared on the CBS evening news that as far as he
was concerned the war was over. He said that he had been ''too often
disappointed by the optimism of American leaders'' and that the only
''rational'' thing to do now was to negotiate a settlement. It was a historic
moment, a watershed, in television news. Before this, it had always insisted it
was objective, no bias and no frills.

A few days after Mr. Cronkite's broadcast, the moral factor seemed to strike
NBC. Frank McGee said that ''the war is being lost.'' Mr. McGee was also
reaching for a higher truth, and in retrospect he seems to have been right. Mr.
Cronkite probably was right, too. The war most likely was being lost; it would
have been ''rational'' to settle it. Mr. Cronkite and Mr. McGee may have reached
the right conclusions, even if their premise - the great defeat of Tet - was all
wrong.

''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' may also be morally right in its
conclusions, although in the libel suit this is incidental. The CBS lawyers must
prove that the documentary's conclusions were correct, and as proof they must
cite facts. The facts, of course, are the rub. They exist, solid and unshakable,
but what they mean is another matter.

When the CBS lawyers circulated the ''smoking gun'' memorandum to news
organizations, they circulated other defense documents, too. The documents had
the facts. A former news correspondent, for example, said in an affidavit that,
almost on the eve of Tet, General Westmoreland had told him ''that the enemy was
no longer capable of launching a concerted attack.'' The general may indeed have
been lying, although it may be held that he was only misinformed.

Meanwhile, in a cable to a subordinate, General Westmoreland protested the
inclusion of certain Vietnam irregulars in the estimate of enemy strength
because ''it distorts the situation and makes no sense.'' He was upheld in this
by Gen. Creighton Adams, who said in another cable that the irregular forces
''contain a sizable number of women and old people.'' Both generals were almost
certainly wrong - for one thing, the Vietcong relied heavily on mines and booby
traps that hardly needed strong males to set them - but being wrong, or
wrong-headed, is not necessarily the same as suppressing information. However
the libel suit is decided, it is likely that the debate over the facts will go
on.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Vladimir Vysotsky

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TALES OF THE ECONOMIC RECOVERY

BYLINE: By WINSTON WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2779 words


CHICAGO

THE economy's dramatic

recovery has been well

documented in the figures that have been pouring out of Washington since the
beginning of the year. But the surge described by the statistics is just
becoming apparent in the lives of many in the Middle West, the nation's economic
heartland.

From the mountains of Western Pennsylvania to the prairies of the Great Plains,
local communities are shaking off the legacy of three years of recession, or
trying to. Some of the damage appears to be permanent.

''Everything is not rosy by any means, but we're having a strong economic
recovery in the region,'' says Nina Klarich, a First National Bank of Chicago
economist. ''The numbers are finally starting to show up.''

Nevertheless, the optimism is tempered from town to town by a continuing high
level of unemployment and by anxiety over whether the recovery will last.
Youngstown, Ohio

The epitaph of Youngstown, Ohio, has been written many times. After a swirl of
steel plant closings hit the Mahoning Valley in the late 1970's like a
destructive tornado, even some local boosters thought the area was on its way to
becoming the Middle West's equivalent of a ghost town.

Those who would have buried the wiry little town would marvel at its resilience
now. Dozens of new homes have been built this year. Strings of multicolored
pennants fly outside the model homes at subdivisons with fancy names like
Capital Estates. While carpenters hammer away at the wooden skeletons of the
modest houses, landscapers sink skinny trees into the ground.

New home sales began to pick up in the first quarter and by midyear they
registered an improvement of 45 percent over the period a year earlier. ''We've
just had a terrific July and August,'' said Stanley Malkoff, co- owner of Homes
by Stanjim. ''For the first time in three years we have 15 to 20 houses going.''

The nationwide rebound in automobile sales has been the savior of the Mahoning
Valley. General Motors' Lordstown assembly plant, the showcase of the industry
when it was built in the late 1960's, is turning out Pontiac Sunbirds and
Chevrolet Cavaliers full tilt. More than 8,700 employees are at work there,
including 3,400 recalled since March. Only 600 workers remain on furlough.

Nearby, at G.M.'s Packard division, which makes and assembles electrical wires
and parts, 9,100 workers are manning the plants. Nobody is on layoff. Packard
wanted to expand its Mahoning Valley operation, paying new workers only half the
prevailing rate, but union members rejected the proposal last week and the
expansion will not take place.

The union's rejection angered builders and construction workers who thought the
expansion would help their business.

Expanding employment is the stuff that the Youngstown housing recovery is made
of. ''We're seeing a lot of younger professional people, electrical engineers,
who have been on the job for five or six years,'' Mr. Malkoff said. ''They feel
a lot more secure now that they see people coming back to work.'' They're
looking for amenities like cathedral ceilings, skylights and fireplaces.

Low interest rates, provided by the State of Ohio, are enticing buyers into the
market as well. Afraid of high rates, Ohio voters last November agreed to let
the state sell $410 million in bonds to provide 30-year fixed-rate loans to
first-time home buyers. In many cases they carry rates below 10 percent.

When the Mahoning Valley housing market soured four years ago because of the
steel mill closings, Mr. Malkoff got stuck with 30 unsalable homes that he
rented out at losses of about $200 a month each. Now, he said, ''We're back in
the black. We've been a lot happier in the last 60 days.'' Buchanan, Mich.

The recession was tough on Buchanan, Mich., and the recovery won't begin to
improve things until early next year. That's when four small companies employing
a total of 200 are scheduled to move into the town's abandoned factories, lured
by tax abatements and other inducements. Meanwhile, the unemployment rate is 18
percent.

Buchanan is not your typical burned-out mill town. You can tell that by the
neatly trimmed grass surrounding the auto workers' union hall and the huge trees
shading the American Legion hall. A bucolic little place on the St. Joseph
River, Buchanan eight decades ago became both a corporate headquarters and a
center for manufacturing when the city offered free rent and cheap power to lure
from Chicago the small operation that later became the Clark Equipment Company.

Clark plants once offered 3,000 jobs in this town of 5,136 people. The last 600
jobs were lost over the past year, after Clark, a maker of fork lifts, axles and
construction equipment, decided to close its three turn-of-the century plants in
Michigan.

Like other makers of motor vehicles and capital equipment, Clark went through a
painful retrenchment during the recession. The company's sales dropped to $1.02
billion last year from $1.53 billion in 1980.

Although Clark's orders this summer ran about 18 percent ahead of last summer,
no solid upturn is in sight, largely because the nation's industries have not
yet started increasing their investment in capital goods. That reluctance to
return to capital investment is not unusual for the early months of a recovery.
In addition, Clark is consolidating its production in three non-unionized plants
in North Carolina and one in Kentucky, all built in the 1970's.

The adjustment has been rough on the citizens of this company town. ''Clark was
a good place to work,'' said Sam Tutson, 55, who migrated from Mississippi 40
years ago for a job at Clark. ''They paid you good. The people were nice.'' When
his job ended in June he decided to retire on a pension of about $11,000 a year,
about half his regular salary.

Sitting in his den crammed with softball trophies, Mr. Tutson said that looking
for work would be a waste of time. ''I wouldn't know how to find a job. I don't
have any skills. I don't have any education.''

His wife, Jean, had worked at Clark for almost 10 years, the last few as a
production supervisor. She was let go in March 1982, a few months before she
became eligible for early retirement. Now she is working as an inspector at
Georgia Boy, a maker of mobile homes, for $5.75 an hour.

Complaints that only low-paying jobs are available are common now in the
Midwest. It is the big gripe about the small companies that are taking over the
Clark facilities in Buchanan. They include a print shop, a tool and dye maker
and a manufacturer of lawn furniture.

On her new job the bosses are constantly reminding the workers, '' 'You can be
replaced,' '' Mrs. Tutson said. But there is no union organizing. ''The job
situation around here is so bad, people are afraid to take a chance,'' she
concludes.  Pittsburgh, Pa.

The structural change in the Middle West that is sending many of the region's
plants to Mexico and the Sun Belt, has convinced workers and public officials
alike that now is the time to plan for the post-industrial age, the era of high
technology.

Several companies in the region - Cincinnati Milacron, Westinghouse and Nordson
- are getting deeply involved in the manufacture of robotics and computer
equipment, expecting the transformation to high-tech factories to accelerate if
the recovery proves durable enough. But high tech means problems for the labor
force.

Take the case of Ronald Bricker, 40. He was a steelworker, unemployed then, who
sat quietly last April in a Pittsburgh computer classroom while President Reagan
delivered a homily about the value of retraining for tomorrow's jobs. After the
lecture, he stepped boldly toward the President, thrusting his resume at him and
asking Mr. Reagan for help in finding work.

''I did it to dramatize the situation of people like me,'' Mr. Bricker said. ''I
never thought it would get so bad. I really got scared when I was standing in
the unemployment line and there were people there in their 50's.''

The White House found Mr. Bricker, a Marine veteran of Vietnam and the father of
a high school junior, an entry-level job as a computer repairman for Radio
Shack. Three months later he left because the $6.50 an hour he was earning was
only half what he had made at Ryerson, a marketing and distribution subsidiary
of Inland Steel. It also yielded less take-home pay than the $198 he had
collected in unemployment compensation.

''The two months I was there we fell further behind,'' he said. ''While I was
waiting for my future we were losing everything else.'' He said he tried to
refinance his 16 percent home mortgage while he worked at Radio Shack, but his
pay was too small to qualify him for a new loan.

And the work didn't suit his temperament, either. ''You would work on a computer
for two days and you still wouldn't know the problem,'' he said. ''I don't like
that kind of work. At Ryerson you can look back and see what you've done at the
end of the day.''

Today Mr. Bricker is back at Ryerson, grinding steel plates to specified
thicknesses. But management, stressing that steel buyers are not rebuilding
their inventories yet despite the recovery, and that demand for steel for
capital goods is still flagging, warned that his tenure would be merely that of
a summer replacement if demand didn't improve. Dozens of other Ryerson workers
remain on layoff.

The Commerce Department announced last week that manufacturers had indeed
started to rebuild their inventories, which rose four-tenths of 1 percent in
July, reversing June's decline. And steel production has also increased,
according to the statistics.

But Mr. Bricker said he is not holding his breath about his job. He said he can
tell from the volume of work at the warehouse that the recovery is still very
sluggish. He has put his dream home up for sale.

Mr. Bricker has entertained thoughts of moving to the Sun Belt, but now his most
likely move is a return to school. Not a high-tech school this time; probably
something middle-tech and high paying, like heavy equipment operating, he says.
Chicago, Ill.

The raucous commodity exchanges in Chicago mirror the economic health of the
Middle West as much as any place does. So it comes as welcome news that the
shouting and shoving in the crowded pits of the Chicago Board of Trade seem as
indecorous as ever.

Perhaps more so, especially after Government grain subsidy programs ignited a
recovery in the farm economy last spring. The exchange is enjoying record volume
this year. In August, volume was 70 percent above August of last year. For the
first eight months of this year, volume totaled 41.7 million contracts, up 30
percent from the same period last year.

For several weeks, back office workers at the exchange have been reporting to
work 30 minutes early each morning to clear up the previous day's backlog. In
the middle of August, trading volume for a single day reached a record 438,550
futures contracts at the 135-year-old exchange, surpassing a high set less than
two weeks earlier.

The next day, the price of a seat on the Board of Trade climbed to a record
$335,000, topping by $5,000 the previous high set in October 1980, when fear of
climbing interest rates and the prospects of the trading profits to be made from
a pervasive drought had whipped the futures markets into a frenzy. In the
intervening years, when trading activity fell into the doldrums, largely because
of recession, the price of membership dropped as low as $185,000 in July 1982.

This time the same combination is working for the traders. Hot, dry weather in
the Corn Belt is firing up activity in the corn, wheat and soybean pits and
bringing commission- paying speculators back into the market.

Volatility in the direction interest rates have taken in recent weeks has been
good for trading in Treasury bond futures, making the board's Treasury bond
contract the most widely traded commodity in the world.

The turnaround could not have come sooner for Laurence D. Coleman, 31, who
trades in Treasury bond futures contracts for his own account. He took a beating
last year after many small speculators became more cautious because of the
recession and got out of the game.

At that time, Mr. Coleman, who had quit a job as a loan officer at the Harris
Bank in Chicago, was a second-year trader suffering from ''the sophomore jinx.''
He had spent $65,000 on an associate membership allowing him to trade financial
futures. Although he had tripled his bank salary in 1981, another year like last
year, he said, would have left him in deep trouble.

''Nine months ago the market took a sense of direction because of the consensus
that interest rates were coming down,'' he said. They did, but the subsequent
rise in rates last spring kept things going as speculators increased their
activity, and that gave Mr. Coleman a profit niche.

He has honed his technique and built his confidence to the point where he is
comfortable trading in units of $2 million, as opposed to $500,000 when he was a
novice. He is making money again but still not at the rate of his freshman year.

''I'm happy with the way things are going,'' he confesses. ''If there was a gold
rush in California I'd join that. If it paid enough I'd look for oil. But I came
here. It's a place of opportunity for people who aren't afraid of risks.''
Kenosha County, Wis.

Farmers often talk about their finances in stark, exaggerated terms, suggesting
either feast or famine. But this year many of them won't know how they're doing
until the final effects of the drought and the payment- in-kind program are
weighed. Under PIK, the Government gives farmers surplus grain in return for not
growing crops, as a way to keep down surpluses.

Dairy farmers are a notable exception to that uncertainty. They know they are
hurting, despite the economic recovery. The soaring price of feed grains means
it will cost them more to feed their cows.

At the same time, the federal Government is once again clamping down on milk
price supports in an effort to rein in the cost of farm subsidy programs. The
cost of such programs will reach $22 billion this year, up from $4 billion two
years ago.

Last Thursday, dairy farmers began refunding another 50 cents to the Government
for each 100 pounds of milk sold. The first 50-cent tax was imposed in April,
which means the Government is getting back a total of $1 every time a farmer
sells 100 pounds of milk at $12 to $13, the price the Government guarantees to
pay if the farmer can't sell his milk privately for that much.

''The squeeze is definitely on,'' said 31-year-old Roger Sherman of Kenosha
County, Wis., who with his wife Barbara wants to buy from his parents the white
and red frame house and the 500-acre dairy farm that's been in his family since
1839. ''It'll put some people out of business.''

Dairy price supports have not risen since the dawn of the Reagan Administration.
But fuel and fertilizer prices have continued to go up, although their rise has
slowed, and dairy farmers are still paying close to 13 percent interest on
loans.

Mr. Sherman and his 62-year-old father produce about 1.5 million pounds of milk
a year from a herd of 100 cows. They made very little profit last year, with
farm prices in general depressed by the recession, and there probably will be
even less this year because of the squeeze between prices and costs. There will
be profits from the 88 acres of corn land they enrolled in the PIK program but
not enough to offset the other declines, they say.

''In the 1970's you couldn't make a mistake,'' said the elder Mr. Sherman.
''Prices were going up. Crops were good and you were always adding to your farm.
Suddenly all that has changed.''

Land prices have skyrocketed in Kenosha, the county seat, as developers have
kept extending the Milwaukee and Chicago suburbs deeper into rural areas. And
the higher land values may end the couple's farming dream by making the land
uneconomical for use as a dairy.

But the younger Mr. Sherman, who studied business administration at the
University of Wisconsin, is determined to stick to his plans. ''The 1980's is
the decade of management,'' he asserts. ''You have to cut costs or get out of
the business.''

He uses a small computer to keep records on finances, prices, Government
programs and herd statistics. The Shermans have delayed purchases of heavy
equipment and expect to save money by continuing to patch up old equipment.

Despite clouds on the horizon, his mood is upbeat. ''I'm not that optimistic
about the next year,'' he said, ''but I'm real optimistic about the next five
years.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Laurence D. Coleman (Page 21); Drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LET THE SEVENTH FLEET PROTECT BOAT PEOPLE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 179 words


To the Editor:


Roger Winter's article on your Aug. 27 Op-Ed page, ''Boat Refugees' Horrors,''
reminds us once again of the barbaric experiences to which the boat people from
Vietnam are subjected. He calls for more help from the civilized part of the
world but does not offer any concrete proposals.

I have a suggestion: Why doesn't the United States Navy deploy elements of its
Seventh Fleet to search for boat people and pirates on the high seas, to protect
the former against the latter? It has been a mission of navies for centuries to
protect oceangoing voyagers against pirates. Why not now?

The humanitarian aspect of such a program is justification enough. There are,
however, at least two other supporting reasons: First, it is consistent with,
and evidence of, this country's deep commitment to the protection of human
rights at the most fundamental level. Second, it is good naval training.

ROLAND PAUL Westport, Conn., Aug. 27, 1983

The writer is a former counsel to the Senate Foreign Relations Subcommittee on
Security Commitments.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER TO THE EDITOR

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS

BYLINE: By Wayne Biddle and Margot Slade

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 236 words


Another RoundOn Agent Orange

The Veterans Administration, which opposes compensating Vietnam-era soldiers for
health problems they believe resulted from exposure to Agent Orange, last week
fired its latest salvo in the war of evidence. A medical study of 85,000
veterans found no problems related to the dioxin-laced herbicide, the agency
announced.

Dr. Alvin L. Young, an Air Force officer who has conducted field tests of the
ecological effects of dioxin, told a news conference at the national meeting of
the American Chemical Society that the health problems seen in the study were
typical ''in a population of males growing older.'' But he also said the study
was not truly epidemiologic, and that the 10 to 15 years since many of the
veterans were exposed to Agent Orange ''may not be long enough'' for some
cancers to appear. Moreover, he said about three-fourths of the group were not
sure they had been exposed at all.

Of particular interest were the cases of soft-tissue sarcomas discovered by the
survey, since this rare form of cancer has been closely associated with dioxin
exposure. Dr. Young said it showed up in 11 instances, where 16 might be
expected in a comparable population. But Dr. Alastair Hay, a dioxin expert from
the University of Leeds in England, noted that if the number of soldiers
actually exposed was far fewer than 85,000, then the discovery of 11 cases might
be significant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE BITTER LIFE OF CHAD

BYLINE: By Alan Cowell Alan Cowell, The New York Times's bureau chief in
Nairobi, recently covered the war in Chad. THIS IS THE TIME WHEN THE seasons
change, an uneasy hiatus in the year when crops are planted but not yet grown
and there is hunger before the harvest.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3870 words


It is a time of uncertainty, overlaid this year, as so often in Chad's cruel and
contorted history, with conflict and intimations of disaster. The gaunt men who
squat at night before flat- roofed houses of baked clay seem to sense it,
whispering fears and secrets to one another, the whiteness of their turbans,
skull caps and djellabas framing ebony faces caught somewhere between the North
African desert and the savannah of the south. The wind blows from the swollen,
mud-brown Shari River, ruffling trees but offering no real relief.

The crops failed last year because of civil war and drought, and this year the
effort to get relief supplies to the arid hinterland has been thwarted by yet
another war and by rains that turn the tracks on the edge of the desert into
quagmires that bog down the grain- laden relief trucks. None of this really
surprises. Calamity falls upon calamity, as it always has, in this remnant of a
colonial cartographer's grand design, once a part of French Equatorial Africa.
There are ruins everywhere, and the low white facades of the capital city of
Ndjamena are blighted with pockmarks from shellbursts and riflefire.

The Chadians call this la soudure, the joining time between seasons. But the
uncertain expectancy this year concerns more than crops and harvests, though
hunger is pervasive: 360,000, out of a population of less than five million,
will suffer from malnutrition this year, according to United Nations estimates.

War came to the north early this summer. Columns of the 1,500-strong rebel
forces coursed through useless lands between mean oases, backed by 3,500 Libyans
- a large-scale deployment on a continent of small wars - and their
Soviet-supplied tanks, warplanes and field guns. The people in Ndjamena did not
learn much about the devastation in the desert from official channels; word came
from men with tired eyes returning from the front.

The French arrived, too, supposedly as ''instructors,'' but ready for battle.
Night after night, their military transport planes thundered in and out of
Ndjamena's airport, ferrying in helicopters, artillery, ammunition and men -
soldiers whose broad shoulders and cropped hair recalled a colonial past.

When the French first announced they were coming, President Francois Mitterrand
spoke of 180 or 200 men. The figures soon acquired additional zeros, which must
have depressed the French Socialists. Urged on by the United States, which had
sent two Awac surveillance planes, now withdrawn, to track the Libyan- backed
invasion, the French had come to try to contain Libyan leader Col. Muammar
el-Qaddafi and to do so was to renege on all the anti-interventionist promises
made during the party's long years in opposition. But, ultimately, French
national interest - its need to maintain its great influence in the region - was
threatened. And so, hard-faced men who had seen service in Zaire and the Central
African Republic were once again dispatched to mold destinies far from the
shores of France. The commitment is open-ended, and the equipment they have
brought suggests they are in for a long stay. The prize, as ever in Chad's
history, is not so much Ndjamena itself. When the city was first colonized, it
was designed as a gateway to the more worthwhile prizes provided by the
wealthier French colonies to the south and west. Its value is the same today to
the Libyans, as well as to the French.

The French had, of course, been here often enough since Chad became independent
in 1960, supporting a southern- dominated government against those very northern
warriors who now contest for power. President Hissen Habre was allied in those
days with Goukouni Oueddei, now leader of the rebel forces, and both of them
were labeled Marxists by the outside world. Now Habre is the West's favorite,
and he calls the Government in Paris ''our French friends,'' while Goukouni and
the Libyans have embraced each other.

The Zairians have also come, more than 2,000 sullen men sent by President Mobutu
Sese Seko's dictatorship, slovenly soldiers who are tapping some of the $25
million in American military supplies sent to aid the Chadian Government and
using American trucks to transport crates of beer.  Like the French, they say
they are here only to deter, but no one takes that claim too seriously, for the
Zairian Army in the past has shown itself more prone to retreat than advance.
Then there are the Americans, a handful servicing and flying the curved-wing
giants of C-141 Starlifter military transports. They keep a low profile but
cannot disguise the anguished roar of their jet engines. At one stage, the
Government of Chad appealed for direct and massive American intervention. But
that was withheld, forcing the hand of the French. Still, the talk went in the
bars and half-lit places where opinions are traded that it was the Americans who
had led in alerting the world to Qaddafi's adventurism and they who had given
him his label: the most dangerous man in the world.

Rarely has Qaddafi been so blatant in his incursions into Chad. While the French
and Americans dallied, he moved south toward the inadequately defended capital.
That was when the French came, raising the stakes by an awesome amount.

Alone, Habre's 3,000 troops cannot hold the line against the numbers and
equipment of the rebels and their Libyan allies. Chad has always been prey to
foreign influence. It was demarcated by foreigners in the first place, and it is
foreigners who will decide what form its next spasm of agony will take.


We came here, scores of journalists from all over the world, to report this war,
but we could not see it. It was there, somewhere to the north when we first
arrived, out in the desert, but we could not get to it.

It loomed like a glowering menace whose dimensions were all the more

Chad Jump Pages 26 & 29







sinister for being invisible. Africa specializes in nearly- invisible conflicts
- Somalia vs. Ethiopia, Tanzania vs. Uganda, Zimbabwe vs. Rhodesia - which
hardly anyone charts in the detailed manner of such conflicts as Vietnam. And
the authorities in Chad do not want us to do so, either.

At the telex office in central Ndjamena, where the machines chatter and subside
to the rhythm of uncertain lines to the outside world, there is a man who reads
a reporter's copy and decides what is to be transmitted. In one dispatch, not
this one, he excizes a paragraph that says censorship is in force. An
interesting conundrum: If there is no censorship, then it is false to say there
is censorship, so the reference to censorship must, of necessity, be censored.

Most of the censors do not read English, so reporters must translate their texts
into French. Much is gained and lost thereby. Other controls intrude. The
Government did not like it when the French Embassy gave regular briefings on the
war, so it told the French to refrain and they complied, to the surprise of all.

Just after dawn, in the telephone exchange of the central Post Office, a Chadian
operator, stripped to the waist against the creeping heat, vainly tries to open
up the line to Paris - the only connection with the outside world - but his
French counterparts fail to respond. His call echoes through the gloomy building
- '' 'Allo, Paris. 'Allo, Paris'' - a forlorn anthem of dependency.

The United States Embassy, which consists of an Ambassador, Peter Moffat, and
only a sprinkling of support personnel, denies knowledge of most things, but
what seems like evasion to some may simply mean that the Embassy is being
bypassed in decision-making.

So the streets fill with taxis, carrying reporters on fruitless missions that do
not mask the reality: They, like eveyone else in Chad, are at the mercy of
Colonel Qaddafi.


I last saw Colonel Qaddafi at the Organization of African Unity summit meeting
in Addis Ababa in June. He was berobed, charismatic, handsome, the answer to a
photographer's prayer. He was also frightened. He could not stand long in an
open space without his eyes flickering over spots where a sniper might be
concealed, where an assassin might hide. The white robe he wore covered a navy
blue blazer and cream slacks, an odd blend of dress for a man who prides himself
on the purity of his desert lineage. But, perhaps he is torn: seeking jihad,
holy war, as much as he craves recognition by his enemies in the West. What he
wants, ultimately, may not be all that clear to him. He is an opportunist who
takes advantage of the wavering of others.

But Qaddafi's visions extend. He wants Chad to be part of a ''Greater Libya,''
and as long ago as 1973 he annexed the Aouzou Strip, a 50- mile-wide swath along
the southern Libyan border, believing Chad's northern frontier to be rich in
uranium. Now he wants all of the country. And then the governments in Nigeria,
Mali, Niger, Sudan and the Central African Republic must look to their defenses.
But first he needs a pliant regime in Ndjamena.  The north is nothing without
the capital, the gateway to the fertile south that the French called le Tchad
utile, the useful part of Chad, and the supply lines get longer and more
strained the farther the colonel advances.

Qaddafi's history in Africa is a mixed one. He failed in Uganda to halt the
Tanzanians who in 1979 ousted the dictator Idi Amin. Libyan guns have been
sighted in Burundi, destined for dissidents in Uganda and Zaire. A recent coup
in Upper Volta replaced an anti-Libyan president with a pro-Libyan one.

The list continues: Support for revolutionary regimes in Ghana and the
Seychelles, money for opposition movements in Mauritius and Reunion. An
''Islamic Empire'' is probably the ultimate aim, but the immediate motive is the
self-aggrandizement of a man from the desert who rules fewer than three million
people.


Chad itself is no great story, but Qaddafi's incursion is. Networks chartered
aircraft to fly out their film and the telex office became jammed with 150
reporters who arrived from Europe, America, France and Japan by taxi across the
wild lands of northern Nigeria and northern Cameroon, by canoe across the Shari
River and by plane from Paris and Khartoum. We overtaxed Ndjamena's resources,
sleeping in hotel rooms with no beds and no curtains and no water. But the
front, in the beginning, was a long way off.

Chad's Government brought it a little closer by putting on shows for us: A
hundred Sudanese ''mercenaries,'' for instance, shuffling barefoot into the
sandy forecourts of a crenellated old colonial prison in Ndjamena to squat
before neutral camera lenses. At the Chamber of Commerce, 13 Libyans were
presented, roped together under the baleful gaze of rifle snouts. One of the
soldiers was so weak and emaciated that he could not keep his trousers from
falling to his ankles as he stood before the cameras in final indignity, bared
and hopeless.

As the fighting ebbed after the first Libyan advance, the reporters became
restive, writing about themselves rather than about a war that seemed more and
more a distant rumor. One American broadcasting outfit filmed cameramen
colleagues who were, in turn, filming prisoners. On the sandy street outside the
jail, young barefoot boys made a suddenly lucrative living selling bubble gum in
packs that contained playing cards depicting bikini- clad women. The cameramen
filmed that, too.


We did not need displays of prisoners, however, to remind us there was a war.
The thundering transports told us so, as did the repetitive thud of machine-gun
fire from the barracks where the French were training young Chadian
''volunteers'' to kill their countrymen.

We knew, too, that there was a war from the Toyota land cruisers and British
Land-Rovers carrying Habre's elite forces, men of the desert honed thin by the
sandstorms. They drove with indifference to the potholes or to the civilians who
got in their way, for they are not used to ceding to others the right of
passage, and they carried with them the conveyances of their power - well-worn
Soviet AK-47 assault rifles, Belgian FN's. They had just returned from
Faya-Largeau, angry of eye at their defeat by the Libyans at that northern
oasis, but knowing that war in these parts quickly mutates from loss into
victory. We had seen such men before, in Beirut

and Zimbabwe, a lost generation, grown to manhood in the fury of gunfire, which
will never, ever, lose the taste for it or accept that the power of the gun is
not - or should not be - absolute.

They do not talk much to outsiders. But it is possible to meet them. The man did
not want to give his name or age, but he was perhaps 30, prematurely aged around
the eyes. Yes, he went to school, in the early days, and yes, he had had a
career in the police. But the war beckoned and he went off to fight, first for
Goukouni, now for Habre. A mercenary, wanting only to fight and to be paid. For
a foot soldier, the man said, a battle is worth, say, 50,000 Central African
francs.

That's about $140. It is paid, in part, before the fray so that a man can
distribute it to his family as a kind of insurance policy against his failure to
survive. The super elite, the men who can handle .50 caliber machine guns,
antiaircraft cannon and SAM-7 missiles, get six or seven times as much, paid in
cash.

Yes, another man said, I was in Kulbus on the Sudan border, where we sheltered
in exile, and, yes, I chased the Libyans in the east, in 1981, and, yes, I was
there when we came back, through Abeche and Faya-Largeau. His well- polished
holster held a nine- millimeter pistol that will never leave his side, just as
the sharpened dagger concealed in his robes will never leave the scabbard above
his left elbow except in anger.

But why fight? We are just simple soldiers, he said. That is not quite all. Guns
equal virility here, and the Goran branch of the Toubou clan of the north from
which Habre is drawn, is a warrior tribe. Each time there is war there is money
to be made, sport to be had, manhood to be asserted.

Left alone, Chadians fight among themselves. Egged on by outsiders seeking this
advantage or that, the battles get bigger. And the foreigners who get themselves
embroiled must accept the risk that they, too, will be bloodied.


Who are they, these warlords who have been picking at potential conflicts the
way a child picks at a scabbed knee until it bleeds again? Their pedigrees are
identical: desert warriors, guerrilla chieftains, exponents of the fast strike
and withdrawal that punctures the system and slowly drains it. They are even of
the same Toubou stock, though President Habre's people have traditionally traded
with those living to the south while Goukouni Oueddiei's looked north to Libya.
But they present strikingly different appearances: Goukuoni, whose thin face is
topped by a shock of

black hair and accented by a goatee, invariably wears the long white robes of
his an Page 30 & 31





 cestors, while Habre, whose fuller face sports a close-cropped haircut and
beard, draws from a wider wardrobe in which Arab robes, Western suits and
military uniforms reflect the three constituencies he needs to survive. They
used to be friends, fighting together against the southern-dominated government
installed by the French at independence. Now the only thing they have in common
is a hunger for power.

When the southerners finally fell to the northern warriors in 1979, the fighting
did not stop, for the spoils of power in this torn land - incomprehensible to an
outsider - were too enticing. Goukouni held the day at first, but when he looked
like losing, he asked the Libyans to come in on his side. They did, and Habre
retreated to the Sudan in December 1980, but the fighting continued. The Libyans
suffered badly, losing a thousand men, some mutilated in evil ways by Habre's
fighters, before they pulled out a year later.

As the Libyans left, Habre advanced from his sanctuaries, harrassing their
retreating forces, appropriating their abandoned armories, pushing inexorably on
the capital with the ruthlessness for which he is known.

Habre has the capital now, and that is important. But his regime does not sit
easy. When he gave a press conference recently, he sat on a stage surrounded by
soliders while a man barely out of adolescence guarded the gate to the
auditorium with a rocket- propelled grenade launcher. Habre concluded a lengthy
historical analysis of Chad's troubles with an acknowledgement of vulnerability:
''All countries must help us.''

Habre is highly praised by Westerners for being a nationalist who divides the
portfolios of government evenly between the northerners who call their god Allah
and the southerners who pray to a Christian deity. No one has shared power like
that before, certainly not Goukouni.

But then, as the fall of Faya-Largeau demonstrated, Habre cannot hold the line
without his Western supporters. The Government did not say how many people had
been displaced by the fighting, but it is assumed that most of the town's 10,000
inhabitants sought to escape, trekking across pale deserts in the way of their
nomadic ancestors.

The relief agencies give Habre high marks for running a show that seems
conscientious, trying to hold north and south together so as to produce a viable
nation. But other images intrude. The Shari River, the stream at Ndjamena's
doorstep, flows and ebbs with the seasons. Once, when the waters receded, they
revealed dark secrets - skeletons with wrists still bound by ropes, skulls
bearing the terminal punctuation of executioners' bullets. Goukouni was in power
when the bones were found, but the carnage seems to have taken place outside the
house where Habre lived during the street fighting of 1980. No one talks about
it now, for it does not enhance the image of a benevolent government whose
interests match those of the West. But the reality is there. Chad has known
near-constant war for 18 years. There are no clean hands, and no pretense that
life is more than a tenuous thing, a thread easily severed by the jolt of a
capricious bullet.


In the national museum in Ndjamena there is a room whose purpose is to chronicle
Chad's economic development. It contains several robes called boubous, two camel
saddles, one old muzzle-loading rifle and a torn remnant of chain-mail armor.
War has blighted economic growth for most of the period of Chad's independence
from France, and so it is no surprise that a room labeled ''Economy'' should be
virtually empty. Other display areas present a large

array of lances, shields and battle- whips which help explain that emptiness.

The country is desperately poor, kept afloat, as it has been since the initial
postindependence regime of Francois Tombalbaye, only by budg



Page 31






 etary aid from France and French backing of its currency, the Central African
franc. But by one of those inversions that war produces, economic bust has
changed to boom because of the fighting that threatens the nation with partition
or collapse. One of the two hotels in Ndjamena ran out of meat recently, so
great was the demand from the influx of correspondents and military personnel.
The beggars, too, sense the potential for gain and position themselves
strategically. Outside a food store, a foreigner laden with costly purchases is
accosted by a teen- age beggar, so sick or hungry that he almost falls onto his
new patron under the weight of the few coins dropped into his outstretched
hands.

Years of war have reduced what little formal economy there was, never viable
without French support, to a shadow, and trade and barter are once again the
order of the day at this place where old desert trading routes converge at the
river crossing. The centuries blur as a man in the robe of his ancestors,
transports a motorcycle in a dugout canoe across the Shari from Cameroon. At
dusk, on the river banks, outside the Post Office, in open spaces, men kneel in
prayer toward the east, intoning: ''Allah akbar,'' God is great.

Then, there are the newer totems in the colonaded bazaars that fringe the
avenues leading to the poor quarter of town and the warren of a market by the
King Faisal Mosque. Here a wraparound cloth bearing innumerable small likenesses
of President Habre, there a preparation for the hair called African Pomade, a
bottle marked ''Heaven Night Spray.'' A visitor to the market can have a car or
moped repaired, purchase a copy of the Koran, a raincoat, a suitcase, imitation
Persian rugs, ocher spices. The list of goods is endless: bottle-nosed fish,
slabs of roasted goat, marijuana, corn cobs, transistor radios, canned mango
juice and sacks of grain marked ''Donated by Japan.'' In the midst of the
bustling commerce, a woman gone mad sits on the sidewalk, barebreasted,
wild-eyed, loins swathed in sacking, hair matted. The insouciant policeman at
whose feet she is positioned looks beyond her, trying to spot a traffic
infringement that will replace his unpaid salary.

When the Libyans were pulling out of Chad in 1981, there were interesting
moments. Late at night, at the hotel La Tchadienne, a mysterious American
appeared with a Texan accent. Cloaked by flying dust, he opened a briefcase and
handed out money to the foreign pilots flying the aircraft that carried the
withdrawing Libyans. Then he disappeared. The phones did not work then because
Libya had spent nothing on rebuilding the country it had occupied, and the telex
was down, so a correspondent wishing to send a dispatch had to cross the Shari
River by pirogue, drive 150 miles to north Cameroon and there try to locate a
direct-dial telephone to New York.

When I left Chad this time, the swimming pool at La Tchadienne was full, almost
clear, there were communications, the Americans were not Qaddafi's hirelings
and, as usual in former French colonies, physical degradation had not put an end
to cuisine. The style, if not the substance, of colonialism survived, so that
the pepper steaks were as good as in Paris, the wine was French and so was the
ice cream, at $9 a liter.

Wars wash over and erode Chad. Presidents change annually, or almost. But the
niceties and courtesies of life somehow keep resurfacing. At La Tchadienne,
there is a sign that evokes old standards. ''The swimming pool only accepts
clients who are clean and who have their own towel,'' it says. ''No dirty
children.''

Some things never change. The aircraft thundering in and out of Ndjamena are
foreign, not Chadian, and they are part of an intervention that will not turn
malnourished children's hair from sickly ginger to healthy black. The rains
still cut off the south from the north because the roads are so poorly
constructed. Presidents and warlords still parade themselves before an enduring
population without reference to foreign notions of democracy.

Yet the people, somehow, still smile. The poverty of their country rivals that
of the isolated Himalayan kingdom of Bhutan, but Chadians are often polite and
friendly. And you wonder: If people get the governments they deserve, what
awesome, ancient sin is it that invokes the blight of war and the miasma of
calamity that cling so tenaciously to the people of Chad?


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Qaddafi (Page 29); photo of Hissen Habre (Page 29); photo of
war scene

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

READING AND WRITING;
TO BEGIN WITH

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 7; Page 23, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 905 words


Epigraphs, those brilliant quotations from past masters or pungent sayings by
contemporaries that appear between the title page and Chapter One, are an
author's way of saying, ''I am walking in the footsteps of literary tradition
and possibly greatness.'' Sometimes the epigraph is so good, in fact, that it
says more, more briefly, than the book itself - hardly the author's intention.

''Epigraph'' - sometimes confused with ''epitaph,'' a commemorative line or
verse inscribed on a tombstone - is derived from the Greek word for an
inscription on a building or statue. The champion modern supplier of epigraphs
may be William Butler Yeats. For example, Norman Mailer's ''Ancient Evenings''
begins with these words from Yeats's essay ''Ideas of Good and Evil'': ''I
believe in the practice and philosophy of what we have agreed to call magic, in
what I must call the evocation of spirits, though I do not know what they are,
in the power of creating magical illusions, in the visions of truth in the
depths of the mind when the eyes are closed.''

Yeats's poems are the great source of titles as well as epigraphs. ''The Second
Coming'' is full of phrases that have ended up on the jackets of such books as
Joan Didion's collection of essays ''Slouching Towards Bethlehem'' and Joseph
Frank's book of criticism ''The Widening Gyre.'' William Maxwell's novel ''They
Came Like Swallows'' derives both title and epigraph from Yeats's lines ''They
came like swallows and like swallows went, / And yet a woman's powerful
character / Could keep a swallow to its first intent.'' Yeats's famous line
''The center cannot hold'' could serve as an all-purpose epigraph for half the
political books published these days.

F. Scott Fitzgerald, without crediting Keats, found both epigraph and title for
''Tender Is the Night'' in ''Ode to a Nightingale'': ''Already with thee! tender
is the night. / . . . / But here there is no light. / Save what from heaven is
with the breezes blown, / Through verdurous glooms and winding mossy ways.'' For
his new novel, ''The World Is Made of Glass,'' Morris West altered Ralph Waldo
Emerson slightly: ''Commit a crime, and the earth is made of glass. . . . Some
damning circumstance always transpires.''

Ernest Hemingway's best-known epigraph, taken from John Donne, also became the
title for his novel ''For Whom the Bell Tolls'': ''No man is an Iland, intire of
it selfe; every man is a peece of the Continent, a part of the maine. . . . And
therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee.''
Hemingway chose his epigraphs carefully. He used two that worked in tandem for
''The Sun Also Rises.'' The first was from a conversation with Gertrude Stein:
''You are all a lost generation.'' (At one point he thought of calling the novel
''The Lost Generation.'') And following it came an excerpt from Ecclesiastes
that gave him his title: ''One generation passeth away, and another generation
cometh; but the earth abideth forever.  The sun also ariseth.'' Biblical
epigraphs abound. ''The Young Lions'' by Irwin Shaw is indebted to Nahum 2:
''Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord of hosts, and I will burn her
chariots in the smoke, and the sword shall devour thy young lions.'' For ''A
Month of Sundays,'' John Updike found this line in the 45th Psalm: ''My tongue
is the pen of a ready writer.'' For her novel ''Family Happiness,'' Laurie
Colwin turned to Psalm 68: ''God setteth the solitary in families.''

In a current Canadian-American thriller, ''Northern Exposure,'' Michael Kilian
sets the tone with a Stanley Kunitz poem: ''I wept for my youth, sweet
passionate young thought, / And cozy women dead that by my side / Once lay: I
wept with bitter longing, not / Remembering how in my youth I cried.'' Epigraphs
like that are lovely standing alone. Scott Spencer's ''Endless Love'' took its
cue from Delmore Schwartz: ''How could I think the brief years were enough, / To
prove the reality of endless love?'' And E. L. Doctorow's ''Ragtime'' quoted
Scott Joplin: ''Do not play this piece fast. It is never right to play Ragtime
fast.''

 Surprisingly, Graham Greene did not use Cervantes for his latest novel,
''Monsignor Quixote.'' Instead, he turned to good old Shakespeare: ''There is
nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it so.'' For his Vietnam novel,
''The Quiet American,'' Mr. Greene found an apt quotation by Byron that covers
wars generally: ''This is the patent age of new inventions / For killing bodies,
and for saving souls, / All propagated with the best intentions.''

Joseph Heller's ''Good as Gold'' used a line from a story by Bernard Malamud:
''If you ever forget you're a Jew, a gentile will remind you.'' A second
epigraph to the same novel - a pungent quote on power attributed to Lyndon B.
Johnson - is a bit earthy, so you'll have to look it up for yourself.

It took Tolstoy in ''Anna Karenina'' to write such a great opening sentence that
it became almost as well-known as the biblical epigraph preceding it -
''Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord'' (Romans 12:19). Tolstoy's
sentence, of course, goes, ''Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family
is unhappy in its own way.'' It's a natural for an epigraph. See Saul Maloff's
novel, ''Happy Families.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS MASS MARKET

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 715 words


Mass market paperbacks are soft-cover books

sold at newsstands, variety stores and supermarkets, as well as in bookstores.
This listing is based

on computer-processed reports from bookstores

and representative wholesalers with more than

40,000 outlets across the United States.  1

MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon.

(Warner, $3.95.) The secret behind a woman business tycoon's rise to power:
fiction. 2

THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel.

(Bantam, $3.95.) A fictional saga of human survival at the dawn of civilization.
3

DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King.

(NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four novellas with mainly

nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.  4

THE CASE OF LUCY BENDING, by Lawrence

Sanders. (Berkley, $3.95.) The aberrant behavior

of an 8-year-old girl epitomizes the society of

Florida's Gold Coast: fiction.  5

SPELLBINDER, by Harold Robbins. (Pocket,

$3.95.) From soldier in Vietnam to television

evangelist: fiction.  6

FRIDAY, by Robert A. Heinlein. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) The adventures on
Earth of an Artificial Person: science fiction.  7

CLOAK OF DARKNESS, by Helen MacInnes.

(Fawcett, $3.95.) A counter-terrorist agent finds

himself on an assassination list: fiction.  8

LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Pocket, $3.95.) Life in

the international glitter set: fiction.  9

TOUCH THE DEVIL, by Jack Higgins. (NAL/

Signet, $3.95.) Tracking down a K. G. B. agent who

has stolen NATO secrets: fiction. 10

TRULY TASTELESS JOKES TWO, by Blanche

Knott. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor.  11

TRULY TASTELESS JOKES, by Blanche Knott.

(Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor. 12

JADE, by Pat Barr. (Warner, $3.95.) An English

girl, kidnapped to China, makes her way in Oriental society: fiction. 13

THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER, by Jeffrey Archer. (Pocket, $3.95.) The children of two
bitter

business rivals marry: fiction. 14

INDECENT EXPOSURE, by David McClintick.

(Dell, $3.95.) The scandal at Columbia Pictures

and Wall Street's part in it. 15

DAKOTA!  by Dana Fuller Ross. (Bantam, $3.95.)

Dangers await Toby Holt in the Bad Lands, while

his wife faces perils at home: historical fiction.  TRADE

Trade paperbacks are soft-cover books usually

sold in bookstores and at an average price higher

than mass market paperbacks. This listing is

based on computer-processed reports from about

2,000 bookstores in every region of the United

States .  1

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell,

$7.95.) Three generations of a wealthy San Francisco family: fiction.  2

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $5.95.)
Black men

and women in the South: Pulitzer Prize-winner

for fiction. 3

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson.

(Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for women.  4

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F. Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Inspirational
talks by a

California professor.  5

BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little,

Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon strips featuring some

very odd characters. 6

LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy

Shaw. (Warner, $10.95.) How to add years to your

life and life to your years.  7

ROYAL SEDUCTION, by Jennifer Blake. (Fawcett/Columbine, $5.95.) A New Orleans
belle, a

European prince, international intrigue: historical romance.  8

LINDA EVANS BEAUTY AND EXERCISE

BOOK, by Linda Evans. (Simon & Schuster/Wallaby, $9.95.) How-to by the
television personality.  9

GARFIELD EATS HIS HEART OUT, by Jim

Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) The latest adventures

of that gluttonous cat: cartoon humor.  10

THE RAPTURE, by Hal Lindsey. (Bantam,

$6.95.) Predictions about an approaching global

event based on an interpretation of the Bible.  11

WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?  by

Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press, $7.95.)

Guide for job hunters and career changers. 12

THIN THIGHS IN 30 DAYS, by Wendy Stehling.

(Bantam, $2.95.) How-to.  13

THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $4.95.) Philosophical humor. 14

FIT OR FAT?  by Covert Bailey. (Houghton Mifflin, $4.50.) Exercises for fitness.
15

PERSONHOOD, by Leo F. Buscaglia. (Fawcett,

$5.95.) A prescription for realizing one's individuality.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GRASS-ROOTS GROUPS GO NATIONAL

BYLINE: By John Herbers; John Herbers is a national correspondent for The New
York Times based in Washington.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 22, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4303 words


IN CITIES, SUBURBS AND SMALL TOWNS FROM NEW Hampshire to Oregon, platoons of
activists ranging from unemployed factory workers to high-school youths are
knocking on at least 50,000 doors every evening to press the issue of the day,
be it toxic waste in Missouri, utility rates in Ohio or tax reform in
Connecticut. Late in the evening, they return to small, bare offices with money,
commitments for assistance and names and addresses for computers. Soon, many
will be installing telephone banks for the 1984 elections and beyond.

In many grass-roots communities across the nation, where periodic waves of
discontent have given rise to such protest movements as the agrarian revolt of
the 1890's and the labor strikes of the 1930's, citizens are once again
restless. The decline of the nation's old industrial base, uncertainty about
what will replace it and concern over unemployment, falling incomes, farm
foreclosures and bankruptcies have stirred new rumblings. A multitude of
citizen-action groups on the left, which sprang up in the 1970's to secure
specific but frequently narrow goals on the state or local level, are now
seeking to organize the discontent nationally and reverse the drift toward
conservatism evident in President Reagan's election in 1980.

The activism on the left springs from a major development of a decade ago, when
millions of citizens became disillusioned with the traditional forms of
politics. They organized neighborhood, regional and state groups by the
thousands to mount direct actions and legal challenges against what they
perceived to be abuses of big government and big business in housing, taxes,
insurance, the environment, energy prices, women's and minority rights. They are
now broadening their agendas, forming coalitions with such old-line liberals as
labor and farm groups. More important, they have been entering elective politics
with the kinds of sophisticated candidate- support systems that would have been
impossible three years ago. In so doing, they are taking a page from the book
written by right- wing activists in the 1970's.

Many leaders of this movement were the angry young of the 1960's who disrupted
American society on behalf of civil rights, peace and a host of other causes
before disappearing from the national scene. These old-time activists on the
left are, how ever, only one element in the new political ferment. Thousands of
new pressure groups organized around single issues - corporate political action
committees (PAC's) and nuclear-freeze advocates, for example - are bringing
about a profound change in American government, away from a representative
system and toward a more directly participatory one. Yet, compared with other
groups, the evolving and merging groups on the left have received less attention
even though their influence, both actual and potential, may be greater.

Many of its leaders say the movement has simply been doing what comes naturally,
moving into national politics as a logical next step, with the Reagan
Administration as both catalyst and target. They explain the rise of the groups
as a result of their organizational maturity coinciding with circumstances
favorable to expansion. They assert that even with a somewhat improved economy,
unemployment is likely to continue at an elevated level, and the high industrial
wages that sustained blue-collar families for decades may never return. The
emergence of issues such as toxic waste has brought together blue- collar
neighborhoods and environmentalists and moderated their past differences over
jobs versus the environment. Labor unions, which for many years could elect or
defeat candidates on their own, are losing members and therefore reaching out
for allies wherever they can be found. The women's movement, after its crushing
defeat in the battle for the equal rights amendment, is looking for new allies.
All these centrifugal forces are contibuting to a new coalition.

One group typical of this new development is the Illinois Public Action Council,
or IPAC, a coalition of about 130 organizations across the state. In the
upcoming 1984 elections, the group's new campaign strategies and techniques will
invariably be pitted against those of the new right. The new movement is
nonpartisan and appeals to citizens of various ideological persuasions; but, in
practice, it is seeking to make its impact almost exclusively within the
Democratic Party. Its leaders says it is hopeless to attempt any drastic change
among Republicans.

The idea for IPAC started with Saul Alinsky, a charismatic community organizer
whose legacy lives on in thousands of self-help organizations across the nation.
Alinsky, a product of Chicago's slums, perfected confrontational politics at a
time when poor communities seemed to have few alternatives. If, for example, a
municipality failed to pick up garbage, he and his followers would dump it on
the steps of City Hall. When he died of a heart attack in 1972, his successes in
Chicago and elsewhere appeared to have been temporary, as urban neighborhoods
continued to decline and the revolutionary spirit of the 1960's died.

Over time, however, neighborhood groups not only survived but proliferated,
matured and gained power. Many of the groups are now engaged in moneymaking
ventures involving real estate and transportation and crime-control services.
Although very different from a neighborhood organization and involved in more
enterprises than Alinsky probably ever dreamed of, IPAC is a direct descendant
of one of his last organizations, the Citizen Action Program (CAP) in Chicago.
CAP used confrontation stratagems and legal challenges to stop construction of
an expressway, to force Commonwealth Edison to reduce air pollution and to
secure legislation against the redlining of neighborhoods by banks.

In 1975, Robert B. Creamer, a Louisianian who had moved to Chicago to work for
Alinsky and later became CAP's associate director, established IPAC along with
several other Alinsky followers as a means for applying pressure on a state-wide
basis. At first, the group consisted primarily of neighborhood, elderly,
minority and other special-interest organizations. Recently, it has added such
liberal labor groups as the International Association of Machinists and the
United Automobile Workers, as well as several farm groups brought together under
a new umbrella organization called the Illinois Farm Alliance. Now 36, Creamer
calls this organizing ''a self-conscious effort to build upon the same spirit as
the Illinois Populist movement of the late 19th century and the anti-foreclosure
protests of the 1930's.''

With an annual budget of $1.4 million, IPAC operates offices in six cities;
canvasses 7,000 homes a day; runs a PAC providing personnel and research for
candidates for the State Legislature and Congress, and maintains a full-time
lobby in the Illinois capital of Springfield, where it has been winning some
grudging respect in the largely conservative Legislature. On the national level,
IPAC belongs to Citizen Action, a new federation claiming to speak for 3 million
people in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Connecticut, Pennsylvania, New Jersey,
Wisconsin, Illinois, Ohio, Virginia, Indiana, Minnesota and Oregon. This
overarching organization's statement of purpose is ''to bring together low- and
middle-income citizens of every type - urban and rural; women and men; black,
Latino and white; senior citizens, union members and church members. All (of the
organizations in the federation) emphasize community organizing and grass-roots
leadership development as the key to social change. All address the economic
questions of greatest concern to their members as neighborhood residents,
consumers, taxpayers and workers.''

FOR THE MOST PART, THIS BROAD MOVEMENT'S top leaders show a surprising
uniformity from group to group and state to state. Most are in their 30's or
early 40's and egalitarian in their attitudes, preferring to stay in the
background while pushing their local members up front. In 1965, when the
civil-rights movement was at its peak and the anti-Vietnam protests were just
beginning, they were high- school and college students. Like thousands of their
peers, they took to the streets, part of a great national ideological outpouring
against what was perceived as racial oppression and an immoral war. While the
Stokely Carmichaels and Abbie Hoffmans grabbed headlines and went to court,
these followers quietly organized rallies, marches and demonstrations.

When the movement faltered in the 1970's, the current leaders did not splinter
off into such radical and frequently violent groups as the Weathermen, nor did
they join the workaday middle class, as most of the rank and file did. Instead,
they turned their backs on the national scene and immmersed themselves in the
neighborhoods, becoming what Harry C. Boyte in his book ''The Backyard
Revolution'' called ''a new generation of organizers.''

Heather Booth, a soft-spoken woman in her late 30's, is a movement theorist and
organizer. She grew up in Brooklyn, was converted to direct-action politics as a
university student and led antiwar and women's protests before turning, along
with her husband, Paul, to neighborhood organizing. In 1973, Mrs. Booth, a
former schoolteacher, founded Chicago's Midwest Academy, which has trained an
estimated 10,000 organizers in organizing low- and moderate-income people across
the country.

''Politics was in disarray,'' says Mrs. Booth, recalling the mood of the early
1970's. ''People of good faith were embroiled in factionalism. They were bushed
out and turning off or turning in on each other. Watergate was just beginning to
be exposed. It was a pretty awful period. We were trying to find a way to hold
on to something positive.''

What Mrs. Booth and others achieved in various regions over the next few years
was substantial but circumscribed. They helped build organizations and institute
techniques for assisting specific people to achieve such specific goals as
stopping a freeway, filling potholes and pushing City Hall, the Legislature or
Congress to enact certain consumer legislation. Still, the elective system the
young activists had condemned as corrupt rolled on its own track with its
consultants, pollsters, managers, media experts and candidates, unimpeded by the
citizen-activist movement on the left. ''Take 'em on as they come up,'' was,
with rare exception, the activist attitude toward elected Democrats,
Republicans, liberals and conservatives alike.

The election of Ronald Reagan and, especially, the impact of the new right in
1980 changed that. Those working under the umbrella of Citizen Action, among
others, decided they could not survive under the new order unless they got into
elective politics. ''We were at the stage where we could no longer stay out,''
says Ira Arlook, executive director of the Cleveland- based Citizen Action.
''There were public officials with us on the issues whom the Republicans were
making a special effort to knock off. We could not simply say to them, 'Good
luck, hope you win.' ''

To prepare for the 1982 Congressional elections and beyond, Citizen Action set
up the State and Local Leadership Project, a nonpartisan training school for
campaign workers based in Chicago and under Mrs. Booth's direction. Assistance
was provided by Paul Tully, who had been with the George McGovern and Edward M.
Kennedy Presidential campaigns and now works for Walter F. Mondale. Statewide
groups set up PAC's, selected Congressional and legislative districts where
Reagan Republicans could be defeated and sent their workers door to door
promoting first the issues and then the candidates who supported their
positions. Despite the fact that it was impossible in many instances to separate
the effects of their efforts and those of the recession and a widespread
reaction against the Reagan policies, their record was impressive, One of the
movement's more celebrated winners was Doreen Del Bianco, a young activist
elected to the Connecticut Legislature over a Republican incumbent. Miss Del
Bianco joined the Connecticut Citizen Action Group four years ago when she
decided to sign a petition for lower utility rates.

''I was just a housewife and blamed all my troubles on blacks, Puerto Ricans and
other victims,'' she says, reflecting on her political transformation. ''Now I
know it's the corporations that are keeping people down int he workplace and in
the community.''

Miss Del Bianco eventually bacame one of the leaders of the group, and when the
organization decided last year to support candidates in elections she
enthusiastically entered the race for state representative from a Waterbury
district that had traditionally sent moderates of both parties to Hartford. ''I
entered the race because I was tired of talking to legislators who don't
understand what it is to go from paycheck to paycheck, who don't understand how
hard it is to pay Northeast utility bills, who don't get threatened when their
property taxes go up,'' she says. Despite a cool reception fromt he Democratic
Party in the district, Miss Del Bianco got enough money from labor unions and
help from grassroots activists to win by a margin of 137 votes out of 8,200
cast. As could be expected, Miss Del Bianco has found herself at cross purposes
with the Hartford corporate lobby, which considered her and her organization
radical and out of step with the current probusiness trend in the country.

For most of these groups, the first steps into politics were tentative. Next
year, though, they plan a much more extensive effort IPAC, perhaps the most
politically advanced of all the groups, is being watched as a bellwether for the
movement elsewhere.

In Illinois, as in other Midwestern states, plant closings, alyoffs, fiscal
deficits on all levels, declining public services, farm foreclosures and
discoveries of new toxic wastes have become routine occurrences. Some of the
small industrial cities have unemployment rates above 20 percent.

Every day at 2 P.M., IPAC canvassers gather in scattered locations across the
state. In Rockford, Neil Lancaster, a veteran activist and a canvass supervisor,
is giving a pep talk on the issues to a dozen or so workers in a store-front
office with the stark, unkempt air of a union hall. The workers, in their 20's
and 30's, are black and white men and women and, like Miss Lancaster, casually
dressed in jeans and jackets. Utility rates have increased in the area, and Miss
Lancaster predicts more hikes if President Reagan's bill to deregulate natural
gas passes and the State Legislature fails to restrain prices. There is no
pretense of objectivity in these briefings in the Populist tradition, the issue
is black and white: the people versus big business and government. By the time
Miss Lancaster ends the briefing, the canvassers, recruited from activist ranks,
are filled with enough indignation to get them through the evenig.

The canvass itself is a highly professional operation. The workers pile into
cars and spread out over suburbs of small working-class houses whose occupants
are, more often than not, frugal and conservative. When the door opens, Miss
Lancaster, carrying a clipboard with credentials and a statement of purpose
showing prominently, explains she is with IPAC, a group fairly well known
throughout the state, working to keep utility rates down. Her approach is soft
but direct. The resident, a white-collar man just home from work, looks vexed
but lets her in for a brief discussion of the issues. She emerges five minutes
later with a check for $15 from someone who may support the organization on
other issues as well. The man has bought a piece of whatever political impact
IPAC can make and a subscription to its newspaper, Illinois Action.

Others turn her away or decline to contribute, but Miss Lancaster and other
canvassers are often successful. She says the canvassing operation is
meticulously accounted for. If a canvasser, who is paid slightly over the
minimum hourly wage, cannot collect $80 an evening, he or she is fired.
Canvassing is not conducted in areas where the population falls below a certain
density because it takes too long to get to the next house. The money canvassers
bring in - IPAC expects to gross more than $1 million this year - along with
names and addresses for the computer banks, is the lifeblood of the
organization's new initiatives. Although canvassing is not a new technique,
these activists have so perfected it in the past year or two that many of them
claim it has boosted their fortunes even more than the enormously successful
direct-mail appeals have the new right's.

At state headquarters in Chicago, IPAC director Creamer, along with a governing
board representing various disparate groups, are reacing out in many new
directions. The group has set its sights and resources on Congressional
districts outside of Chicago, a city considered too encumbered by the old
Democratic machine for IPAC to be effective (Although the group did not endorse
anyone int he recent Mayoral primary, it did send out canvassers to work for
Harold Washington int he general eleciton). IPAC is seeking - sometimes over the
opposition of county chairmen - to rebuild the state Democratic Party around
Populist issues and from the precinct level up. The attempt is to create the
same kind of grass-roots structure that existed for many years in the Minnesota
Democratic Farmer-Labor Party.

For 1984, IPAC has targeted five conservatives Congressmen for defeat. The races
will pit the techniques of the right against those of th left. In Presidential
politics, IPAC is debating whether it should support a candidate in the Illinois
Democratic primary next year, but organization labor has become such an
important element in the coalition that its members have decided its choice
would have to coincide with that of the A.F.L. - C.I.O., which has announced it
will break with tradition and endorse a candidate before th primaries. IPAC
leaders deny that they ahve become captives of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., explaing that
they simply do not want to risk fracturing their coalition at this point. An
IPAC endorsement would give any Democratic candidate a leg up in Illinois.

Creamer has recruited Michael McGann, a deputy director of Senator Kennedy's
1980 Illinois Presidential campaign, from downstate Illinois to run the
political operation. IPAC's finance director is Rahm Emmanuel, a 23-year-old,
well-connected Chicagoan formerly with the Democratic National Committee, who
brings in contributions from the North Side rich as well as national political
action committees. Further adding to the diversity are leaders such as Vince
Demuzio, a Democrat and assistant majority leader of the Illinois Senate, one of
the spark plugs on the IPAC board and sponsor of much of its legislation. He is
an alumnus of Lyndon Johnson's ''War on Poverty,'' having served as director of
a federally funded, small-town antipoverty agency.

Their match converging on Springfield from Chicago, Peoria and East St. Louis
last spring was designed to give visibility to the coalition of farmers, urban
blacks, the elderly, the unemployed, the clergy, working mothers and organized
labor. Out of all this comminging, Creamer says, the various groups are trying
to form ''a long-lasting progressive political movement that can redirect
American politics in a humane, democratic direction.

''The process that is under way in Illinois,'' Creamer says, ''Is part of a
larger national dialogue aimed at shaping an integrated progressive economic
alternative - an alternative both to right-wing, supply-side dogma, and the
traditional economic policies of the last 40 years.''

Creamer and other leaders across the nation speak of laws and policies that
would direct more capital into ''Productive areas'' such as manufacturing plants
and equipment and less into ''speculation, mergers and acquisitions.''
Frequently, their discussions trail off into economic theory, but the group's
policies are clearly directed toward more public regualtion and broader
participation by the people at the lower end of the economic ladder. They are
seeking, among other things, larger public expenditures to clean up toxic waste;
more consumer progtection, espeically against mortgage foreclosures and the
cutoff of utilities: more regulation of energy prices; a shift away from sales
and property tax to the graduated income tax; strengthening of work-safety laws,
and higher funding of job-training and social programs - a platform hardly
compatible with the Reagan philosophy or that of many modern-day Democrats.

When asked how they are handling the emotional issues - abortion, prayer in
public schools, and pornography, among others - that helped give rise to the new
right by appealing to working-class people, most movement leaders answer
identically: They ignore those issues, thus avoiding divisiveness. Michael
Ansara, staff director of Massachusetts Fair Share in Boston, points out that a
family could support the economic and environmental policies of his
organization, which boasts 130,000 dues-paying families,a nd at the same time
the social stance of the right-to-life movement.

At the heart of the movement is an element of class struggle ''Our members say
things used to work for them and they don't any more.'' says Ansara. ''Many have
large families and grew up in the Catholic Church. Look at the member who is 35
years old, has worked hard, married, obeyed all the rules but is facing
declining income and other troubles. They see young professional couples who
broke all the rules, evaded the draft in the Vietnam War, lived together
unmarried, have high salaries, drive a Volvo and are coming in buying up and
restoring the houses of working people. that is the stereotype.''

The leaders of Massachusetts Fair Share are considering whether to move into
elective politics prior to the 1984 elections. Groups across the country - in
California, New York, Texas, Florida, Montana, Colorado and other states - are
in various stages of development California's Campaign for Economic Democracy,
headed by Tom Hayden, and ACORN, a national neighborhood movement for low and
moderate-income people based in Little Rock, Ark. have long been supporting
candidates. Most groups have not. But this year the trend is the same everywhere
- toward coalitions and greater involvement in elections.

Although the ascendancy of Reagan conservatism has encouraged a renaissance of
the left, many cite progressivism's new importance as evidence that the ''new
left'' has simply come of age. Lee Webb, executive director of the Conference on
Alternative State and Local Policies, a privately funded, Washington-based
research group, gives elected officials and some activists detailed technical
assistance in pursuing laws and policies. He provides policies'' - how to deal
with such issues as housing, plant closings, tax reform, economic development,
pension fund investment, and others.

Webb, a student of past progressive and political-reform movements, is seldom
surprised when popular movements burst upon the national scene and find national
officials poorly prepared to deal with them - as the nuclear-freeze movement did
last Year. Webb thinks the nation, many of its citizens disillusioned with
Washington's solutions, is reverting to a historic tradition of great movements
beginning at the local and state levels and eventually bubbling up to the
national scene.

Leaders of the activist left think they may be on the verge of making an impact
on national elections. Yet coalition politics have long been a shaky affair in
this country. Efforts to unite the poor across racial lines have failed more
often than they have succeeded. Paul Tully, a former State and Local Leadership
Project adviser, views Citizen Action and other coalitions as a ''very serious
operation,'' but warns that such politics work best when a ''fire-breathing
dragon'' - as many in the movement view the Reagan Administration - offers a
common threat. If the national prospers over the next year or so, the dragon may
seem less threatening.

Many leaders feel there is dragon enough in the structural changes taking place
in the American economy. Ira Arlook of Citizen Action says that such issues as
toxic waste are sufficient to keep the canvassers going for a long time.
Significantly, the most wrenching social and economic changes are occurring not
so much in marginal states as in those with large populations, big Congressional
delegations and many electoral votes - Illinois, Michigan, Pennsylvania and
Ohio, among others.

It seems doubtful that the new progressive movement can achieve basic changes in
American political thought at this stage. The radical change that it is seeking
lies in putting segments of the economy - the banking institutions - under more
democratic control, to give rand-and-file Americans a larger voice in how and
where dollars are invested. But many of the issues, including public control of
utility rates and tax reform, are quite traditional. And the movement seems
locked in to supporting a traditionalist Democrat such as Walter Mondale for
President in 1984. Yet it is expected to have a major impact next year in the
Congressional and state elections.

At a minimum, the new stirrings among the activists on the left are likely to
add a balance to the political scales that was abSent in 1980, when the new
right inspired many religious fundamentalists and other conservatives while many
on the left boycotted the elections in any event, the nation need not be
surprised if the activists on the left turn out, as IPAC's Creamer predicts, to
be ''an incresingly important force in American politics.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of entries in political T-shirt contest sponsored by the Midwest
Academy; Photo of IPAC canvassers (Page 48)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DADA AND THE DIVINE

BYLINE: By Alfred Corn

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1339 words


CONSTANT DEFENDER

By James Tate.  57 pp. New York: Ecco Press. Cloth, $13.50. Paper, $7.95.  LAKE
EFFECT COUNTRY By A. R. Ammons.  60 pp. New York: W. W. Norton & Co.  Cloth,
$15.50. Paper, $5.95. HE war babies are all beginning to turn 40. ''I was born
the year of the gray pennies,'' Sandra McPherson says in her poem ''1943.'' So
were many others, including James Tate, who is about to leave behind the
slightly patronizing rubric ''younger poet,'' patented by the Yale Series. When
his first book was chosen for that series in 1966, ''youngest poet'' was the
operative phrase, and perhaps ''war baby'' was another, with a brand new war
beginning to escalate.

Since that time, as book after book of his has appeared, Mr. Tate has often
seemed as plausible a standard-bearer as any for a generation dislocated and
made permanently restless by the Vietnam War. No younger poet writing then
wanted to negotiate with the middle-minded military-industrial society that got
us into that mess. And not just Vietnam, but other conflicts; maybe America was
just too violent. ''The Lost Pilot,'' the title poem of Mr. Tate's first book,
concerns the death of his father in World War II. It is still one of his best
poems, and one can infer that that early misfortune had something to do with his
becoming a poet.

He has said that his work has a corrective intention, that his poems are aimed
at the illusions cloaking and fostering contemporary problems. His weapons,
though, are not invective and reasoned argument. Instead, he uses humor, irony
and illusionistic imagery to subvert illusion. Almost all his poems are like
dreams or nightmares, but more chaotic. ''Surreal,'' some would say, but, partly
because of the humor, ''Dada'' is a better fit. His is a Made-in-U.S.A. Dada
sensibility founded on comic strips (Li'l Abner, Popeye), the Saturday afternoon
movie serials, the grand tradition of Kilroy graffiti and our goofing on
Culture, trotting out archaic diction like ''yonder maid'' and ''forsooth.''
Along with John Ashbery and Woody Allen, James Tate sendeth up the classics.

With ''Viper Jazz'' (1976), ''Riven Doggeries'' (1979) and now ''Constant
Defender,'' the proportion of humor and campiness in Mr. Tate's books has
steadily increased. Too much, probably:

Alfred Corn is the author of three books of poems. His ''Notes From a Child of
Paradise'' will be published next spring.  A mandolin from the madhouse was
calling the lunatics to prayer. Mr. Beasley's Portuguese was improving by the
hour. Little pissing brats just freed from school threw rotten eggs and wild
chrysanthemums, and the gondolier was getting edgy.

''Red Bricks and Camphor Trees,'' from which these lines come, can represent the
overall tone and procedure for most of the poems in this book. Brief, wacko
narratives, all with satiric intention. But what is being satirized? The
dream-veils obscure the view. If problems and illusions are still with us,
shouldn't the targets be made clearer? Explicitness isn't necessarily unartful.

''Constant Defender'' does do justice by the laugh- meter, something most poetry
overlooks. And the lightness of touch helps establish reader rapport in some of
the more serious (and moving) poems in the book, such as ''Land of Little
Sticks, 1945,'' ''The Horseshoe'' and ''On the World's Birthday.'' As he moves
into his fifth and sixth decades, however, I wonder whether Mr. Tate will want
to continue with books so consistently light in tone. We've all heard stand-up
comics confide, ''This isn't work for a grown man, you know.'' But maybe that's
just the point for Mr. Tate: When, one day, grandchildren are swarming around
his knee, he'll be able to recite a new poem to them with the pleasant assurance
of having a gleeful and appreciative audience of peers.

*

For an established master like A. R. Ammons, the problem is likely to be how to
keep writing and remain a master - without simply repeating earlier poems or
writing what are not poems at all. Achieving a style and a subject can be like
stranding oneself at the top of a tree. I'm guessing this won't happen to Mr.
Ammons, even though the 48 short lyrics of ''Lake Effect Country'' for the most
part present a poet we already know well.

''I Could Not Be Here at All'' is essentially the same poem as ''So I Said I Am
Ezra,'' which stands on the first page of his ''Collected Poems, 1951-1971.''
''The Spiral Rag'' and ''Fairly High Assimilation Rag,'' with their headlong,
wide-angle tercets could easily be outtakes from ''Sphere.'' A disconcerting
corollary to Mr. Ammons's free-form and associationist esthetic is that pieces
of poems could easily be moved to other poems, with no one but the author the
wiser, much as a rock or a shrub can be transferred from one part of the
landscape to another without disturbing the general effect.

Judged independently, however, this new book is thoughtful, inventive and secure
in tone. The subjects are philosophical in a vein that will seem more than idle
speculation to anyone concerned with the relationship between nature, man and
the divine. The poet's arguments rely more on imagery and suggestion than logic
and rigor; but of course it is precisely the logical rigor of contemporary
philosophy that prevents it from taking up Mr. Ammons's topics at all. In our
day, metaphysics has taken refuge in poetry.

Mr. Ammons has few rivals in his capacity to observe natural scenes. Effects of
light, wind and water are his special province; and he has the verbal power to
cast his observations in lively language, so that we relish the visual and
verbal detail both at once. Sometimes he abandons description to talk personally
and autobiographically. The transcendental mind proves to be as subject to
frustration, pain and self-pity as any other. ''Old Desire'' will join the
searching (even wounding) poems ''Easter Morning'' and ''Poverty'' in his
previous book, ''Worldly Hopes,'' to fill out the human portrait of this author.
Human, and even suburban, as in this irruption from an Ithaca not like
Odysseus': society will wind and unwind

but we may or may not have a nice weekend

depending on whether or not we have been divorced or

have enough booze to last through Sunday.

That some of the poems adopt a brusquely dismissive tone is one of the
shortcomings of Mr. Ammons's manner we have to shrug off, like his enjambments
after ''the,'' his disfiguring ''busted's,'' ''thru's,'' ''ongoing''
''ongoing's'' and ''&'s.'' Some point about the importance of being roughhewn is
being made; and, if it helps him write. . . .

The best (and freshest) poems are the lyrics on religious subjects. While ''Zero
and Then Some'' disparages any easy mysticism or a sacrament of praise that is
too willed, Mr. Ammons doesn't let this antidevotional mood prevail. In a mere
25 lines, ''Lips Twisted With Thirst'' is grandly apocalyptic, especially at the
conclusion:  Unused to winds liberated to rejected light the soul cowered in its
final

sheath of wings and turning from the naked dignity and cracking drought I spoke
in the presence of it Tree cones and clouds retold the unknown tongue and
heralds from the sun came bearing my message to my scrawny soul


Even better is ''Singing & Doubling Together,'' a poem unlike anything else in
Mr. Ammons's work. The interpenetration and reciprocity of the human and the
divine have seldom been so tellingly spelled out: what but grace have I to bear
in every motion, embracing or turning away,

staggering or standing still, while your settled kingdom

sways in distillations of light and plunders down into the

darkness with me and comes nowhere up again

but changed into your singing nature when I need sing

my nature nevermore.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 6, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A Drive Against Thai Pirates Is Paying Off, U.N. Aide Says

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 126 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Sept. 5


A campaign in the waters off Thailand against pirates who prey on refugee boats
fleeing from Vietnam is meeting with some success, a United Nations official
said today.

Poul Hartling, High Commissioner for Refugees, who is on a four-day official
visit to Japan, said, ''We have been able to cut down the number of attacks,
even though they are still going on.''

Refugees in flimsy boats encounter pirates off Songkhla, southern Thailand. Of
450 boats that landed in Thailand and Malaysia in the year up to last April,
some 200 reported attacks, Mr. Hartling said.

He said refugees were killed, clubbed, raped and robbed, and added, ''It's a
horrible, appalling situation, one of the most violent acts against people
seeking asylum in history.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 7, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SOME MARINES 'FEEL HELPLESS'

BYLINE: By E.J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 887 words

DATELINE: OUZAI, Lebanon, Sept. 6


At 3:15 P.M. today, the call went out that no marine on the base here likes to
hear. ''Into the bunkers!'' shouted a marine to his comrades. ''Condition One!''

A siren sounded to signal the danger - Condition One heralds the most serious of
threats - and troops scrambled into holes in the ground covered over with metal,
the walls reinforced by wood and steel and the entire shelter surrounded by
sandbags.

No Shelter Against Direct Hit Bunkers provide protection against shrapnel and
bullets, but not from a direct hit by a shell. And it was in just such a dank,
cramped place, in the early hours before dawn, that two marines lost their
lives, bringing to four the number of marines killed in Lebanon in the last two
weeks. Over the same period, Maj. Robert Jordan, a Marine spokesman, said, 24
have been wounded.

All four of the marines who were killed were members of Company A. As he
crouched in a bunker during today's alert, Staff Sgt. Alfonzo Hernandez of
Oceanside, Calif., said the deaths had cast a pall over any mission that
involves assignment to the forward positions of Company A near Beirut
International Airport.

''When somebody's going to go to Alpha Company,'' he said, ''they always say,
'Well, I don't want to go, but I've got to go.' ''

Just sitting in a bunker and taking fire is not what marines are trained to do,
and many of the 1,200 members of the peacekeeping force find their work less
than fully satisfying.

We're Guinea Pigs

''You feel helpless,'' said Pfc. Sidney Decker of Conley, Ky. ''We're guinea
pigs. What are we doing here?'' Then he paused, and his Marine training came
into play. ''They have reasons for all this stuff,'' he said, though he still
did not sound entirely convinced.

''It's my second hostile duty,'' said Sergeant Hernandez. ''But in Vietnam, I
was allowed to shoot back.''

The Marines are here as part of a peacekeeping force that also consists of
Italian, French and British troops. Major Jordan said the Marines were being
told that their mission is ''to offset or balance the outside influence of other
foreign powers'' - an allusion to Israeli and Syrian troops - ''and to support
the Government of Lebanon and the Lebanese armed forces.''

Major Jordan said the marines were also given courses on the history of Lebanon
and on the factional politics that have left this country a divided and violent
place.

With such a sensitive, largely political and diplomatic mission, the
restrictions on the troops are severe. Col. Timothy Geraghty described the
operating procedures in case of attack as follows:

''We will try to limit the exchange to the lowest possible level, and terminate
it in the shortest period possible.''

That means that the Marines take a lot of fire that they do not return, and
Colonel Geraghty acknowledged that the limitations can be dispiriting.

''Essentially we are an offense-oriented unit,'' he said. ''We like to take the
fight to the enemy. This mission does call for restraint. That causes
frustration.''

 'They Rationalize It Away'

Perhaps the greatest frustration for the marines comes from being unable to do
as much as they would like for their comrades under attack. That made today's
deaths a cause of particular anguish.

''If people knew the guy, they try not to talk about it,'' said Sgt. Tyrone
Talbert of Willingboro, N.J. ''They rationalize it away - that they couldn't do
anything about it. They keep it inside until later on.''

Yet for all their frustrations and fears, the marines' morale and mood today
seems relatively high. One reason is that they have been firing back with heavy
weapons and small arms fire at least some of the time when they are attacked.
During today's alert, the base rumbled with a loud report from four rounds fired
from 155-millimeter howitzers.

Firing back, said James Davis, an electronic technician first class from
Modesto, Calif., ''was definitely a morale booster.''

''The Moslems got used to firing at the Lebanese Army and hitting us and nobody
fired back at them,'' he went on. ''They realize now that they can't ignore us
anymore.''

 Gallows Humor Keeps Up Morale

The marines also seem to be enthusiasts of gallows humor as a way of keeping up
morale. Visitors to the Battalion Landing Team building - the heavily bombed
remnants of a hotel - are surprised to find a long quotation from a Soviet
newspaper on the bulletin board.

''The appearance of marines on foreign soil,'' the quotation goes, ''has always
in the past indicated the beginning of dangerous military adventures.''

Is that true? a marine was asked. ''For us, it is,'' he replied.

For a large share of the marines, Lebanon represents their first combat
experience, and Private Decker, who turned 18 years old this week (''I had a
maplenut cake for a birthday cake,'' he said), asserted that no amount of
training could fully prepare a soldier for the real thing. ''You hear shells and
say 'Oh my God, this is it,' '' he said. ''When you're practicing, you can't get
killed.''

Sergeant Talbert said most of the troops had volunteered for the duty.

''You've been trained all your time in the military for duty like this and so
you want to use your training,'' he said. ''Most marines are adventurers anyway.
And it could be good for your career.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Marines running for cover in Beirut

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 7, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TO KEEP TROOPS IN LEBANON

BYLINE: By Charles McC. Mathias Jr.  ;
Charles McC. Mathias Jr., Republican of Maryland, is a member of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 769 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Reagan Administration needs broad national support if it is to continue to
keep United States marines in the multinational force in Lebanon. Unfortunately,
President Reagan has thus far not reported to the Congress under the relevant
section of the War Powers Resolution. This is a mistake.

Domestic pressures on the Administration to withdraw the marines could escalate
if, as is possible, the fighting in Lebanon continues and there are more
American deaths and injuries. The War Powers Act provides the basis for
developing broad- based support for American policy in Lebanon.

The resolution does not provide for a recall of American troops. It does not
even limit the President's power to order them abroad. What it does is create a
special relationship between the executive branch and the legislature to promote
coordination on issues of war and peace.

It is not debatable. It is the law.

The Founding Fathers determined that the conduct of United States foreign policy
should be the joint responsibility of both the executive branch and the
Congress. The President can, for example, negotiate a treaty, but the Senate
must give its advice and consent to ratification if that treaty is to be the law
of the land.

The Constitution separates power, but in the process establishes the basis for
achieving broad national consensus on difficult policy issues through
coordinated executive-legislative action.

Presidents, sensitive about their foreign policy prerogatives, are hesitant to
engage in the laborious task of building a consensus in Congress, and all too
often have sought to minimize

the role of Congress in the formulation of foreign policy. The practice has not
always been successful. For example, in 1975, Congress, angered at being
ignored, imposed an arms embargo on Turkey over strenuous executive branch
objections.  In 1973, in the wake of the Vietnam War, Congress passed the War
Powers Resolution over a Presidential veto. This resolution was designed both to
regulate executive branch use of United States armed forces abroad and to insure
broad domestic support in the event that use of force was clearly necessary in
the national interest.  Under one section of the resolution, the President is
required to report to the Congress in any case in which United States armed
forces are introduced ''into hostilities or into situations where imminent
involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances.'' In the
absence of specific Congressional authorization, the President must withraw
United States forces within 60 days of the submission of the report. A provision
for extending this period for an additional 30 days is available for an
emergency. These provisions are not affected by the recent decision of the
United States Supreme Court invalidating the legislative veto.  I believe that
the United States has a continuing interest in building a strong, united Lebanon
as part of a general Middle Eastern settlement. Furthermore, I believe that if
we now precipitously withdraw our marines from that country after they have
sustained death and injuries, the world would get the wrong message about the
United States' ability to maintain a policy under pressure.

But the President is running a serious risk that the American people will not
support our commitment in Lebanon if it remains a narrow policy of the
Administration without a clear expression of Congressional support founded on
adequate consultation and coordination.

The hope that attended the peace agreement between Lebanon and Israel has now
evaporated. The prospects for an early peace in troubled Lebanon are not good.
The restoration of central authority there will not come easily, and the
probability of continuing and escalating conflict between the various political
factions in that country is high.

Therefore, I believe that the President should officially notify the Congress
that United States armed forces are now in a situation of ''imminent
hostilities.'' He should make his case to the Congress for maintaining a United
States presence in Lebanon and seek formal Congressional authorization for his
policy.

This would be difficult for the President to ask and difficult for members of
Congress to authorize. But it would reduce the risk that, should the situation
in Lebanon deteriorate even further, public pressure would take the issue out of
the President's hands and force the withdrawal of the United States contingent.

We need a national policy with respect to Lebanon, and the War Powers Resolution
provides the vehicle for obtaining it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 7, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Warns U.S. On Nicaragua Conflict

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 114 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Sept. 6


Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, said today that any United States
intervention against Nicaragua could lead to a conflict similar to the Vietnam
War.

''North American intervention in Nicaragua could lead to many Vietnams,'' Mr.
Thach said, speaking on his arrival at the international airport here.

He said he would hold meetings with Nicaraguan officials ''to exchange opinions
on international and regional affairs.''

The Vietnamese official was received at the airport by the Nicaraguan Foreign
Minister, the Rev. Miguel d'Escoto Brockman. He was scheduled to meet Wednesday
with Daniel Ortega Saavedra, coordinator of Nicaragua's three-member ruling
junta.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 7, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AN EAST GERMAN WRITER AND THE WALL OF SILENCE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 834 words

DATELINE: EAST BERLIN, Sept. 5


In a small house in the woods outside East Berlin, a noted German author and
former American citizen writes busily for a public that is forbidden to read his
latest books.

It has been 10 years since anything new written by Stefan Heym has seen a
printing press inside East Germany. Still, he keeps at it, saying that the
''stupidity'' of Government censors ''cannot last forever.''

In the meantime, three of his novels have been best sellers in West Germany, and
the 70-year-old author enjoys the rare status of living in the East while
publishing criticism of the East German Government and society in the West.

His recent books are banned in East Germany, but the public reads his works in
volumes smuggled in by visitors from West Germany.



A Committed Socialist

Mr. Heym, who said that he remains a committed socialist, was lionized by the
authorities when he moved to East Germany in 1953 after nearly 20 years in the
United States, where he had become a naturalized citizen. At the time, he
denounced American society as ''warlike'' and ''fascist.''

But Mr. Heym has since earned the anger of the East German authorities because
of his outspoken criticism of the Communist regime. Officials have denounced
him, fined him and finally tried to silence him by ignoring him.  ''Today I am
absolutely a nonperson, an unmentionable, an untouchable,'' he said. ''Of
course, everybody finds that ridiculous, and it doesn't hurt me, I must say.''

The gray-haired, stoop-shouldered Mr. Heym has written 22 books, among them -
while he was in New York - a 1942 work about the Nazi regime, ''Hostages,''
which became an American best seller and was made into a film.

Today, he is a particular embarrassment to the East German Government, although
he does not oppose its economic system. He said that he is critical of
intolerance on the part of ''the boys who run this country.''



What Would Marx Say

''I often wonder what Marx and Engels would say if they saw this setup,'' he
grumbled. ''They would probably be moved to write another 20 volumes.''

''Socialism does not mean censorship,'' he said. ''Nobody, not Marx nor Engels
nor anybody, ever said socialism means a muzzle.''

After he arrived in East Germany, Mr. Heym moved into the house where he still
lives today, in one of the special housing colonies built for the fledgling
country's ''artists.''

Mr. Heym, who is of Jewish parentage, was born in Chemnitz, now in the Soviet
sector and renamed Karl Marx-Stadt. He left Germany in 1933 when he was 20 years
old. As an anti- Nazi refugee, he lived in Prague for two years before
immigrating to the United States. He had won a graduate scholarship to the
University of Chicago, where he earned a master's degree. He later fought in the
United States Army in World War II.

In 1953, during the McCarthy era, Mr. Heym was quoted as saying that it was
''impossible for an honest man to be an author in America.'' He mailed the
Bronze Star he had won fighting in the Battle of the Bulge to President Dwight
D. Eisenhower and moved to East Germany.



Got Into Public Argument

But in 1956, he got into a public argument about the development of cultural
life in East Germany with the former Communist Party chief Walter Ulbricht.

Then, in 1959, the East German Government refused to publish what later became a
best seller in the West - ''Five Days in June,'' a novel based on the 1953
workers' uprising in the Soviet sector of Berlin.

In 1979, Mr. Heym published another best-selling novel, ''Collin,'' which dealt
with an East German author's guilt about his silence during Communist Party
purges.

The East German Government fined Mr. Heym $4,000 for violating foreign currency
regulations by publishing in the West. He was also denounced as a traitor and an
American, even though he had given up his United States passport when he became
an East German citizen.

Mr. Heym said that he did not regret his return. ''The situation is hard, but it
is bearable,'' he said. ''I am not an opponent'' of the East German system, he
said, ''I am critical.''



'A Lot of Contradictions'

''I stay here because it is a fascinating place to be for a writer,'' he said.
''There are a lot of contradictions.''

Another reason he stays in East Germany, Mr. Heym said, is to provide
encouragement for other cultural rebels. ''If I leave, that is one less
independent thinker here,'' he said.

He also said that he has changed his opinion of the American people: ''It is no
longer true'' that they are ''warlike,'' he said.

''There have been developments in the United States that made me feel sorry at
the time that I wasn't there, such as the struggle against the Vietnam war,'' he
said.

Meanwhile, his latest novel, ''Ahasver,'' is to be published in the United
States early next year under the title ''The Wandering Jew.'' It is about a
fallen angel who roams the world in an attempt to rectify the mistakes of
creation. Mr. Heym said that it is autobiographical.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 7, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 769 words


THE TROUBLED CRUSADE. American Education 1945-80. By Diane Ravitch. 384 pages.
Basic. $19.95.

AT the end of her detailed, coolly analytical history of education in America
since World War II, Diane Ravitch finally succumbs to an illustrative vignette.
It concerns a young black man from Mississippi who returned to his hometown in
1980 and saw the deterioration of the black high school that he had happily and
productively attended in the late 1960's.

One expects the vignette to conclude with a blast by the author of the liberal
do-gooders and proponents of Federal intervention in local affairs who might be
construed to have been indirectly responsible for a sorry state of educational
affairs. For Mrs. Ravitch - a faculty member at Columbia University's Teachers
College, and the author of ''The Great School Wars'' (1974) and ''The
Revisionists Revised'' (1978) - has been known to be critical of educational
reformers, and if ever there was an age of massive educational reform in
America, the postwar period was it.

But Mrs. Ravitch fails to conclude her vignette with a fulmination. Instead, she
trails off into slightly platitudinous expressions of hope for the future, and
concludes: ''If it seems na"ively American to put so much stock in schools,
colleges, universities, and the endless prospect of self- improvement and social
improvement, it is an admirable, and perhaps even a noble, flaw.''


Now there seems to me a slightly wistful note to that conclusion - a quality of
whistling past what the author may secretly regard as the graveyard of
education. One gets the feeling that anyone less scrupulous in her regard for
historical accuracy would have vented rage and shaken her fists at certain gods
of disorder. After all, one would have to search long and hard to find a better
case of good intentions backfiring.

From a certain point of view, what is recounted in ''The Troubled Crusade'' is
every conservative's fear of what befalls a freely functioning community system
when Big Government gets its hands on it. For in the 35-year history that Mrs.
Ravitch covers, the long-deferred dream of Federal aid to education could be
said to have been corrupted into a nightmare of bureaucratic meddling and
muddling. Within the same period, what began as an attempt to eliminate race as
a consideration in educating individuals ended up with precisely the opposite
result, namely, with individuals being judged according to attributes they held
in common with various groups.

By the time Mrs. Ravitch reaches the end of her tale, she is drily describing
how the promotion of plans to teach native languages to ethnic minorities had
the net result of reducing foreign-language programs in American schools.
Really, at times her narrative assumes the aspect of a very dark comedy, and one
fully expects her to pronounce some dire moral at the end.

But she never does. What seems to have happened - I am only guessing, of course
- is that she trapped herself. Having set out to write such an objectively
detailed account of the period that the villains would betray themselves, she
discovered that there really were no villains. Everyone behaved with the best of
motives, she seems to be saying - from proponents of progressive education in
the 1930's to defenders of the rights of the handicapped in the 70's. It was
just that the winds of history kept shifting and changing the landscape. There
was the cold war and Vietnam and the Berkeley free-speech movement and the
sudden infatuation with English experiments with the open classroom.


There was sputnik and curriculum reform and the Great Society and the Nixon
Administration's support of affirmative action, which promoted group rights over
those of the individual. Everything affected everything else, as it has a habit
of doing. So instead of writing a moral drama, Mrs. Ravitch had to build an
accurate model of history. That left her with her somewhat punchless title,
''The Troubled Crusade,'' and her slightly bland conclusion that what means well
may in the very long run do well.

But it leaves the reader with a refreshingly clear and objective review that
lends valuable perspective to a confusing period in the very recent past. When
you come to think of it, everything under the sun and moon impinges on the issue
of education, and it is an act of intellectual courage to acknowledge as much
and take it fully into account. What we get in this history of schooling is a
troubled mind brooding on recent disasters. The problems do not resolve
themselves into nostrums, and so the mind goes right on brooding.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Diane Ravitch

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 7, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Economic SceneVictor R. Fuchs Divorce Rate's Fiscal Impact

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 764 words


Victor R. Fuchs is professor of economics at Stanford University and a research
associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research. Leonard Silk is on
special assignment.  SOARING divorce rates, dramatically altering the
circumstances under which millions of children are raised, have contributed to
the economic problems of society. During the last 20 years 19 million children
under age 18 saw their parents divorced. Despite a high remarriage rate, the
rise in divorce, plus an increase in the proportion of births to unwed mothers,
means one-parent homes for nearly one in four children.

Experts differ concerning the psychological effects of divorce on children, but
a negative effect on their economic well-being is almost inevitable. Before
divorce, two parents and their children share one household, benefiting from
economies of scale and from cooperative endeavors of the partnership. After
divorce, there are typically two households to maintain, the economies of scale
are lost and cooperative effort is more difficult.

Moreover, in most cases fathers provide little or no child support when the
mother has custody. Fewer than half of such mothers receive child support
payments from the father. Many divorced mothers must work full time to support
their children, and others depend partly or totally on government subsidy. Even
so, more than 50 percent of the children in families headed by a female live in
poverty, compared with only 8 percent in husband- wife families.

Fortunately for American children and American taxpayers, the divorce rate
appears to have stopped climbing.

Between 1965 and 1975 the divorce rate jumped from 10.6 per thousand married
women to 20.3. Between 1975 and 1980, however, the increase was only 11 percent,
and since 1980 the rate has been stable at about 22.6 per thousand married
women. The last long period of stability was from 1950 to 1965 when the increase
was only 3 percent.

Also, the average number of children involved has fallen from a high of 1.33 per
divorce in the late 1960's to less than 1 per divorce now.

Why have these trends changed? The years following 1965 were unusual in several
ways.

First, the United States was at war in Vietnam, and divorces usually increase
during wartime because many of the marriages are hasty and many of the couples
are young. Second, the late 1960's and early 1970's were marked by cultural
changes, including a wave of feminist ideology.

Also, this period saw the wide diffusion of birth control pills and intrauterine
devices. Robert Michael, an economist who has studied divorce, explains why
improvements in contraception helped raise the divorce rate. First, they made it
easier to lower the average number of children per couple. Second, by reducing
uncertainty about pregnancy, they encouraged women to focus on careers. Third,
they led to an increase in extramarital sex.

Public policy probably also had an effect. The surge in the program of Aid to
Families With Dependent Children in the late 1960's, the introduction of
Medicaid and the growth of other subsidies made divorce realistic for a mother
of small children who found herself in an unhappy marriage.

Many studies also find that the probability of divorce is higher when the wife
holds a salaried job. (In recent years, however, the participation of mothers in
the labor force has continued to rise rapidly although the divorce rate has
not.)

One way to reconcile these findings is to note the distinction between expected
and unexpected changes. Most studies of divorce find that an unexpected change,
such as a sudden large increase or decrease in income, puts pressure on a
marriage.

The entry of more wives into the labor market in the 1960's may have led to more
divorces because in many cases neither the husband nor wife, at the time they
married, had expected the wife to work. Nowadays most marriages begin with this
expectation, so it is less likely to be destabilizing.

A decline in divorce - and especially a decline in the number of children
affected by divorce - would have several favorable economic consequences. It not
only would lower the number of children living in poverty but also would reduce
the size of several government programs. This would ease the burden on taxpayers
or help narrow the Federal budget deficit.

Economic theories of divorce are not sufficiently robust to permit precise
predictions of trends, but it is encouraging to note that there has been no
increase in the divorce rate for three years and that 1983 will probably show a
small decrease.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET SAYS WORLD OPINION IS ON ITS SIDE

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1050 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Sept.7


The Soviet Union stood firm today in its defense of a Soviet fighter pilot's
action in shooting down a South Korean airliner and maintained that world
opinion and international law were strongly on its side.

A Government statement on the incident that was published Tuesday appeared to
have signaled the end, at least for now, of Soviet disclosures. Having
acknowledged in the statement that the plane was shot down, the Kremlin appeared
content to leave the matter to a barrage of largely polemical articles in the
official press.

Several of these asserted that the version of events put out here, centering on
charges that the Korean aircraft was on an American spying mission, was winning
the battle for world opinion. A typical assertion was that of Komsomolskaya
Pravda, the newspaper of the Young Communist League, which said the incident
''has caused legitimate indignation in the Soviet Union and among all honest
people on earth.''

Statement Given Prominence

Tass, the official press agency, said that ''indignation is growing around the
world'' at the United States' role. The Government statement, printed on the
front pages of almost all Soviet papers, described this as a ''preplanned''
matter, charging that the Korean Air Lines 747 jet flew over sensitive Soviet
military installations with the provision that a ''major political provocation''
could be staged against Moscow if Soviet air defenses ''stymied'' the operation.

The official information media backed the claim of international support with a
battery of dispatches from around the world, but the majority of these consisted
of statements by Communist governments allied with Moscow or foreign Communist
parties. On the television news the principal report dealing with international
repercussions of the affair was from Hanoi and involved an article in the
Vietnamese Communist Party paper, Nhan Dan, that accused the White House of
shedding ''crocodile tears'' over passengers whose deaths it said had been
caused by an American plot.

There were also references to the Western press, but as has been the case
throughout the crisis many of these were removed from context or otherwise
presented so as to suggest support for the Soviet position not intended by the
original.

The television news emphasized that the full text of the Soviet Government's
statement had been published in The New York Times, a development evidently
intended to show that the statement had gained credibility in the West.

Responsibility for Decision

The Government statement implied that the decision to shoot down the 747 was
taken by the ''command post'' of the air defense forces in the area where the
airliner went down, in the Sea of Japan off Sakhalin island, without reference
to higher military or political authority. But press accounts today emphasized
that the whole country stood behind the fighter pilot's action.

Komsomolskaya Pravda said that Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, had
talked about Soviet actions in the affair as if he had never heard of the
concept of sovereignty. It said that the Soviet Union took this idea seriously,
and added, ''Our country will continue to act in compliance with Soviet laws
which fully correspond to international norms, no matter whether Mr. Speakes and
his ilk like it or not.''

Another Komsomolskaya Pravda article, striking a more emotional tone, said that
reaction in some quarters abroad implied regret that the Soviet Union regarded
its borders as ''sacred.'' The paper took this as a cue to refer to the
country's losses during World War II, saying: ''Yes indeed, they are sacred. We
shall never forget the price of our victory. Millions of people perished, and
not only soldiers, but also civilians thrown into abandoned mines, forced to
labor camps and poisoned in gas vans.''

One of the few hints that the incident might have caused damage to the country's
international image came in a commentary in Pravda, the Communist Party
newspaper, which asked if the ''South Korean plane incident isn't too propitious
for Washington'' to have been a coincidence. The commentary charged that
Washington had ''unleashed'' the affair so as to cover its own ''crimes'' in
Lebanon, Central America and elsewhere.

International Law Cited

Considerable stress was laid on the contention that the fighter plane's action
against the Korean airliner was soundly based in international law. One of the
country's top academic lawyers, Nikolai A. Ushakov, said in the keynote
commentary on television that the Soviet planes ''acted completely legally and
in full accordance with international rules,'' including sections of the 1944
Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation.

Mr. Ushakov, head of the international law department of the Institute of State
and Law, a body under the Academy of Sciences, said that Article 1 of the
Chicago code laid down the complete sovereignty of each nation over its airspace
and Article 6 provided that all flights through that airspace should take place
in accordance with the rules laid down by the nation concerned. He said these
left no doubt as to the legality of intercepting the plane.

Pilots Authorized to Use Arms

A senior official in the Ministry of Justice, Georgi D. Golubov, in an interview
with Tass, also cited the Chicago convention, but his remarks followed the
Government statement in basing the actual destruction of the plane on the Soviet
border law promulgated last November.

The relevant article of the law empowers the Air Defense Forces to use ''weapons
and combat equipment'' in cases where violators of Soviet airspace cannot be
detained by other means.

All Soviet commentaries avoided saying directly that the South Korean plane had
been shot down, using instead the formulation in the Government statement, which
said that the fighter had fulfilled a command post's order ''to stop the
flight.''


Although ambiguous in English, the word used in the Russian text of the
statement, ''presekat,'' would probably convey more of the finality of what
happened to a Soviet audience. The standard dictionary used by Soviet
translators, published by Moscow's Russian Language Publishers, gives various
synonyms, including to ''suppress,'' ''stop at once'' and ''nip in the bud.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

McCarthy Is Listed as 'Fair' At a Hospital in Washington

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 182 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 7


Eugene J. McCarthy, a former Senator and challenger for the Democratic
Presidential nomination, was transferred to Georgetown University Hospital
today, where he was listed in fair condition after a heart attack.

Mr. McCarthy, who is 67 years old, was stricken Sunday night at his home in
Woodville, Va., and was taken to a hospital in Culpeper, Va.

''The Senator is here for recuperation and observation,'' said Dr. Albert
delNegro of Georgetown. ''He is in relatively stable condition.''

He said it was too soon to tell whether Mr. McCarthy would need surgery.

Mr. McCarthy has experienced an accelerated heartbeat three times since entering
the hospital, he said, something not uncommon in heart attack victims.

Mr. McCarthy, a liberal Democrat from Minnesota who opposed the Vietnam War,
left the Senate in 1970 after 22 years in Congress. He challenged President
Johnson in 1968, and tried again for the Presidency in 1972 and 1976. He has
been lecturing, teaching and writing for several years while living in
Woodville, a rural community 60 miles southwest of Washington.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

KOREA'S AMBASSADOR: 'I KNEW, I HAD A FEAR'

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 7


Shortly after 7:30 P.M. last Wednesday, Korea's Ambassador to the United States,
Lew Byong Hion, arrived at his home off Massachusetts Avenue, unlocked the door
and heard the telephone ringing. It was an official of the Foreign Ministry in
Seoul.

''He asked if I had heard anything about the plane, any news or information,''
Mr. Lew recalled today. ''I began checking all over. None of the U.S. agencies
knew anything yet. Then we started to get calls from journalists.''

''I knew, I had a fear and suspicion from the very start, that the Communists
had shot the plane down,'' he said quietly.

For Mr. Lew, a former ranking Army officer, the incident had a special
poignancy: He knew the plane's pilot, Chun Byung In, who had flown the Korean
Air Lines jet taking Mr. Lew to the United States on his first diplomatic
posting two years ago.

''A very professional, very quiet man,'' said Mr. Lew, sitting in his relatively
small and austere office near downtown Washington. On the right breast of his
black suit, Mr. Lew, like other Embassy officials, wore a black ribbon of
mourning.

The last week, Mr. Lew said, has been somewhat frenzied, with numerous phone
calls from Western and Asian ambassadors here and from ordinary Americans.

Messages of Sorrow and Anger

''They call from all states, from small towns,'' said Mr. Lew. ''They call my
house and speak to my wife and they call here at the Embassy. All want to
express their sorrow and anger.''

Mr. Lew said that although he had received reports at about 10:30 P.M. on
Wednesday that the plane might have landed safely on Soviet territory, by 5 A.M.
Thursday he was virtually certain that it had been shot down.

The envoy's aides say that he handled the crisis over the next few days - the
meetings with State Department and Pentagon officials, the barrage of phone
calls - with a stoicism that was totally in character.

''I was a soldier,'' he said. ''I fought in two wars. I was in charge of anti-
infiltration operations in Korea. That job kept me awake almost six years. I
could manage this kind of situation.''

Typically, Mr. Lew sat down at his desk on Thursday and wrote in Korean what he
believed to be the motive for the plane's destruction. ''Communists
instinctively reject any possible intrusion on their beliefs, society and
territory,'' he wrote. ''Therefore, it is natural for them to maintain a closed
society and display very severe degrees of suspicion against any outsider.

''The Korean airliner was one of those unwelcomed intruders,'' he wrote. ''And
the violent force that was exercised, was done so self-righteously that it was
totally unacceptable to our values.''

Mr. Lew's staunch anti-Communism, mirroring the views of many Koreans, was
enflamed by the airline's destruction.

Americans Called Fortunate

''American people are so fortunate,'' he said with a smile. ''You are so far
from Moscow, thousands of miles away. But look at us! We are situated against
another Communist country, the distance from Seoul to the border only 25 miles.
That is the equivalent of the distance between the White House and Dulles
Airport.''

He spoke in a clenched voice. ''The Communists initiated the Korean War and
turned our land into ashes, inflicting terrible casualties. In the last 3 1/2
decades we have suffered. Yes! You people are fortunate.''

Mr. Lew said that the Korean Government supported ''the perceptions about Russia
expressed by President Reagan'' in the last few days. He declined to criticize
Mr. Reagan's call on Sunday for limited sanctions against the Soviet Union,
including curbs on cultural, scientific and some diplomatic exchanges.

''Well, we might wish to see more, stronger, harsher action but we know very
well every foreign nation has its own domestic concerns and conditions,'' said
the Ambassador.

Mr. Lew was born in the village of Chongwon, southwest of Seoul, where 14
generations of his ancestors lived and died. ''My family were teachers,
scholars,'' he said quietly. ''I never wished to become a soldier and it would
have been the tradition for me, the eldest of nine children, to look after the
family. That should have been my mission.''

Misconceptions About Korea

But at the end of World War II, Korea was divided at the 38th parallel with the
north under Communist control. ''The Communists started infiltrating immediately
and we young Koreans knew we had to make the country strong,'' Mr. Lew said. ''I
changed my life and went into the military.''

He has served in the military more than 30 years, including more than a year as
commanding general of the Korean Capital division, known as the ''Tiger''
division, in Quinhon, in central Vietnam. Mr. Lew was chairman of the Korean
Joint Chiefs of Staff before his appointment as Ambassador to the United States.

In his relatively quiet two years here, Mr. Lew has found some American
''misconceptions'' about his country. ''You have this kind of stereotype of
Korea,'' he said. ''You think Korea is an underdeveloped nation, politically
unstabilized and just leaning on Americans for assistance. What very wrong
perceptions.''

In recent years, he said, Korea has purchased about $900 million in military
items, but pointed out with considerable pride that it received no economic or
food aid.

''Shall I tell you what we are assisting you with? Wherever we go, we cooperate
with American policy. We are committed to America. We are, I think, America's
most faithful ally.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lew Byong Hion

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Technology;
TV Licensing With a Lottery

BYLINE: By Andrew Pollack

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 792 words


THE old drum from which Selective Service numbers were drawn during the Vietnam
War will be used again this month in a new type of lottery - the awarding of
licenses for low-power television stations.

Low-power television stations, first proposed by the Federal Communications
Commission in 1980, broadcast over regular VHF and UHF channels but are less
powerful than conventional stations. Their signal can reach only 10 or 20 miles,
compared with 40 to 65 miles for a regular station. But low-power television
stations are much cheaper to build, costing $100,000 or so, compared with $1
million or $2 million for a conventional station.

It was thought in 1980 that low-power television would allow several thousand
new TV channels to be created. Rural communities would be able for the first
time to have their own mom-and-pop television stations, and minority groups
could afford to own television stations for the first time.

But a delay in issuing licenses has soured the outlook for low-power television,
according to some people in the industry. Now that the F.C.C. is finally ready
to begin parceling out the licenses through the lottery, it may be too late for
low-power television to live up to its initial promise.

''The vacuum that low power may have been able to fill has been eaten away by
other technologies,'' said Booker Wade Jr., a former F.C.C. lawyer who is trying
to organize a network of low-power stations.

Critics think the F.C.C. has not moved fast enough, but its officials say
quicker action was impossible. The commission was swamped with more than 12,000
applications from groups representing minorities and the elderly, labor unions
such as the United Automobile Workers, independent entrepreneurs and big
corporations, including ABC and Sears, Roebuck.

The proposed stations would offer everything from reruns of situation comedies
to special interest programming. One of the stations would cover only Chinatown
in New York City.

The usual F.C.C. method of holding hearings for licenses could not cope with the
load. Only about 360 licenses have been granted so far, according to Barbara
Kreisman, chief of the F.C.C.'s low-power television branch. Most are in Alaska.

The lottery, which will be held monthly starting Sept. 29, was authorized by
Congress to help clear away the backlog. The lottery is arranged so that
applicants that are at least 50 percent owned by a minority group or those that
own no other mass media properties have a higher chance of winning than they
would in a purely random drawing.

F.C.C. officials note the technical difficulty of holding such a vast lottery.

Companies or organizations may apply to run a low-power TV station anywhere in
the country as long as it would not interfere with existing stations. But
suppose a company or several companies were to apply for a particular channel
in, say, Suffolk County. That channel might interefere with another channel
being applied for in neighboring Nassau County. But if the Nassau application
were granted it would automatically preclude some applications in another Nassau
town or in Queens.

So the choice of either the Nassau or the Suffolk application could
automatically determine the fate of many other applications in a chain reaction.
Sometimes hundreds of applications are involved, and it takes a computer to tell
which ones.

Some people say that, despite the delay, low-power television will catch on
because it is cheap and uses proven technology. ''I don't think we have lost
that much ground,'' said John Reilly, director of the National Institute for
Low-Power Television, which organizes seminars on the subject.

But the outlook has dimmed, partly because alternative television services,
including cable and over-the-air pay television, have had more trouble than
expected in attracting viewers and advertisers. And new competition, such as
broadcasts directly from satellites to homes, is on the way.

Another problem has been retaining financing arranged three years ago. Mr.
Wade's Community Television Network, which is planning programming oriented to
minorities, had an agreement to be financed by a broadcaster that would use the
low-power stations part time for pay TV. Because of the delay, however, the deal
has fallen apart.

Some large companies, such as Turner Broadcasting, have canceled plans to go
into low-power television. But such cancellations will probably come mainly from
smaller companies and nonprofit groups, which can less afford to hang on, said
Joan Gudgel, information director for the National Federation of Local Cable
Programmers. So the ones hurt most by the delay, she said, are the very groups
that were supposed to benefit from low-power television in the first place.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. WILL PROTECT MARINES, BUSH WARNS

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 8


After an American frigate shelled Druse positions in Lebanon, Vice President
Bush warned Syria and other anti-government elements in Lebanon today that the
United States would protect its 1,300-man Marine peacekeeping unit around
Beirut.

As he spoke at a news conference, there were indications of rising sentiment on
Capitol Hill for Congress either to authorize or to disapprove of what many
members see as a widening American military effort in Lebanon.

The Vice President accused Syria of ''being extraordinarily difficult'' by
keeping large forces in Lebanon and backing Druse units shelling the Beirut
area.

''To the degree that they control factions in Lebanon, they should use this
influence to see that the United States marines are not shot at from Druse
positions,'' he said of the Syrians.

''If those marines are shot at, they are going to be protected, and it is
important that other countries understand that and it is important that elements
understand it.''

President Reagan backed up Mr. Bush's statement with a telephone call to the
commander of the Marine forces in Lebanon.

''I am determined to see to it that we provide you whatever support it takes to
stop the attacks on your positions,'' the White House quoted Mr. Reagan as
telling Col. Timothy J. Geraghty.

Long Wants Funds Stopped

Earlier, Representative Clarence D. Long, a Maryland Democrat, said he would
press Congress to cut off funds for the American peacekeeping force in Lebanon
unless President Reagan formally sought Congressional authorization to keep the
troops there.

Mr. Long, chairman of the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Foreign
Operations, said he would offer an amendment to a resolution that Congress must
pass by Sept. 30 to continue financing government agencies in the new fiscal
year. His proposal would give President Reagan 30 days to ask Congress for
authority to keep the American units in Lebanon.

''Our marines are too precious to the American people to let them be wasted as
sitting-duck targets in an undeclared war, a war disguised as a peacekeeping
operation where there has never been, from the beginning, any peace to keep,''
Mr. Long said at a news conference.

After two marines were killed and 14 were wounded on Aug. 29, President Reagan
made a report to Congress under a provision of the War Powers Act of 1973 that
requires such a report when American forces enter another nation ''equipped for
combat.''

But despite more casualties since then and despite urging from senior members of
Congress for more explicit endorsement of the American presence in Lebanon, the
President has refused to invoke another section of the law requiring
Congressional approval within 60 days if American forces are introduced ''into
hostilities or into situations where imminnent involvement in hostilities is
clearly indicated by the circumstances.''

Representative Long, citing 5 American dead and 24 wounded in Lebanon this year
and asserting that the Pentagon was paying the marines there ''hostile fire
pay,'' contended that ''the President has, in a sense, refused to obey the
law.''

''The situation today in Lebanon can be described in no other words than one of
hostilities,'' Mr. Long went on. ''Any 9-year-old kid watching television can
see our people in combat, but the President of the United States doesn't see
this as combat.''

The White House has sought this week to defuse the rising frustration without
using the War Powers Act, for fear that a vote under that act would raise
constitutional issues and possibly tie the President's hands in Lebanon even if,
as most members expect, Congress approved the Marine presence.

Privately, Administration officials have been exploring whether the Senate
Majority Leader, Howard H. Baker Jr., or others would sponsor a more general
resolution endorsing the President's policy in Lebanon without invoking the War
Powers Act.

Likened to 'a Blank Check'

But Congressional leadership sources said they doubted this approach would
satisfy a majority of Congress as the fighting in Lebanon grows. Mr. Long said a
broad resolution would be ''a blank check'' like the Gulf of Tonkin resolution,
which President Johnson repeatedly used to justify American military involvement
in Vietnam without a formal declaration of war.

Although the recent fighting has been mainly in the Beirut area, both
Republicans and Democrats in Congress are concerned that it will spread.

Today, Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, sidestepped questions about
whether the American shelling of the Druse positions marked an escalation of the
conflict there.

''The return-of-fire decision was made by the local commander,'' Mr. Speakes
said. ''The President is fully aware, fully concerned. United States personnel
do have the authority to defend themselves against hostile fire.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of U.S. helicopter

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN PROPOSES SEX BIAS CHANGES

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 700 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 8


President Reagan, under criticism that he is insensitive to women's issues,
proposed today to eliminate sexually discriminatory language from a number of
Federal laws.

William Bradford Reynolds, the Assistant Attorney General in charge of the
Justice Department's civil rights division, said, ''That's right,'' when he was
asked if most of the proposed changes were merely cosmetic. But he said the
Reagan Administration's total program for eradicating sex discrimination through
forceful litigation, changes in current laws and proposals for new legislation
were ''an impressive record'' that should be considered an alternative to the
proposed Federal equal rights amendment sought by feminists.

Mr. Reagan has been accused again and again in recent months by numerous women,
including some in his own Republican Party, that he has not sought actively to
end sex discrimination. This, and his opposition to the rights measure, have
been linked to the growing perception that he is far less popular among women
than among men.

Reagan Approves Most Moves

Two weeks ago Barbara Honegger, a Justice Department aide who was working on a
project to identify sexually discriminatory laws, quit her $37,000-a-year job
after terming the program a ''sham.'' Responding, the President announced in San
Diego on Aug. 26 that he had instructed the Justice Department to speed up the
review of laws and to have ''specific recommendations on my desk for discussion
immediately upon my return to Washington.''

Meeting today with his Cabinet Council on Legal Equity, the President reviewed
the Justice document and approved most of the proposed changes.

He rejected the Justice Department proposals for changing several laws that
favor women. These include a requirement that the President must appoint a woman
as director of the Women's Bureau of the Department of Labor and a requirement
that one of eight national officers of the federally chartered organization, the
American Veterans of World War II, Korea and Vietnam, be a woman.

The President and the Justice Department agreed, however, that no changes be
made in laws barring women from being drafted and from serving in combat. ''The
President strongly feels that women should not be sent into combat,'' said Larry
Speakes, the White House spokesman. ''That's bedrock Reaganism.''

140 Items Cited in Report

The Justice Department document identified 140 statutes or related groups of
laws with sex-related distinctions. Of these, 24 have already been corrected,
and 51 would be corrected by a bill, sponsored by Senator Bob Dole, Republican
of Kansas, that the President has endorsed.

Mr. Reagan is proposing to correct 47 of the other laws specifying sex. Typical
are laws that expressly include privileges to widows but not widowers,
references to ''able-bodied men'' and a reference to the President of the United
States and his wife or widow ''until her remarriage.''

Judy Goldsmith, president of the National Organization for Women, termed the
President's proposals ''painfully inadequate.'' ''It is a response that is so
inadequate it is either arrogant or ignorant,'' she said. ''The President has
consistently refused to support those tools that would help women win equality,
such as E.R.A., affirmative action and legislation that would give women greater
access to equality in education.''

Attorney General Responds

In submitting the report, Attorney General William French Smith said:

''In recent months, the Administration has come under attack for an alleged
insensitivity to the interests and rights of women. Our critics have charged us
with lax enforcement and narrow readings of laws prohibiting sex discrimination;
unwillingness to appoint women to significant judicial and executive positions;
and failure to follow through on our promises to identify and eliminate
gender-based discrimination in Federal law.''

''Although there is room for improvement in almost any aspect of governmental
activity,'' he continued, ''most of this criticism is unjustified. In terms of
enforcement of the laws against sex discrimination, the Administration's record
surpasses that of the prior administration.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of William Bradford Reynolds

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

RESTAURANT

BYLINE: By Mimi Sheraton

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1419 words


Exotic cuisines at modest prices.  ALTHOUGH New York restaurants are
unquestionably the most expensive in the country, it is also true that the city
offers the widest and most diverting assortment of inexpensive eating places.
Two cases in point are the restaurants reviewed today, one Vietnamese, the other
Hungarian; together they prove that it is possible to eat for about $10 to $12 a
person, or even less, and still do so with style.

Walk down the steep stairway to the Viet-Nam Restaurant on Doyers Street in
Chinatown, and you will find yourself in a small, informal, though neat and
orderly dining room. Calendar-style paintings of Saigon scenes are decorative
and poignant touches. The young waiters are engagingly polite and helpful,
explaining dishes and how they should be eaten. Order the grilled ground shrimp
packed around sticks of sugar cane, and the waiter explains about rolling them
in thin rice- flour crepes and garnishing them with lime juice or hot sauce.
Whether as appetizers or main courses, salads of shrimp or shrimp and pork are
based on shredded cabbage and fragrant fish sauce, and the waiter suggests that
hot chili sauce be added and the dish stirred before it is eaten. Satays, small
pieces of meat grilled on bamboo skewers, are suitable as appetizers or main
courses; among the best are grilled pork on a stick and tiny nuggets of
lemon-scented chicken.

Soups are huge, and most of the Vietnamese customers eat bowls of these meat,
vegetable and noodle combinations that look large enough to serve four. Along
with the soup, they nibble on side orders of fiery fried shrimp or the tender,
grilled spiced beef cubes that are said to come with fresh vegetables, which
turn out to be sliced tomato and iceberg lettuce. The beef soup with rice we
tried had a flat flavor, but sour shrimp soup with lemon grass, celery, tomato
and browned onions was lovely, especially with a little hot sauce.

Large shrimp are fine, but the tiny variety have on all visits reeked of iodine,
indicating staleness. Those shrimp spoil such otherwise intriguing dishes as
imperial fried rice and crisp fried squid curled around a shrimp stuffing.

The best main courses include batter-dipped fried frogs legs sprinkled with lime
juice, salt and pepper; hotly spiced sauteed squid satays with onions, and
savory packets of grape leaves filled with grilled beef and topped with chopped
peanuts. Beef stew in a rich tomato-beef sauce is satisfying plain or bolstered
with rice or wheat noodles, and the wide, chewy backbone nerve simmered with it
adds flavor and body. Curried chicken in a watery broth and fried fish (a frozen
or dried, imported pomfret) leave much to be desired, and so do the dry and
tough beef satays.

A number of more elaborate dishes on the menu were unavailable on four visits.
An interesting oddity is the listing of French bread as an a la carte item at 60
cents, which is ordered by many Vietnamese; the practice is a holdover from the
days when the French ruled what was then Indochina.

Canned fruits are the only desserts. Beer is on hand, and so are soft drinks.
Our dinners ran $10 to $12 a person with tips, but those with modest appetites
can have dinner for $8.


With cold weather ahead, the hearty Hungarian dinners at $10 and $11 at the
romantic little Bristol Restaurant on Second Avenue, between 84th and 85th
Streets, should be welcome. Informal but atmospheric, with candles and
stained-glass lampshades, the Bristol dishes up home-style meals that can be
very good if you choose carefully.

Learn your way around this menu, and you can do very well at these modest
prices. As a rule of thumb, avoid anything made with a cream or near- cream
sauce. That means no chicken or livers with paprikash sauce, or chicken or veal
with mushroom sauce or cream gravy. Roast chicken had an unpleasant reheated
flavor on two visits, and vegetable soup has been thin and watery.

Instead you might begin with the fragrant chicken soup with noodles, go on to a
wide, crisp Wiener schnitzel garnished with galuska noodles, which are like
sp"atzle, or with home-fried potatoes (send them back if they are cold) and end
with freshly made cheese strudel or palascinta crepes and coffee, all for
$10.95. In addition, you will be served a crisp fresh cucumber salad and halfway
decent rye bread, which may be marbled with pumpernickel. Other good main
courses on the $9.95 and $10.95 dinner include lean, moist roast duck with
brandied and cinnamon-flavored stewed apples; Transylvanian goulash, made with
veal or beef and heaped on sauerkraut with sour cream, and plain veal goulash.
Boiled beef comes in a big, lean tender chunk, and braised pork chops with a
paprika tomato sauce that includes peppers, onions and sausages is a dish hefty
enough to be shared by two.

Several appetizers may be ordered in larger portions as main courses. Among the
best are stuffed pepper, stuffed cabbage and crunchy fried chicken livers.
Sausage with peppers and onions in a tomato and paprika sauce can be appetizer
or main course. Breaded mushroom fritters are delicious and can be shared as an
appetizer.

Although there is an extra charge on the dinner for sour-cherry soup and for
goulash soup, with its paprika-bright broth and chunks of tender boiled beef and
potatoes, they are worth trying.

Cooked vegetables are dismal at Bristol, and so are the canned green peas atop
otherwise pleasant garlic-flavored sauteed veal slices.

Cheese strudel, the only kind of strudel that was available on our visits, was
pleasant, although the pastry could have been flakier. Palacsinta filled with
ground walnuts or apricots were fine at three dinners, but limp and tasteless at
one lunch. Cheese-filled pancakes were consistently and inexplicably salty.

Imported beers are available along with a few inexpensive wines, the best of
which is Egri Bikaver at $10.75.

Staff members are polite and want to please; slow service seems the fault of the
kitchen.

A la Carte

Last week, Ottomanelli's Steak and Wild Game Restaurant, at 439 East 82d Street
(744-9600), was given a rating of one star. The review did not emphasize enough
of the positive elements that led to that rating. These include first-rate
steaks, lamb and veal chops, roast beef, rack of lamb and shrimp scampi
Proven,cal, as well as excellent classic potato and onion accompaniments. Also
recommended are smoked trout, shrimp cocktail, smoked cornish hen, fettuccine
Alfredo and, for dessert, tartufo and chocolate layer cake.

Viet-Nam Restaurant

v

11 Doyers Street, between the Bowery and Pell Street, 964-0890.

Atmosphere: Small, bright and informal downstairs dining room; friendly and
helpful service.

Recommended dishes: Imperial roll with shrimp and pork, imperial roll with pork,
shrimp and pork salad, chicken salad, sour shrimp soup, beef stew with tomato
sauce, shrimp on sugar cane, fried shrimp Vietnamese style, fried frogs' legs,
satay squid, spiced beef cubes with fresh vegetables, grilled beef in grape
leaf, grilled pork on a stick, lemon chicken.

Prices: Lunch and dinner, a la carte, with main courses $3 to $12.

Credit Cards: Visa and Mastercard.

Hours: Sunday through Thursday, 11 A.M. to 10:30 P.M.; Friday and Saturday, 11
A.M. to 11 P.M.

Reservations: Necessary on weekends.

Bristol Restaurant

v

1636 Second Avenue, between 84th and 85th Streets, 988- 1424.

Atmosphere: Casual, homey and atmospheric litte restaurant; staff is polite,
efficient and accommodating, but kitchen is often slow.

Recommended dishes: Stuffed pepper, stuffed cabbage, breaded chicken livers,
lecso with sausages, fried mushrooms, chicken noodle soup, sour cherry soup,
goulash soup, Transylvanian veal or beef goulash with sauerkraut, plain veal or
beef goulash, boiled beef with horseradish, roast duck with fruit on the side,
Wiener schnitzel, pork chops Hungarian style, palacsinta (crepes) with walnuts,
apricots or cheese fillings, cheese strudel.

Prices: Complete lunch, $4.50; lunch and dinner, a la carte, with main courses
$8.50 to $11.50; complete three-course dinner, $9.95 to $13.50 (includes
coffee).

Credit Cards: All major cards.

Hours: Lunch, Friday, Saturday and Sunday, noon to 3:30 P.M.; dinner, daily, 4
P.M. to midnight.

Reservations: Recommended on weekends.

What the stars mean: (None) Poor to fair
v Good
vv Very good
vvv Excellent
vvvv Extraordinary

These ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food and price in relation to
comparable establishments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 10, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

5 FILMS WITH POLITICAL STATEMENTS DUE IN FALL

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 2427 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Sept. 9


Five new movies dealing with sensitive political and social issues will reach
movie theaters this fall, all in an eight-week period. Their release is
considered noteworthy by the film industry because in the last six years only
about half a dozen Hollywood movies have addressed such highly charged issues.

In the view of people familiar with the films, two of the five are critical of
American business practices. The third is pro-Sandinista, the fourth leans to
the Palestinian side, and the fifth - the only one expected to appeal to
conservatives - treats antinuclear protesters as Soviet dupes.

No one in the industry is prepared to say if five such films make a trend, but
the box-office results of these movies will be watched closely by movie
executives. If they are successful, a rash of films with strong political points
of view might well result.

Middle Eastern Question

The most controversial of the five is likely to be Orion's ''Under Fire,''
starring Nick Nolte and Gene Hackman as journalists covering the civil war in
Nicaragua that ended in the overthrow of the Government of Gen. Anastasio Somoza
Debayle in 1979.  The film explicitly takes the side of the victorious
Sandinistas and may be the only American movie in recent decades to side with a
foreign government against which the United States has aligned itself.

Universal's ''Hanna K.,'' a French- produced, English-language drama directed by
Constantine Costa-Gavras, the director of ''Missing'' and ''Z,'' asks whether
Palestinians can get justice from the Israelis and answers negatively.

Warner Brothers' ''Deal of the Century,'' starring Chevy Chase as an arms
merchant selling American weapons to underdeveloped countries, is a black
comedy. It is described by its producer, Bud Yorkin, as ''a 'Dr. Strangelove'
about the arms industry and a reasonably strong statement on the insanity of the
arms race.'' He added, ''We depict arms shows where bazookas and antitank guns
are sold like refrigerators or television sets.''

A fourth new movie with political overtones is ABC Films' ''Silkwood,'' which
stars Meryl Streep as Karen Silkwood, a laboratory technician and union activist
who died under mysterious circumstances after charging that she had evidence
that plutonium fuel rods manufactured by a Kerr- McGee Corporation nuclear
processing plant in Oklahoma were defective.

''The Final Option'' is an English movie based on the 1980 siege of the Iranian
Embassy in London by terrorists. The movie stars Judy Davis, the Australian
actress who appeared in ''My Brilliant Career.'' It is basically a thriller, but
it has changed the facts of the real event to make its terrorists not a group
protesting the treatment of the Arab minority in Iran but a band opposed to
nuclear weapons that is manipulated by the Soviet Union.

Frank Yablans, vice chairman of M-G-M/U.A., the studio releasing ''The Final
Option,'' said that former Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., a member of
the studio's board of directors, had arranged screenings of the movie in
Washington but had no part in the studio's decision to release the film this
fall. The film has won praise from such political conservatives as Secretary of
Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and Senator Paul Laxalt, Republican of Nevada.

Hollywood Views Assailed

Euan Lloyd, the producer of ''The Final Option,'' said: ''I've been irritated by
a strong presence within the film colony of films with an anti-Establishment
message. In 'WarGames,' the general is made to look a bloody idiot. I'd like to
make films as politically strong as I can - not as Commie-bashing but to
counteract movies like 'The China Syndrome,' 'Missing' and 'Gandhi.' ''

One Hollywood executive, David Chasman, who has been a vice president of
production at United Artists, Columbia and M-G-M, said of the politically
sensitive cluster, ''Perhaps enough time has passed to erase the memory of the
box-office failures of the last set of socially and politically oriented
films.''

It is not that Hollywood is afraid of controversy, people in the industry say,
but that Hollywood is afraid of controversy that doesn't make money. The right
controversy has often made money - including, in recent years, ''The China
Syndrome,'' the film with Jane Fonda and Jack Lemmon about the alleged lack of
safety in nuclear power plants, and ''The Deer Hunter,'' Michael Cimino's film
with Robert De Niro and Meryl Streep about the war in Vietnam.

A Statement That's Entertaining

''We believe that if you can find a movie that makes a statement and is
entertaining, a film that's a little deeper than frivolous, it's an asset,''
said Michael Eisner, president of Paramount Pictures. ''The managers of movie
companies don't sit around saying, 'How do I feel about El Salvador?' They
respond to a director who wants to make a particular film. If we feel that
particular film is wise financially, we'll do it.''

Daniel Melnick, the former head of production at Columbia Pictures who developed
''The China Syndrome,'' took a different view. He said:

''The movie came out of my concern about the dangers of nuclear energy as an
everyday part of our lives, about the belief that nuclear power was a panacea.
The fact that the movie coincided with the political convictions of its
producer, Michael Douglas, and myself didn't make me forget my obligation to
make 'The China Syndrome' exciting melodrama rather than a polemic.''

Mr. Eisner and Mr. Chasman are agreed that, in Mr. Eisner's words, ''If 'Under
Fire' is a smash hit, everybody will be doing political movies.''

Hollywood has, at various times, emphasized movies with political and social
messages. During the 1930's the slogan of Warner Brothers was ''combining good
citizenship with good picture making.'' From ''I Was a Fugitive From a Chain
Gang'' in 1933 to ''Mission to Moscow'' in 1943, Warners handled many topical
news stories, sometimes advertised as ''Torn From Today's Headlines.'' During
the 1940's, 20th Century-Fox also made movies with social themes, including
''Pinky'' (1949) and ''Gentleman's Agreement'' (1947), which were, respectively,
relatively daring exposes of racism and anti-Semitism.

Socially Alienated Youths

After the success of ''Easy Rider'' in 1969, movies about socially alienated
youth flooded theaters. ''However, those movies - such films as 'The Strawberry
Statement' and 'The Magic Garden of Stanley Sweetheart' - were not intended as
political ferment,'' recalled Mr. Chasman, who is now an independent producer.
''They were simply the equivalent of bikini movies, made by a panic-stricken set
of studio managers who were doing what they thought teen-agers wanted.''

Recently, Hollywood has relied more openly and fervently than usual on escapist
entertainment. Many current movies are based on comic strip characters, take
place in outer space, are sequels to other successful movies or are deliberately
tasteless comedies with considerable sexual content.

The serious movies, a minority, deal not with society but with psychological
inner space - a father becoming a mother to his son in ''Kramer vs. Kramer,''
the Academy Award- winning best picture of 1979, or a damaged family groping
toward healing itself in ''Ordinary People,'' winner of the Academy Award in
1980.

A flurry of movies attempting to explore the Vietnam War - including ''Coming
Home,'' ''Apocalypse Now,'' and the Academy Award winner for 1978, ''The Deer
Hunter'' - were made years after the war was over.

'FTA' and 'China Syndrome'

There have been exceptions. In 1971, ''FTA,'' Jane Fonda's filmed record of live
performances that she and Donald Sutherland gave at Army bases, argued the
futility of the Vietnam War. In 1979, ''The China Syndrome'' reached theaters a
few weeks before an accident at the Three Mile Island nuclear plant in
Pennsylvania became a subject of national tension and debate over nuclear
energy.

Mr. Costa-Gavras's 1982 film ''Missing'' propounded a thesis that the United
States Government participated in a cover-up of the murder of an American
citizen. Jack Lemmon played a conservative American businessman who starts out
believing in the American authorities but becomes radicalized when his son
disappears during a civil war in an unnamed South American country. The country
is obviously intended to be Chile.

Although Mr. Costa-Gavras's new film, ''Hanna K.,'' does not treat its Israeli
characters with the same hostility he reserved for the American officials in
''Missing,'' the movie's sympathies lie mostly with the Palestinians.

''Hanna K.'' presents Israelis as arrogant but conscience-ridden masters whose
sense of fairness can be lost in their fear of Arab claims to Israel's soil.
Although the film was made almost entirely in Israel, the tough opening scene,
in which Israeli soldiers dynamite a Palestinian house, was shot in Italy.
''Hanna K.,'' which stars Jill Clayburgh, will be released at the end of this
month in New York and Los Angeles.

Taking Sides in Nicaragua

''Under Fire,'' a movie that even more explicitly takes sides, will be released
nationwide on Oct. 21 at a time when the Reagan Administration's support for
opponents of the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua is under debate.

The makers of ''Under Fire'' already have screened the film for Representative
Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachussets, who has co-sponsored a bill that
would prohibit the introduction of United States combat troops into Central
America without affirmative action by Congress. Mr. Markey hailed the film,
which he said would have a ''profound'' effect on public opinion because ''it
will give the public at large an insight into the way Central American politics
work and because it makes clear the indigenous social and economic conditions
that spawned the revolution in Nicaragua.''

On Sept. 21, Orion and the National Press Club will screen ''Under Fire'' in
Washington. What the studio calls ''Capitol Hill opinion-makers'' from both
political parties will be invited.

''Under Fire'' began life four years ago when its producer, Jonathan Taplin,
became ''fascinated'' by the work of the young correspondents who covered the
war in Vietnam. With development money from United Artists, Mr. Taplin said that
he and Clay Frohman, a screenwriter, and Frank Roddam, a director, developed a
script about ''what it feels like to be out of action if you're a war junkie.''

Changing Views at Studio

''When United Artists changed regimes, Reagan was coming in as President and the
new regime at the studio thought the movie was too political,'' said Mr. Taplin.
A new director, Roger Spottiswoode, and a new writer, Ronald Shelton, reworked
the script, in the process making it even more political. The movie was now set
in Nicaragua and what Mr. Taplin calls ''the notion of a crisis of conscience''
was introduced.

The final movie describes the decision of two journalists to shed their
neutrality and join the battle against the Nicaraguan dictator because ''once in
a while one has a chance to do something that will change history rather than
just record it.''

According to Mr. Taplin, the creators of ''Under Fire'' were influenced
philosophically by Philip Knightley's nonfiction book on war journalism, ''The
First Casualty.'' The book's title refers to an observation by the late Senator
Hiram Johnson that ''The first casualty when war comes is truth.''

When both Nick Nolte and Gene Hackman agreed to star in ''Under Fire'' and their
agent, Sue Mengers, helped structure financial deals that allowed the movie to
be made for a reasonable price, Mr. Taplin took the project to Orion Pictures.

Foreign Sales Considered

''It was so inexpensive - $8.5 million - that Orion couldn't refuse it,'' Mr.
Taplin said. ''And we guaranteed completion if the budget went over $8.5
million. Orion was eager to do a picture with foreign sales potential because it
was financing pictures with money from foreign distributors.''

Mike Medavoy, vice president and head of production at Orion, was quick to
describe ''Under Fire'' as ''an exciting topical story,'' rather than as a
political film. ''Unlike a Costa-Gavras film like 'Missing,' which has a
political intent, this is a well-told story that has political content,'' he
said.

''Silkwood,'' the first movie to be directed by Mike Nichols in eight years, is
carefully described by John Scanlon, a publicist representing the film, as ''a
movie about workers who are exposed to perilous conditions in a factory owned by
very powerful people.'' After Miss Silkwood's death, her parents sued,
contending that she had been contaminated by plutonium at the plant where she
worked. In May 1979, they won a $10.2 million judgment. That judgment was
overturned by an appeals court and is now on appeal to the United States Supreme
Court.

'Lockheed Scandal' Recalled

'' 'Deal of the Century' deals with all the bribery and chicanery in the
aerospace industry,'' said its director, William Friedkin. ''Their motto is
'Make the sale at any cost.' Almost every incident depicted in the film is true.
Most of the high-priced, advanced weaponry doesn't work. When a weapon fails,
the military simply revises the conditions of the test.''

Mr. Friedkin said that the title ''refers to the famous Lockheed bribery scandal
that nearly brought down the Japanese Government.'' He was referring to
Lockheed's admission that in the 1970's the company paid about $38 million in
bribes to foreign government officials and others.

In addition to several thrillers that simply use antinuclear terrorism or the
cold war as background, there are a few other 1983 movies with political
overtones.

Much of the movie ''Daniel'' derives from the case of Julius and Ethel
Rosenberg, who were executed for atomic espionage conspiracy in 1953. The E. L.
Doctorow-Sidney Lumet film, while making no claim to being historically
accurate, moves from Communist demonstrations in 1938 to anti-Vietnam War
protests in the 60's and winds up at a massive 1982 demonstration in Central
Park against nuclear weapons.

''WarGames,'' one of the box-office hits of the summer, intends little more than
commercial entertainment but manages to focus attention on whether reliance on
dehumanized technology will make a nuclear Doomsday inevitable.

''The Right Stuff,'' the story of the first seven astronauts, will be truly
political when it comes out next month, because one of its heroes, Senator John
Glenn, is running for President.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Gene Hackman and Nick Nolte, Meryl Streep, Jill Clayburgh

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SATELLITES MAIN SOURCE OF PHOTO DATA FOR U.S.

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 937 words


Soviet contentions that the Boeing 747 shot down by Soviet fighters on Sept. 1
was a spy plane are scoffed at by American and NATO specialists and others who
know the capacity and uses of United States reconnaissance satellites and
planes.

Marshal Nikolai V. Ogarkov, chief of the Soviet General Staff, at a news
conference in Moscow on Friday, accepted the ''spy plane'' concept and also said
an American RC-135 long-range reconnaissance plane had been found on the route
of the 747.

The United States and NATO specialists said satellite pictures were the mainstay
of visual intelligence. Pictures taken from satellites flying at 100 or more
miles altitude after magnification have in one instance shown the bolts on the
deck of a Soviet cruiser.

In another picture, a man reading a newspaper on the street of a north Russian
town was seen in the picture to be perusing Pravda. It is known to be Pravda,
they note, because the nameplate is clearly visible in the satellite photograph.


U.S. Using Blackbird Plane

Why, specialists ask, go to the trouble of rigging a 747 with cameras when the
satellites tell it all? In any event, they said, the United States has other
aerial means, such as the SR-71 Blackbird, for strategic reconnaissance. The
Blackbird has a maximum speed for short distances of 2,310 miles per hour and an
operational ceiling of over 80,000 feet.

Marshal Ogarkov's allusions to the 747 as a spy plane caused speculation among
intelligence sources about how much the Soviet Air Force knows about the
capacity of the satellites.

The United States thus far has refused to allow publication of any satellite
pictures because American technology in this field is believed to be far ahead
of that of the Russians. In the international intelligence business, however, it
is taken for granted that there is no major Soviet base or troop command center
that has not been photographed by the satellites.

''We know what they have, everything is known except their intentions,'' one
official said, ''but there is no sense in telling them exactly how we know.''

RC-135 for Electronic Spying

Marshal Ogarkov also said an American long-range RC-135 had been found on the
747's route east of Kamchatka.

United States sources, while conceding that RC-135's and other planes fly along
the periphery of Soviet airspace, said they were not intended to take pictures,
but for electronic monitoring of missile tests to learn whether the missiles are
in accord with Soviet-American arms agreements.

Soviet reconnaissance planes and intelligence ships similarly monitor American
missile tests in the Pacific.

Many Soviet missiles land in the Sea of Okhotsk between Kamchatka and the
Siberian mainland.

Soviet emphasis on the 747's flying close to two military bases confirms reports
of the importance the Soviet armed forces now give to their Far Eastern
installations.

One reason is that Soviet nuclear submarines of the Pacific Fleet are now based
at Sovetskaya Gavan on the Siberian mainland west of Sakhalin.

Allusion to Petropavlovsk

Marshal Ogarkov also mentioned at the news conference that the 747 was close to
a strategic naval base on the Kamchatka Peninsula. Intelligence sources believe
he was referring to Petropavlovsk.

Over the last five years this once modest base has been expanded. Depots, fuel
tanks and underground ammunition storage have been built. Surface-to-air
missiles and interceptor planes have been deployed in and around the base.

At the same time the Russians have built a number of naval air bases in the
area.

The Japanese Defense Agency in a recent report said the Soviet Union had
deployed 2,100 planes, including 440 bombers and 150 reconnaissance planes, in
the Far Eastern Command. The bomber force includes at least 70 Tupolev Backfire
bombers. This is a supersonic bomber with a range estimated at 5,000 miles.

One reason for the high number of reconnaissance planes in the
Kamchatka-Sakhalin region, intelligence officers said, is that they are required
for reconnaissance of American missile tests and of United States and other
naval deployments in the Sea of Japan and for rotation through the Soviet base
at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam.

Marshal Ogarkov also made a point of the fact that both the RC-135 and the 747
were operating in ''the dead of night'' and at ''high altitudes.'' This should
not have surprised him, intelligence sources said. The 747 was on a regularly
scheduled flight and reconnaissance planes can operate at night and at high
altitudes when they are concerned with radar intelligence.

The Issue of Using a Decoy

Was the RC-135 using the 747 as a decoy that would force the Russians to
illuminate their radar installations? This question has been asked by several
nonmilitary experts on electronic warfare. It is possible, an Air Force officer
said, but not probable. He said the location of the radar installations had been
registered in the past by RC- 135's and had certainly been picked up by
satellite photographs.

United States and NATO experts feel Marshal Ogarkov showed a certain na"ivete in
his comments.

''Is he really trying to say that, with all the other means the West has, we
would go to the trouble of using an easily identifiable 747 on an espionage
mission?'' a Canadian source said.

Some officers familiar with the world of international intelligence said the
marshal might not be as uninformed as he seemed to be about the realities of
electronic intelligence.

They suggested that some of his comments might have been intended to elicit
information from American and other sources.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of investigators checking piece of wreckage

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICAL ISSUES LEND SPECIAL DRAMA TO MOVIES

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2171 words


Filmmakers, perhaps taking their lead from the widely popular television docu-
dramas of recent seasons, not to mention the kudos garnered by ''Gandhi'' last
year, seem to be making a marked departure from the heroics and outright fantasy
that have dominated movie screens of late, with the result that political issues
figure unusually prominently in many upcoming films. In fact, the topics of many
of this fall's major movies will be topical indeed, with dramas about an
American photojournalist in Nicaragua, a woman lawyer in Israel who falls in
love with a Palestinian, a band of anti-nuclear terrorists who hold a group of
American officials hostage, a group of veterans who go back to Vietnam to rescue
their buddies from a prison camp, and the death of a worker in a nuclear plant.
These are hardly laughing matters, so it's just as well that the fall schedule
also includes an unusual abundance of comic relief. Chief among the comedies are
a Steve Martin movie with a screenplay by Neil Simon, and a remake of an Ernst
Lubitsch classic, ''To Be or Not to Be,'' starring Anne Bancroft and Mel Brooks.

The season gets off to its unofficial start with the New York Film Festival,
which opens on Sept. 23 with ''The Big Chill,' written and directed by Lawrence
Kasdan. This story of a group of college friends and their warm and lasting
friendships stars William Hurt, Mary Kay Place, Kevin Kline, Glenn Close, Meg
Tilley, Tom Berenger, Jobeth Williams and Jeff Goldblum. The Festival's closing
night selection is another American film, Robert Altman's adaptation of
''Streamers,'' the play by David Rabe. American filmmakers are unusually well
represented at the Festival this year, with a lineup that also includes Francis
Coppola's ''Rumble Fish,'' starring Mickey Rourke, Matt Dillon and Dennis
Hopper, and Jonathan Kaplan's ''Heart Like a Wheel,'' about the racing-car
driver Shirley Muldowney.

Also in the Festival will be two films that have already proved controversial -
Zsolt Kezdi-Kovacs' ''Forbidden Love'' (about a brother- sister affair and the
societal disapproval that it generates), and Ann Hui's ''Boat People,'' set in
Danang three years after the fall of the Thieu government. Although this year's
lineup includes more new directors than ever before, it will also feature works
by such Festival veterans as Jean-Luc Godard (''Passion''), Alain Resnais
(''Life Is a Bed of Roses''), Andrzej Wajda (''Danton''), Alain Tanner (''In the
White City'') and Robert Bresson (''L'Argent'').

Among the numerous fall films with political themes will be ''Under Fire,''
directed by Roger Spottis- woode, in which Nick Nolte plays a photojournalist
during the 1979 revolution in Nicaragua. Opening in October, it co-stars Joanna
Cassidy and Gene Hackman as American foreign correspondents. Later in the
season, Mr. Hackman will also be seen in ''Last River to Cross,'' directed by
Ted Kotcheff, which is about an American colonel searching for a son who's
missing in action in Vietnam. Costa-Gavras's ''Hanna K.,'' opening in this
month, will feature Jill Clayburgh as a lawyer living in Israel. While separated
from her Parisian husband, and having an affair with an Israeli colleague, she
falls in love with a Palestinian.

Also on a topical note is ''The Final Option,'' directed by Ian Sharp, which
will tell of a group of activists, led by Judy Davis, who capture a group of
American officials in London. Richard Widmark stars as the American Secretary of
State. ''Silkwood,'' directed by Mike Nichols and scheduled for Christmas
release, will star Meryl Streep as Karen Silkwood, a nuclear plant worker who
died under mysterious circumstances.

Among movies with less current, though still political themes, there's ''Beyond
the Limit,'' formerly titled ''The Honorary Consul'' and based on Graham
Greene's novel set in South America. Directed by John MacKenzie and opening this
month, it stars Richard Gere, Michael Caine and Bob Hoskins, who was also the
star of Mr. MacKenzie's ''Long Good Friday.''


The season's foremost Cold War drama may well be ''Gorky Park,'' set in Moscow
and starring William Hurt, Lee Marvin, Joanna Pacula and Brian Dennehy. Based on
Martin Cruz Smith's best seller about a triple murder near the Kremlin, it was
directed by Michael Apted and opens around Christmas. Sam Peckinpah's ''Osterman
Weekend,'' based on a Robert Ludlum novel and due in October, will star Rutger
Hauer and Burt Lancaster in the story of a television newsman who takes on the
C. I. A.

Unusual occupations to be seen on the screen this fall are an astronaut (Philip
Kaufman's ''Right Stuff,'' based on Tom Wolfe's book and starring Sam Shepard,
Scott Glenn, Barbara Hershey and Dennis Quaid; October), a writer (Mary
Steenburgen playing the novelist Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings in Martin Ritt's
''Cross Creek,'' also starring Rip Torn, Malcolm McDowell and Peter Coyote;
September), pirate (''Savage Islands,'' with Tommy Lee Jones playing Captain
Bully Hayes, a 19th-century rogue in the South Pacific; November), and Lord of
the Apes (''Greystoke,'' a version of the Tarzan legend starring Christopher
Lambert, and directed by Hugh Hudson; December).

Some perennially popular movie occupations will also be represented, among them
gangland kingpin (Al Pacino in Brian De Palma's new verion of ''Scarface'';
December) and spy (Sean Connery returning to his 007 role in ''Never Say Never
Again,'' co-starring Barbara Carrera and Max Von Sydow; October). Surely the
most offbeat careers to be depicted this fall are those of wolf expert in the
Arctic and Playboy centerfold. Charles Martin Smith will star in ''Never Cry
Wolf,'' which was directed by Carroll (''The Black Stallion'') Ballard and opens
in October. Mariel Hemingway will play Dorothy Stratten, the actress-model
murdered by her estranged husband, in Bob Fosse's ''Star 80,'' which also
features Eric Roberts, Carroll Baker and Cliff Robertson. It opens in November.

Among the season's numerous comedies will be a remake of ''To Be or Not to Be,''
the delightful Ernst Lubitsch comedy that starred Jack Benny and Carole Lombard,
and will now feature Mel Brooks and Anne Bancroft as members of a Shakespearean
acting troupe. It's directed by Alan Johnson, who choreographed Mr. Brooks's
inimitable ''Springtime for Hitler'' and ''Inquisition'' numbers. ''To Be or Not
to Be'' is scheduled for Dec. 16, and so is ''The Lonely Guy,'' starring Steve
Martin as Bruce Jay Friedman's hapless hero. Neil Simon wrote the screenplay,
Arthur Hiller directed, and the cast includes Charles Grodin, Steve Lawrence and
Judith Ivey. Then there's ''The Deal of the Century,'' directed by William
Friedkin and starring Chevy Chase, Sigourney Weaver and Gregory Hines. Due in
October, it's described as ''a comedy-drama about the military-industrial
complex,'' and has a screenplay by Paul (''Risky Business'') Brickman.


Not surprisingly, a lot of the fall comedies are aimed at teen-age audiences.
''Going Berserk'' was written and directed by David Steinberg, and features John
Candy and other members of the SCTV troupe. It's not to be confused with ''Get
Crazy,'' by Alan Arkush, which stars Daniel Stern and Malcolm McDowell and has a
rock and roll ambiance (there are cameos by Fabian and Bobby Sherman, among
others). These and the rock mystery ''Eddie and the Cruisers,'' about a rock
star's disappearance, are due early this fall. Less comical but also aimed at
young audiences are ''Two of a Kind,'' starring John Travolta and Olivia
Newton-John, about a couple forced by divine intervention to fall in love, which
is due at Christmas, and Ralph Bakshi's animated ''Fire and Ice,'' which is
scheduled for November.

Among the major actresses who'll have major roles this fall is Barbra Streisand,
who directs herself in ''Yentl,'' based on Isaac Bashevis Singer's tale of a
girl who must masquerade as a boy to get an education. ''Yentl'' is scheduled
for November. Shirley MacLaine and Debra Winger will play mother and daughter in
''Terms of Endearment,'' based on Larry McMurtry's novel and also starring Jack
Nicholson and John Lithgow. It opens in December. This month, Julie Christie can
be seen in James Ivory's ''Heat and Dust,'' which also stars Greta Scacchi and
has an Indian setting.

Fanny Ardant, the star of Francois Truffaut's ''Woman Next Door,'' will also be
seen in Mr. Truffaut's new comedy-thriller, entitled ''Vivement Dimanche,'' or
''Confidentially Yours.'' It co-stars Jean-Louis Trintignant and will open at
Christmas. Among the other major foreign films scheduled this season are ''The
Go Masters,'' a Chinese-Japanese co- production that has already been seen by
200 million viewers and that took top honors at the film festival in Montreal.
It tells of a game, interrupted by wars and other complications, that spans 40
years and three generations.


Chief among the occult topics that will be tackled this fall, apparently, is
clairvoyance. ''Dead Zone,'' directed by David Cronenberg from Stephen King's
novel, will star Christopher Walken, Brooke Adams and Martin Sheen in the story
of a man who emerges from a long coma and finds himself endowed with unusual
powers. Then there's Douglass Trumbull's ''Brainstorm,'' also starring Mr.
Walken plus the late Natalie Wood; this involves an invention that makes it
possible for one person to share fully in another person's experience. It opens
in October. December will bring ''The Keep,'' somehow mixing Gothic horror and a
World War II setting, and starring Ian McKellen, Jurgen Prochnow and Scott
Glenn. Christmas will bring ''Christine,'' from another Stephen King book, about
a car with a mind of its own.

Among the stage adaptations will be ''The Dresser,'' starring Albert Finney and
Tom Courtenay, and directed by Peter Yates (around Thanksgiving); ''Educating
Rita,'' with Michael Caine and Julie Walters, based on a London hit by Willy
Russell (September); and ''Romantic Comedy,'' starring Dudley Moore and Mary
Steenburgen, and directed by Arthur Hiller (October).

The season's less easily characterized prospects include ''The Man Who Loved
Women,'' a remake of the Truffaut film starring Burt Reynolds and directed by
Blake Edwards (December), and ''Crackers,'' Louis Malle's remake of ''Big Deal
on Madonna Street,'' starring Donald Sutherland, Jack Warden, Sean Penn and
Wallace Shawn (October).

Last and hardly least will be the release, at long last, of the five Alfred
Hitchcock films that have been withheld from distribution since shortly after
their initial engagements. Beginning with ''Rear Window,'' which will be shown
as part of the New York Film Festival, the other films that will make their very
welcome reappearances are ''The Man Who Knew Too Much,'' ''Rope,'' ''The Trouble
With Harry'' and the breathtaking ''Vertigo,'' one of the greatest of
Hitchcock's works. This revival will mark one of the major highlights of the
fall film season. That's one of the few things about it that can be predicted
with any certainty.

''The Big Chill.'' Written and directed by Lawrence Kasdan. Starring William
Hurt, Kevin Kline, Glenn Close, Mary Kay Place, Jeff Goldblum, Jobeth Williams,
Tom Berenger and Meg Tilley as a group of college friends who, years later,
still love one another and still listen to the same terrific music. New York
Film Festival.

''Streamers.'' Robert Altman's version of the play by David Rabe. Film Festival.


''Rumble Fish.'' Francis Coppola directs a tale of two young brothers involved
in a gang. Film Festival.

''Beyond The Limit.'' Directed by John Mackenzie, and based on Graham Greene's
novel ''The Honorary Consul.'' Sept. 30.

''Hanna K.'' Directed by Costa-Gavras, starring Jill Clayburgh as a woman
lawyer, living in Israel, who falls in love with a Palestinian. Sept. 30.

''Under Fire.'' Directed by Roger Spottiswoode. Nick Nolte plays an American
photojournalist embroiled in political upheaval in Nicaragua. October.

''The Right Stuff.'' Directed by Phillip Kaufman, derived from the book about
the Mercury astronauts by Tom Wolfe. October.

''Star 80.'' Bob Fosse's film about Playboy centerfold Dorothy Stratten, who was
murdered by her estranged husband. Early November.''

Yentl.'' Barbra Streisand stars in this version of Isaac Bashevis Singer's
story. Nov. 18.

''Silkwood.'' Meryl Streep plays a nuclear plant worker who died under
mysterious circumstances in this drama directed by Mike Nichols. December.

''Scarface.'' Directed by Brian De Palma. Al Pacino has the Paul Muni role in
this new version of the drama about a tough young immigrant who becomes a
powerful mobster. Dec. 9.

''To Be or Not to Be.'' Mel Brooks and Anne Bancroft as Shakespearean troupers,
in the roles first played by Jack Benny and Carole Lombard, in this remake of
Ernst Lubistch's wartime comedy. Dec. 16.

''Confidentially Yours.'' Comedy-thriller directed by Francois Truffaut,
starring Fanny Ardant and Jean-Louis Trintignant. December.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Debra Winger and Shirley MacLaine; photos of Al Pacino, Jill
Clayburgh, Joanna Cassidy and Nick Nolte; photo of Mel Brooks and Anne Bancroft;
photo of JoBeth Williams, Kevin Kline, William Hurt, Glenn Close

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THE BLOCKBUSTER TAKES OVER

BYLINE: By SALLY BEDELL SMITH

SECTION: Section 2; Page 35, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2248 words


This season, more than ever, the blockbuster event will spell the difference
between success or failure in prime time for the three major networks. And this
season, more than ever, ABC, CBS and NBC will feel the competitive heat from
cable services and ad hoc networks offering large- scale - and exclusive -
productions of their own.

That all these developments constitute no laughing matter to the networks may be
reflected in a decline in one of the mainstays of the home screen: the situation
comedy.

Following the enormous success last season of two mini-series, ''The Winds of
War'' and ''The Thorn Birds,'' both on ABC, all of the networks are filling
their schedules with what will amount to a total of a dozen mini-series,
including biographies of John F. Kennedy and George Washington, plus more than
75 made-for- TV films featuring such big-name performers as Albert Finney and
Jane Fonda. And ABC will have the ultimate big event: the Winter Olympic Games.

The networks' strategy, of course, is aimed at winning back disaffected viewers
who have been lured to the fare on cable services and independent channels. But
those competitors will also be seeking to expand their new-found hold on
viewers. Among the forthcoming prime-time events that ad hoc groups of
independent and network-affiliated stations will be offering are a four-hour
biography of Anwar Sadat, starring Lou Gossett as the late Egyptian leader, and
Laurence Olivier in both ''King Lear'' and an award-winning British production,
''A Voyage Round My Father,'' based on John Mortimer's account of his
relationship with his father, a blind barrister.


But perhaps the most provocative new fare will be found on cable and public
television. Home Box Office, now available to nearly 12 million subscribers
nationwide, will this season present its most ambitious slate of made-for-pay
films, nine in all, including ''The Far Pavilions,'' a six- hour mini-series set
in British Colonial India and starring Ben Cross, and ''Right of Way,'' with
Bette Davis and James Stewart as an elderly couple in love. Showtime, which
reaches 4.2 million subscribers, will offer ''A Case of Libel,'' a courtroom
drama starring Ed Asner and Daniel J. Travanti, and ''A Talent for Murder,'' a
mystery starring Angela Lansbury.

Public television continues to rely heavily on overseas imports for its dramatic
productions. ''Masterpiece Theater,'' for example, will present an assortment of
mini-series including a dramatization of ''The Citadel,'' A. J. Cronin's story
about an idealistic doctor from Wales, also starring Ben Cross, and ''Nancy
Astor,'' about the American socialite who became a member of Britain's
Parliament. The sixth season of ''The Shakespeare Plays'' opens Oct. 17 with
Nicol Williamson and Jane Lapotaire in ''Macbeth.''

The one notable exception to this current tendency in public television is the
''American Playhouse'' series, which will offer 27 new teleplays, including
Philip Roth's ''The Ghost Writer,'' I. B. Singer's ''The Cafeteria,'' a
production of Sam Shepard's ''True West'' and Eugene O'Neill's ''Hughie,''
starring Jason Robards.

But it is in public-affairs programming that PBS will offer the season's most
ambitious production: a 13-part retrospective of the Vietnam War, to begin in
early October. And there will be a new slate of its weekly ''Frontline,'' the
uneven if laudable documentary series of the past year. PBS has also picked up a
series produced by CBS Cable, which folded last year: ''A Walk Through the 20th
Century With Bill Moyers,'' 20 programs focusing on such topics as the
Depression, automobiles and World War II propaganda.

Under the ''Great Performances'' aegis will come ''Verdi,'' a seven- part
biography of the Italian composer, ''Alice in Wonderland,'' a re- mounting of
last season's short-lived Broadway revival, and four ballets choreographed by
Peter Martins to music by Igor Stravinsky. Operatic productions will include
Donizetti's ''Lucia di Lammermoor,'' with Joan Sutherland, and Verdi's ''Don
Carlo,'' with Placido Domingo and Grace Bumbry from the Metropolitan Opera.


In their efforts to attract the increasingly fickle audience, the three
commercial networks will be presenting a larger than ordinary number of special
events, including some that deal with sensitive topics. Indeed, several of their
television films could stir up political controversy: ''The Day After'' on ABC,
a graphic two- hour film about the aftermath of a nuclear attack, and ''Roses''
on NBC, a docudrama about a Catholic missionary and three young nuns slain in El
Salvador.

Other network films will try to be sexually provocative. These include NBC's
''Champagne Sessions,'' about a high-priced call girl, and CBS's ''Daddy's
Little Girl,'' which tells of an incestuous relationship between a father and
his daughter.

In their mini-series, the networks are looking for either the big historical
sweep (for example, ''The Last Days of Pompeii'' on ABC) or what Steve Mills,
CBS's vice president in charge of television films and miniseries, calls
''classy trash'': dramatizations of Sidney Sheldon's ''The Master of the Game''
on CBS and Judith Krantz's ''Princess Daisy'' on NBC.

Otherwise, the networks are playing it safe with their weekly series, many of
them little more than carbon copies of past successes. This year brings fewer
new weekly series than before - 22 compared to 25 last year. There will be more
crime fighters operating outside the law (modeled after NBC's successful ''The A
Team'') and more melodramas featuring large casts of characters with
intertwining lives and active libidos (after ''Dallas'' and ''Dynasty'').


Successful serial melodramas such as ''Dallas'' have become the most imitated
formulas in prime time - perhaps because the continuing plot- lines can trap
restless viewers into a weekly habit. The most promising of these, ''Bay City
Blues,'' uses the lineaments of its predecessor, ''Hill Street Blues'' (both are
produced by Steven Bochco of the MTM Company) by constructing realistic stories
around more than a dozen ensemble characters. The gimmick here is a minor-league
baseball team as a prism for mid-life crises and youthful ambitions.

A more conventional approach can be found in ''Hotel'' on ABC, which grafts the
glamorous trappings of a ''Dynasty'' onto the framework of a ''Love Boat''- a
continuing cast of regulars, in this case the employees of an elegant San
Francisco hotel, combined with a weekly contingent of visiting guest stars. But
while ''The Love Boat'' is light-hearted, ''Hotel'' takes itself seriously. In
the opening episode, Morgan Fairchild plays a high-priced call girl who is raped
by a group of teen-age boys attending their high school prom. Afterwards, the
manager of the hotel, James Brolin, says to the hooker, ''You were raped in my
hotel. They took something from both of us and I want to get it back.''

An even more brazen imitation occurs in ''For Love and Honor'' on NBC Friday
evenings at 10 P.M. The show picks up on ''An Officer and a Gentleman'' - even
down to the tough but compassionate black platoon sergeant and the opening scene
of two local girls cruising through a military base in their car.

A more frank treatment of sexuality can be found nearly across the board in the
10 P.M. time period. In ''For Love and Honor,'' lovers have passionate
assignations by moonlight on screen. And in ABC's ''Hotel,'' viewers will hear a
receptionist complaining to her boyfriend, the hotel porter, ''We haven't made
love in weeks.'' In crime-fighting shows, vigilantism will be the order of the
day. The most free-wheeling are ''The Rousters'' on NBC, about the gun-toting
descendants of Wyatt Earp, and ''Hardcastle and McCormick'' on ABC, about an
ex-convict racing-car driver who teams with an eccentric judge to fight for
justice sub rosa and after hours. Both shows are stippled with primitive humor
in the style of ''The A Team'' - no surprise since producer Stephen J. Cannell
created all three shows.


But perhaps the most striking trend of all this season is the apparent decline
in importance of the situation comedy - for years the key to success for the
networks. CBS has only six such shows this year compared to 10 last year. In
all, there are only eight new comedy entries on the prime-time schedule. These
run to ''warmedies'' - warm-hearted, traditional domestic relationships between
wholesome characters - or pure fantasies revolving around such devices as ghosts
and genies. Although lip service will be paid to contemporary mores, the thrust
of these programs is conservative. For the most part, they deal in sight gags
and outlandish situations rather than social commentary on everyday problems and
issues as ''Maude'' and ''All in the Family'' once did.

In addition, a number of this season's situation comedies echo with the voices
of past successes. ''After M*A*S*H'' will bring together Jamie Farr, Harry
Morgan and William Christopher from the long-running ''M*A*S*H.'' Their new
venue is a veterans' hospital following the Korean War. ''Jennifer Slept Here''
recalls ''Topper,'' with Ann Jillian starring as the whimsical ghost of a
Hollywood starlet who befriends a lonely young boy living in her former home.

And, finally, there is the talking ape: ''Mr. Smith'' on NBC, a comedy series
about an orangutan with a 256 IQ who serves as a consultant to the U. S.
Government. Produced by Ed Weinberger and Stan Daniels, formerly of the ''Mary
Tyler Moore Show,'' ''Mr. Smith'' promises hip social satire aimed at adult
viewers while the children can dwell on the ape's antics. If its appeal to both
audiences works, ''Mr. Smith'' could be the ideal television show. The result,
however, would be equally predictable: a veritable prime-time zoo of
anthropomorphized creatures trying to capture the viewer's attention next year.


Specific broadcast dates have yet to be set for some of the forthcoming season's
programs.

''Kennedy'' (NBC, beginning Nov. 20) - A seven-hour exploration of the White
House years of the assassinated President. It stars Martin Sheen, Blair Brown,
E. G. Marshall, Geraldine Fitzgerald and John Shea.

''Chiefs'' (CBS) - Charlton Heston stars in this six-hour film about a murder in
a Southern town that affects the lives of three successive police chiefs. The
cast also includes Keith Carradine, Brad Davis, Victoria Tennant, Wayne Rogers
and Billy Dee Williams.

''The Day After'' (ABC, Nov. 20) - This TV film offers a chillingly realistic
view of a nuclear attack and its aftermath. Jason Robards heads a cast that
includes John Cullum, Jobeth Williams, Steven Guttenberg and John Lithgow.

''The Mystic Warrior'' (ABC) - A five-hour mini-series, based on the book by
Ruth Beebe Hill, about life among the Sioux Indians in the early 1800's;
produced by David Wolper and Stan Margulies, who were also responible for
''Roots.''

''Robert Kennedy and His Times'' (CBS) - Based on the book by Arthur Schlesinger
Jr., this seven-hour dramatization traces the personal life and public
contributions of the late leader.

''John Paul II'' (CBS) - Albert Finney will make his American television debut
in a biography of the Pope from his youth in Poland to his elevation to the
papacy.

''The Dollmaker'' (ABC) - A TV movie about a Kentucky farm woman with five
children who is forced to live in Detroit during World War II. Starring Jane
Fonda; with Geraldine Page.

''A Streetcar Named Desire (ABC) - A new production of the Tennessee Williams
play, with Ann-Margret as Blanche DuBois and Treat Williams as her brother-
in-law, Stanley Kowalski.

''The Olympic Winter Games'' (ABC, beginning Feb. 6) - A record 65 hours of
coverage of the contests in Sarejevo, Yugoslavia, will blanket prime time for 14
days.

''Roses'' (NBC) - The murder of Jean Donovan, a Catholic missionary and three
young nuns in El Salvador, forms the basis of this drama starring Melissa
Gilbert, Martin Sheen, Mike Farrell and Pamela Bellwood.

''Princess Daisy'' (NBC) - A four-hour adaptation of Judith Krantz's best-seller
about high life on Madison Avenue. A newcomer, Merete Van Camp, plays the title
role; with Lindsay Wagner, Claudia Cardinale, Stacy Keach, Robert Urich, Barbara
Bach, Ringo Star, Paul Michael Glaser and Sada Thompson.

''Vietnam: A Television History'' (PBS, beginning Oct. 4) - Six years in the
making, this overview of the Vietnam War will be presented in 13 installments.

''Macbeth'' (PBS) - Part of ''The Shakespeare Plays'' series, this new
production stars Nicol Williamson and Jane Lapotaire.

''The Far Pavilions'' (HBO) - Colonial India in the 19th century is the setting
for this six-hour love story; starring Ben Cross, Amy Irving, Omar Sharif and
John Gielgud.

''Right of Way'' (HBO) - Bette Davis and James Stewart co-star in this film
about an elderly couple in love.

''All the Rivers Run'' (HBO) - An eight-hour mini-series about the marriage
between a seafarer and an independent woman in Australia during the 1890's;
Sigrid Thornton and John Waters star.

''Sakharov'' (HBO) - Jason Robards has the title role in this biography of the
exiled Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov.

''A Voyage Round My Father'' (Mobil Showcase Network) - John Mortimer, the
British barrister and screenwriter, wrote this autobiographical account of life
with his father, a blind barrister. Laurence Olivier and Alan Bates star.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A picture caption on the Television page last Sunday misidentified the actor
shown with James Mason in the CBS mini-series ''George Washington.'' The actor
is Ralph Cosham.

GRAPHIC: photo of Ann-Margaret, Albert Finney, Amy Irving, Jane Fonda; photos of
James Mason and Barry Bostwick, Jason Robards, Ben Cross; photo of a 'talking'
ape

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
ARTICLE I VS. ARTICLE II

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 827 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 10


Article I, Section 8: The Congress shall have Power . . . to declare War . . .
to raise and support armies . . . to make all Laws which shall be necessary and
proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers . . .

Article II, Section 2: The President shall be Commander-in-Chief of the Army and
Navy of the United States . . .  - U.S. Constitution

For a couple of centuries in American history, the war power of the Commander in
Chief eroded the war power of the Congress. At the start of our Civil War,
Congress was not in session. President Lincoln did not call it into session;
instead, he assumed the powers granted by the Constitution to the Congress ''to
suppress insurrection'' and went to war. Months later, Congress retroactively
approved his actions.

A decade ago, after a short undeclared war in Korea and a long undeclared war in
Vietnam, Congress took advantage of a scandal-weakened President to reverse the
trend.

Over President Nixon's veto, Congress passed the War Powers Resolution, a law
requiring the President to consult with Congress before sending troops abroad
and to report to Congress when troops ''equipped for combat'' are sent where
hostilities are unlikely to erupt. That's the easy part.

The sticking point for any President, the part that wrenches the war power away
from him, is the section of the law that deals with the dispatch of troops
''into hostilities or situations where imminent involvement in hostilities is
clearly indicated.'' In that case, the President must bring home the troops
within 90 days unless Congress declares war or less formally permits him to let
the troops fight.

Presidents say that law restricts their freedom of action in emergencies. But it
seemed they were stuck with the shift in war power back to the Congress - until
the recent Supreme Court decision about legislative vetoes, which slapped the
Congress down for using a technique in dozens of laws that infringed on the
President's executive powers.

Now we do not know which end is up. The War Powers Act is on the books; the
President must obey the law. But the law may be unconstitutional; the President
must not permit unconstitutional encroachments on his power. What to do?

This is not one of those nice legal conundrums. President Reagan sent 1,300
marines into Lebanon last year, combat-equipped, ''with no intention or
expectation that armed forces will become involved in hostilities.'' In the last
year, 5 Marines have died and 24 have been wounded, with most casualties in
recent weeks.

Americans can see and hear on television the explosions near Marine positions.
Air and naval return fire has been directed at the Syrian- backed Arab
militiamen shelling our Marines. If words have meaning, these are
''hostilities.''

Thus, we approach the great constitutional issue: should the President obey or
challenge the law? Should Congress insist on compliance or set precedent by
closing its eyes to its circumvention?

You would never know that a fundamental question about the most important power
in government now confronts us. Most of the public discussion is about whether
it would be seemly to withdraw troops under fire, or whether Mr. Reagan has
found his quagmire in getting involved with the policing of Lebanon.

At the White House, spokesmen are doing contortions to avoid using act-
triggering words like ''combat'' or ''hostilities'' as the President is
photographed telephoning the Marine commander that ''whatever support it takes
to stop the attacks on your positions'' will be forthcoming. In the Republican
Senate, Charles Mathias of Maryland, who supports our presence in Lebanon, plans
to invoke the War Powers Act early next week, while in the Democratic House,
neo- isolationists want to use the act to embarrass the President.

But the war-power debate is bigger than Lebanon, than intervention versus
isolation, than partisan splits. A flaw has developed in our fundamental
charter. Such uncertainty about the division of power is a danger to the nation
in peacetime, and could be catastrophic at the brink of war.

Shall we continue to avoid the problem, relying on a comity of errors to enable
the executive and legislative branches to work out some artful evasion? Or shall
we have a donnybrook, a constitutional crisis with accusations of usurpation and
threats of impeachment?

Here is a better way: let the Senate Foreign Relations Committee hold hearings
on the act, with the Lebanese instance its case in point. Let the President call
in a battery of constitutional lawyers and publish their opinions. Let talk
shows sing and op-ed pages ring with learned hair-pulling and scholarly
harangues.

There ought to be a way to bring the constitutionality of the War Powers Act
before the Supreme Court with some good will and dignity. The tension between
Article I and Article II will never be wholly resolved, but when branches
profoundly disagree, it's time to go to the roots.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A HISTORY OF A PAINFUL TIME

BYLINE: By ROGER ROSENBLATT; Roger Rosenblatt is a senior writer and essaysit at
Time Magizine and the author of ''Children of War''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1452 words


THE VIETNAM EXPERIENCE. By Clark Dougan, Edward Doyle, Samuel Lipsman, Terrence
Maitland, Peter McInerney, Stephen Weiss and the editors of the Boston
Publishing Company.  Volume One. Setting the Stage. 191 pp.  Volume Two. Passing
the Torch. 208 pp.  Volume Three. Raising the Stakes. 192 pp.  Volume Four.
America Takes Over. 192 pp.  Volume Five. A Contagion of War. 192 pp.  Volume
Six. Nineteen Sixty-Eight. 192 pp.  Illustrated. Boston: Boston Publishing Co.
$16.95 each.

AT the end of ''Manchild in the Promised Land,'' Claude Brown writes that as a
boy growing up in Harlem, he would come home at night and tell his father all
the terrible and astonishing things he had seen on the street during the day.
His father would scold him: ''Boy, why don't you stop that lyin'? You know you
didn't see all that. You know you didn't see nobody do that.''

''But,'' Mr. Brown writes, ''I knew I had.''

Such is the feeling one has remembering the years of Vietnam, though one is less
sure of what was seen. No event since the American Civil War so tore at the
nation's opinion of itself. None left such painful confusion about national
integrity or progress. Ideas that had been ambling along as comfortable
abstractions suddenly assumed the concrete forms not only of an all- out war but
of street riots, sit-ins, beards, beads, the finger for everything one didn't
like. When the smoke cleared, there were the Vietnam vets, haunting their fellow
citizens like Marley's ghost. For over a decade, the nation seemed on fire, and
for almost 10 years since, it has been tending to the burns. Did we really see
all that?

This question seems to have prodded the Boston Publishing Company to undertake a
16-volume history of ''The Vietnam Experience.'' Six volumes have been published
so far, with the others to come in the next two years. The books cover their
subject carefully and are organized in similar patterns, with a great many
photographs, some of them remarkable, accompanying the basic story. Other
materials are interspersed throughout: firsthand accounts of battles, maps,
excerpts from books, diagrams of weapons. Among these the central narrative
voice functions as in old documentaries - the sound of rich, cool authority.
Sometimes this voice gets on one's nerves, as when it exaggerates the
momentousness of some statement or decision. Yet if these books had been given
fine and fancy writing, they might not succeed as well as they do.

One of the first things one notices in these volumes is their quiet contrast to
earlier books on the war. Vietnam has rarely attracted writers seeking to
portray the story steadily and whole. The passions run to the right and left
equally. In ''Fire in the Lake,'' Frances FitzGerald called America's presence
in Vietnam ''self-deception through self-interest.'' Ten years later in ''Why We
Were in Vietnam,'' Norman Podhoretz called the war ''an act of imprudent
idealism whose moral soundness has been so overwhelmingly vindicated by the
hideous consequences of our defeat.'' Often the issue seems personal. The war
has given writers an occasion to explain both an event and a process of mind,
their moral and political pilgrim's progress. ''Let the books be written,''
Gloria Emerson wrote in ''Winners & Losers,'' ''so that when all of us are dead
a long record will exist at least in a few libraries.''

''The Vietnam Experience'' constitutes a long record by itself, yet for all its
relative calm and plainness, the series has emotional power too. In part this is
due to the photographs. In one picture, a father holds an umbrella to shield him
from the sun as he searches for his daughter among the children crushed by a mob
fleeing from Nhatrang; in the adjacent picture, having found the girl's body, he
drags it away in a jute sack. Another photo shows a sitting Marine clutching his
rifle barrel in both hands like a baseball bat, his cheeks stained dark, his
black eyes disappearing into the shadow formed by his helmet. He stares into
nothing.

Then too there are the details and small moments that jut out at strange angles
from the accounts of maneuvers, strategies and more sweeping concerns. In 1975,
with the Vietcong about to take Saigon, the bar girls wash their faces clean of
makeup, slip into peasant dress and go home to their former villages. An 18-
year-old American soldier reports seeing his comrades tie an old man upside down
on a chair and pour water in his nose, eventually drowning him. The soldier
remarks that this is a lot for an 18-year-old to take. In the middle of a
description of an assault comes this from a United States Army pilot at Bienhoa:
''With my elbows on my knees, leaning slightly forward holding the flight helmet
by the chin strap so it would swing below my folded hands, I slowly lifted my
head, my mind reeling from what had just been wrought. In that moment, I drank
in the jubilation of victory, and I knew we were going to win this war.''

Compared with such moments, the main line of the story often seems mechanical,
like a newsreel with bold titles to pick up the pace: ''Hope Springs Eternal'';
''Everybody Out!'' Perhaps this is inevitable when recounting vast, complicated
battle plans or tactical debates, yet it is surprising that the description of
the Tet offensive, for example, conveys so little feeling of the shock and panic
that attended that amazing operation. What carries us through these passages is
belief in their authenticity - that here, from as many sides as possible, is a
clear depiction of events in the right order and proportion. One seems to be
getting as much as can be got, probably for the first time.

Oddly, however, it is not the new and unusual elements that give these books
their effectiveness. Rather, it is the familiar faces, scenes and poses, the
words heard not so long ago, repeated like echoes over a great distance. Again
the spiffy figure of South Vietnam's former Vice President and Prime Minister,
Nguyen Cao Ky, in his spotless pressed uniform and white silk scarf - the
Gilbert Roland of his war. Again the tall, stiff backs of Lyndon Johnson, Walt
Rostow and Dean Rusk as the three stand like Stonehenge, pondering the war from
the Oval Office in May 1966 - the identically dark suits, the polished shoes,
the white room. Up pops Hubert Humphrey bright and early on the ''Today'' show
to assure the nation: ''We are on the offensive. Territory is being gained. We
are making steady progress.'' And Robert McNamara and Mme. Nhu and the Buddhist
monks in flames and hooches and fraggings and all the rest.

The passage of time has given this story the dimension of tragedy. All that is
anticipated, promised and planned in these pages has long fallen in ruins. It is
chastening, especially for Americans, to be able to confront ambitions and
failures simultaneously, feeling the surge and sting in one swoop. In a way,
these volumes simulate the experience of slogging through the war again, both as
soldier and spectator, a march into elephant grass. The experience feels
purgative, necessary. That may be why one does not object strongly to the lack
of selectivity or distillation. By telling all, the writers and editors have
given history to the reader for his own shaping.

Yet for the whole story of the Vietnam experience, one will have to go deeper
than these books allow. They are fine on the military and political aspects of
the war but less so on other monumental events, like the killings of Martin
Luther King Jr. and Robert Kennedy, which often have been associated with the
Vietnam experience, properly or not. The trouble is that one does not yet know
what exactly the experience en compassed. Did the war commit the assassinations,
storm the universities, peddle drugs? Did it cry out for black nationalism and
feminism? Did it cause all the eruptions, destructive or valuable, of those
years? Or was it a crosscurrent of those events, a desperate act of a
civilization that had come to several dead ends all at once? Perhaps
subconsciously we sought that war - all 57,000 dead - to come to terms with
ourselves; we had achieved the top of the world and were not sure we deserved to
be there.

AFTER the last two decades America spent in Vietnam, after the last storming of
the United States Embassy and the last riots at the airports, after the last
helicopter lifted off the last roof - after we were home - President Ford issued
a statement asking the nation to ''close ranks'' and ''avoid recriminations
about the past.'' It will be a good long while before we close ranks on this
war, and it ought to be. How is one to avoid recriminations about the past
without looking the past in the eye? These books are the eye.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of soldiers in Vietnam

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

FALL PREVIEW 1983

BYLINE: By ROBERT R. HARRIS; Robert R. Harris is an editor of The New York Times
Book Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2548 words


ONE Sunday last month, the New York Times fiction best-seller list recorded a
first-place tie between ''The Name of the Rose,'' a first novel by Umberto Eco,
an Italian scholar of semiotics, and ''Return of the Jedi,'' a heavily
illustrated storybook based on the latest movie in the ''Star Wars'' series. It
is not unusual that two such very different books are popular at the same time;
that's one of the reasons why publishers, who can seldom figure out what readers
want, adopt the shotgun approach. According to that concept, a wise publisher
will issue every type of book he can think of, because something is bound to
sell.

Nowhere can the diversity in book publishing be observed more clearly than in
publishers' semiannual catalogues of forthcoming books. What follows is a
selective rundown of some books that will be published this fall, a season that
for publishers begins now and will extend into the depths of winter.

* The fall fiction list has enough variety to satisfy any reader's taste. James
A. Michener's ''Poland'' and Mark Helprin's ''Winter's Tale'' were reviewed in
these pages last week. In ''The Anatomy Lesson'' Philip Roth winds up his
trilogy about the famous author Nathan Zuckerman who engages in some serious
literary battles, suffers acute writer's block and contemplates a change of
career. ''Shame,'' by Salman Rushdie, whose ''Midnight's Children'' was widely
acclaimed two years ago, is a tale of passion and politics in a country that, he
says, is ''not Pakistan, or not quite.''

Three writers who have been much favored by critics are represented by their
first novels in many years. ''The Cannibal Galaxy,'' reviewed on page 3, marks
Cynthia Ozick's return to that form; her last novel, ''Trust,'' was published in
1966. It's been seven years since Renata Adler's ''Speedboat'' won the Ernest
Hemingway Award as the best first novel of 1976; now, in ''Pitch Dark,'' she
propels her female protagonist to London, Africa, Ireland and Orcas Island.
''Arcadio,'' the final novel by William Goyen, who died last month, tells the
story of a hermaphrodite in the author's native Texas. His previous novel, ''The
House of Breath,'' was published seven years ago..

According to his publisher, the terror master Stephen King was once asked if he
had ever written a story so horrifying that he was unsure when readers would be
ready for it. He had, and it seems that the time for ''Pet Sematary'' has come.
Making the season something of a family affair, Mr. King's wife, Tabitha, will
publish her second novel, ''Caretakers.'' A new voice from another writing
family, Joseph Theroux, debuts with ''Black Coconuts, Brown Magic,'' a somber
comedy set in Samoa. He is the younger brother of Paul (whose ''The Kingdom by
the Sea: A Journey Around Great Britain'' will also be published this fall) and
Alexander Theroux.

There are also new novels by Isaac Bashevis Singer, Joyce Carol Oates, Tom
Wicker, William F. Buckley Jr., George V. Higgins, Ernest J. Gaines, Robert
Towers, Elizabeth Spencer and Louis Auchincloss on the fall list. And from
abroad there are new works by William Trevor (a novel and a collection of
stories), Anthony Powell, J. M. Coetzee, Robertson Davies, Amos Oz, Italo
Calvino and Jorge Luis Borges (a ''fiction'' written during the late 1920's).

A welcome sign that the recession has eased for publishers is their willingness
to take a chance on short- story collections, which don't often become blockbust
ers.''The Stories of Bernard Malamud'' contains 25 tales from the author's long
career, including such favorites as ''The Magic Barrel,'' ''Idiots First'' and
''The Last Mohican.'' V. S. Pritchett adds ''More Collected Stories'' to his
''Collected Stories'' and ''Selected Stories.'' ''The Collected Stories of
Colette'' includes 100 pieces written between 1908 and 1945, ranging from a
1,000-word fable to a novella, and ''The Collected Stories of Sean O'Faolain''
offers 90 tales by one of Ireland's foremost living writers. In addition to new
collections by Raymond Carver (reviewed on page 1), Donald Barthelme and Gail
Godwin, there are almost a dozen compilations of short fiction by lesser-known
writers.

* Nov. 22 will mark the 20th anniversary of the assassination of President John
F. Kennedy, and new books about him range from the the soberly reflective to the
mildly sensational. William Manchester, the author of ''Portrait of a
President'' and ''Death of a President,'' commemorates Kennedy with ''One Brief
Shining Moment: Kennedy and Myth,'' an anecdotal essay buttressed with many
photographs. Ralph G. Martin has written ''A Hero for Our Time: An Intimate
Story of the Kennedy Years,'' and John H. Davis, who wrote ''The Bouviers,''
adds ''The Kennedys: An Intimate Family Portrait.'' Lynne McTaggart tells the
tragic story of the President's sister, who was killed in a plane crash in the
south of France in 1948, in ''Kathleen Kennedy: Her Life and Times,'' and
Harrison Raine and John Quinn look to the future in ''Growing Up Kennedy: The
Third Wave Comes of Age,'' a portrait of Joseph and Rose Kennedy's 29
grandchildren. In ''JFK: Ordeal in Africa,'' Richard D. Mahoney examines
Kennedy's role, as a senator and as President, in African politics. And in
''Oswald's Game,'' Jean Davison challenges the conspiracy theories that have
swirled around the assassination and tries to track the motivations of Lee
Harvey Oswald .

* A SMALL industry has emerged to interpret Vietnam, the war that won't go away.
Stanley Karnow, a veteran reporter on Southeast Asia, is the author of ''
Vietnam: A History,'' whose publication in October coincides with the beginning
of a PBS televison documentary he wrote and in which he will appear. ''Without
Honor: Defeat in Vietnam and Cambodia'' is by Arnold R. Isaacs, who covered the
war for The Baltimore Sun; ''The War Everyone Lost - And Won: America's
Intervention in Viet Nam's Twin Struggles'' is a political history of the war by
Timothy J. Lomperis, a Louisiana State University political scientist. And
William Shawcross, the author of the controversial ''Sideshow: Kissinger, Nixon
and the Destruction of Cambodia,'' conducts a follow-up investigation in ''A
Time to Sow: Cambodia Since 1975 - A Report on the International Organizations
that Respond to World Disaster.''

What it was like to fight in Vietnam and what happened after the war to those
who did fight are the subjects of several works of nonfiction and four first
novels. In ''Bloods,'' edited by Wallace Terry, 20 black Vietnam veterans recall
their tours of duty, and in ''Conversations With the Enemy'' Winston Groom and
Duncan Spencer report the true story of Robert Garwood, the Marine private first
class who was accused of collaborating with the enemy while he was a prisoner of
war. Among the first novels about the war is ''Meditations in Green'' by Stephen
Wright, who won Charles Scribner's Sons 1983 Maxwell Perkins Prize for his
disturbing portrait of the war's devastating effect on an American grunt.

* Despite the proliferation of all means of communications, from magazines to
computers, books remain our chief medium for the full expression of ideas, and
for taking issue with those of others. This fall, disparate analyses of the
world and the domestic political situation, past and present, abound. Richard J.
Barnet examines ''The Alliance: America, Europe, Japan,'' and Daniel Pipes looks
at Islam as a political force in ''In the Path of God.'' The 1970's oil crisis
is the subject of ''Fiasco'' by Jack Anderson, with James Boyd, and of ''The Oil
Follies of 1970-1980'' by Robert Sherrill. In his first nonfiction book, ''On
Wings of Eagles,'' the novelist Ken Follett tells of businessman H. Ross Perot's
hiring a Green Beret colonel to rescue two employees from a prison in Iran. And
in ''The Time of the Assassins,'' Claire Sterling, author of ''The Terror
Network,'' contends that there was a conspiracy behind the attempt to
assassinate Pope John Paul II in 1981.

China and the Soviet Union remain popular subjects. There are at least half a
dozen books on China, including ''Zhou Enlai'' by Dick Wilson. The Soviet Union
rates 10, including ''Soviet Power: Kremlin Foreign Policy From Brezhnev to
Andropov'' by Jonathan Steele, David Shipler's examination of Soviet society,
''Russia: Broken Idols, Solemn Dreams,'' and three more books that try to
explain the rise to power of the Soviet leader Yuri Andropov. Another dozen or
so authors are still trying to figure out how Japan works.

Central America's prominent place in the headlines has spurred the beginnings of
what promises to be a spate of books on that area. One of several due this
season is ''Inevitable Revolutions: The United States in Central America'' by
the historian Walter LaFeber.


AMERICAN society is in for further dissection. Although campaign biographies of
announced or potential Presidential candiates are conspicuous by their absence
from the publishers' fall lists, Ronnie Dugger, the author of ''The Politician:
The Life and Times of Lyndon Johnson,'' turns his focus on the incumbent in ''On
Reagan: The Man and His Presidency.'' John Crewdson, who won a Pulitzer Prize
when he was a reporter for The New York Times, reveals the plight of illegal
aliens and America's new immigrants in ''The Tarnished Door,'' and Peter
Matthiessen gathers several of his essays on American Indians and their current
fight for their land in ''Indian Country.'' Michael Harrington and Harvey Cox
have been pondering the relationship of religion and politics, Mr. Harrington in
''The Politics at God's Funeral: The Spiritual Crisis of Western Civilization''
and Mr. Cox in ''After the Secular City: Religion and Politics in the Post-
Modern World.''

John Kenneth Galbraith contemplates ''The Anatomy of Power,'' and Irving Kristol
provides ''Reflections of a Neoconservative.'' Thomas Sowell examines ''The
Economics of Politics and Race,'' Nathan Glazer reflects on ''Ethnic Dilemmas:
1964-1982,'' and Paul Fussell dissects ''Class'' in contemporary American
society. Peter G. Peterson describes the crisis of ''Social Security,'' Susan J.
and Martin Tolchin weigh the wisdom of the current push for deregulation in
''Dismantling America,'' and Barbara Gelb chronicles the fight against crime by
the New York City Police Department in ''Varnished Brass: The Decade After
Serpico.''

In a lighter vein, there are books by two of America's favorite newspaper
humorists - ''The Rescue of Miss Yaskell and Other Pipe Dreams'' by Russell
Baker and ''While Reagan Slept'' by Art Buchwald.


WITH the recent upturn in the country's economy, one might think that analyses
of what went wrong and prescriptions about how to make it right would cease. Not
so. W. W. Rostow's ''The Barbaric Counter-Revolution'' weighs the efficacy of
the Federal Reserve Bank's efforts under Presidents Carter and Reagan to control
inflation by restricting the rate of increase in the country's money supply. In
''The Twenty-Year Century,'' Felix Rohatyn proposes that an institution similar
to New York's Municipal Assistance Corporation, which saved the city from
declaring bankruptcy, be created on the national level. In ''The Tyranny of the
Status Quo'' Milton and Rose Friedman decry what they see as the continued
growth of Government despite the Reagan Administration's attempts to contain it.
Louis Rukeyser, the host of PBS television's ''Wall Street Week,'' tells what he
sees ahead for the economy in ''The Challenge and the Chance,'' and Eliot
Janeway offers ''Prescriptions for Prosperity.''


PEOPLE are always interested in other people's lives, and this publishing season
promises many biographies and autobiographies. Among the latter are the third
and final volume of the behavorial psychologist B. F. Skinner's account of his
controversial career, ''A Matter of Consequences''; recollections by William L.
Shirer, ''20th Century Journey, A Memoir of a Life and the Times: The Nightmare
Years, 1930-1940,'' and ''A Personal History'' by A. .J. P. Taylor, the British
historian. In his first book since ''Roots,'' Alex Haley reminisces about his
western Tennessee hometown in ''Henning: The Portrait of an American Town.''

Stephen E. Ambrose presents the first volume of his ''Eisenhower: A Life,'' and
he is the co- author, with Richard H. Immerman, of ''Milton S. Eisenhower,
Educational Statesman.'' Martin Gilbert offers the sixth volume of the official
biography of Winston Churchill: ''Finest Hour, 1939-1941.'' Garry Wills
reconsiders the career of America's first President in ''Cincinnatus: George
Washington and the Enlightenment.'' And in ''The Discoverers,'' a sweeping
examination of man's efforts to explain the world around him, Daniel J.
Boorstin, the Librarian of Congress, ranges through the works of Copernicus,
Kepler, Galileo, Newton, Darwin, Marx, Freud and others.

It has become fashionable of late to re-evaluate noted authors' lives and works
in terms of their sexuality. The women in Ernest Hemingway's life were paid
homage this summer, and fall will bring Scott Donaldson's ''Fool for Love,'' an
examination of F. Scott Fitzgerald's volatile relationships with women and of
how he translated his needs and feelings into fiction. Phyllis Rose investigates
the domestic situations of John Ruskin, Charles Dickens, John Stuart Mill,
Thomas Carlyle and George Eliot in ''Parallel Lives: Five Victorian Marriages.''
In ''Dashiell Hammett: A Life,'' Diane Johnson, who had access to Hammett's
letters and the cooperation of his longtime companion, Lillian Hellman, makes
much of his flagrant philandering. In ''Franz Kafka: The Nightmare of Reason,''
Ernst Pawel reassesses the life of the writer, revealing that Kafka not only
didn't love but didn't even like his supposed heartthrob, Felice, and that,
contrary to the myths that have grown up around him, he was a hard-working and
successful businessman rather typical of his era and class.

The second of a projected five volumes of Joseph Frank's ''Dostoevsky'' is
called ''The Years of Ordeal, 1850-1859.'' And there are three more Bloomsbury
biographies this fall - of Vita Sackville-West, Vanessa Bell and Julia Strachey.


AMONG the books of the moment, computer titles are still the rage. Fitness and
health books are thriving. Cat books are on the wane and dog books are in the
ascendant. How people become emotionally attached to animals and how animals can
help us cope with the anxieties of modern life is the focus of what at least one
book promoter is calling pet therapy books.

Publishers are loath to give up a good thing, and some fads are slow to die. But
when one fad has run its course, another is sure to follow. We are no longer
inundated with solutions to Rubik's Cube, but we are plagued with gross joke
books. And the fact that we are about to be confronted with books called ''The
Joy of Computers,'' ''Technostress'' and ''Woman's Experience of Sex'' may very
well tell us something, but I would not venture to say just what. Nevertheless,
there are many works of science and criticism, and more biography and political
and social analysis than have been highlighted here - enough books of substance
to balance all the fluff that will surely settle on the best-seller lists.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
In the article ''Fall Preview 1983'' (Sept. 11) the publication date of the late
William Goyen's ''The House of Breath'' was given incorrectly. The novel was
published in 1950.

GRAPHIC: drawing of books and falling leaves

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 56, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 705 words


MASS MARKET

Mass market paperbacks are soft-cover books sold at newsstands, variety stores
and supermarkets, as well as in bookstores. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from bookstores and representative wholesalers with
more than 40,000 outlets across the United States.

1 THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) A fictional saga of
human survival at the dawn of civilization.

2 MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $3.95.) The secret behind a
woman business tycoon's rise to power: fiction.

3 DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.

4 SPELLBINDER, by Harold Robbins. (Pocket, $3.95.) From soldier in Vietnam to
television evangelist: fiction.

5 CLOAK OF DARKNESS, by Helen MacInnes. (Fawcett, $3.95.) A counter-terrorist
agent finds himself on an assassination list: fiction.

6 ACCEPTABLE LOSSES, by Irwin Shaw. (Avon, $3.95.) A New York literary agent's
life is threatened by a mysterious stranger: fiction.

7 TOUCH THE DEVIL, by Jack Higgins. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Tracking down a K.G.B.
agent who has stolen NATO secrets: fiction.

8 MAX, by Howard Fast. (Dell, $3.95.) The birth of the American film industry in
New York at the turn of the century: fiction.

9 THE CASE OF LUCY BENDING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $3.95.) The aberrant
behavior of an 8-year-old girl epitomizes the society of Florida's Gold Coast:
fiction.

10 LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Pocket, $3.95.) Life in the international glitter
set: fiction.

11 FRIDAY, by Robert A. Heinlein. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) The adventures on
Earth of an Artificial Person: science fiction.

12 JADE, by Pat Barr. (Warner, $3.95.) An English girl, kidnapped to China,
makes her way in Oriental society: fiction.

13 TRULY TASTELESS JOKES TWO, by Blanche Knott. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor.

14 TRULY TASTELESS JOKES, by Blanche Knott. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor.

15 THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER, by Jeffrey Archer. (Pocket, $3.95.) The children of
two bitter business rivals marry: fiction.

TRADE

Trade paperbacks are soft-cover books usually sold in bookstores and at an
average price higher than mass market paperbacks. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States.

1 THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $7.95.) Three generations of a
wealthy San Francisco family: fiction.

2 THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $5.95.)
Black men and women in the South: Pulitzer Prize-winner for fiction.

3 COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson. (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.

4 LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F. Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.)
Inspirational talks by a California professor.

5 BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon strips
featuring some very odd characters.

6 LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $10.95.) How to add
years to your life and life to your years.

7 ROYAL SEDUCTION, by Jennifer Blake. (Fawcett/Columbine, $5.95.) A New Orleans
belle, a European prince, international intrigue: historical romance.

8 LINDA EVANS BEAUTY AND EXERCISE BOOK, by Linda Evans. (Simon &
Schuster/Wallaby, $9.95.) How-to by the television personality.

9 WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?  by Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press,
$7.95.) Guide for job hunters and career changers.

10 THE RAPTURE, by Hal Lindsey. (Bantam, $6.95.) Predictions about an
approaching global event based on an interpretation of the Bible.

11 THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $4.95.) Philosophical humor.

12 THIN THIGHS IN 30 DAYS, by Wendy Stehling. (Bantam, $2.95.) How-to.

13 FIT OR FAT?  by Covert Bailey. (Houghton Mifflin, $4.50.) Exercises for
fitness.

14 GARFIELD EATS HIS HEART OUT, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) The latest
adventures of that gluttonous cat: cartoon humor.

15 MISS MANNERS' GUIDE TO EXCRUCIATINGLY CORRECT BEHAVIOR, by Judith Martin.
(Warner, $10.95.) Etiquette prescribed by an amusingly bossy lady.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SHOPPER'S WORLD;
HONG KONG'S STREET OF 'GREEN TEMPTATION'

BYLINE: By FRED FERRETTI; FRED FERRETTI is a reporter for The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 10; Page 6, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1228 words


Each morning just before 10, every day of the year, four blocks of Kowloon along
Canton Road are transformed into a street lined with jade, a path called the
Jade Market by Hong Kong's Western population but referred to by the Chinese as
Jade Street. For a shopper it is a seductive wonderland of green temptation with
more than 300 dealers sitting along Canton Road from Jordan Road to Saigon
Street, under jerry-built awnings or large umbrellas, on camp chairs or on their
haunches, unfolding tables, cloths or racks of red satin- backed cards all
displaying jade rings, necklaces, bracelets, pendants and carvings.  One man
sits on a curb in front of a towel on which are piled stacks of black-green jade
carvings; another perches on a padded folding chair behind a glass-covered
display case filled with what he swears is nothing but the finest of deep
apple-green imperial jade. A woman ambles up the street with several dozen red,
white and green jade necklaces suspended from her wrist and forearm, stopping
whenever someone shows interest. Children watch the jade while their parents go
off for tea or some food in one of the two narrow alleys that cut through Jade
Street, Ningpo Street and Nanking Street.

In the street, ignoring the traffic, are other jade peddlers, dealing among
themselves with a ritual so old that nobody can remember its origin. They
bargain with their hands, but their hands are under cloths, white or black. One
man or woman will hold a piece of jade in one hand while the other hand is
hidden. The prospective buyer will put his hand under the cloth. Then they will
speak. The seller might say ''yat'' and extend three fingers. Yat designates a
unit of 100 and three fingers means three units, or $300. The buyer will grab,
perhaps, only one finger, which means he is offering $100. And so it goes, hands
under cloths with units of 1,000 designated by ''teo,'' units of 10,000 by
''tso.''

Jade Street is the world's only open-air bazaar devoted entirely to the gem that
the Chinese regard with some degree of veneration. A beautiful woman is often
called a woman of jade, and a handsome man is said to have a countenance of
jade. Every Chinese baby is presented either with a tiny jade wrist bracelet or
with a ''pi,'' a circular, smoothly polished piece of jade with a hole in the
center, a tiny doughnut of jade, if you will, that has been for centuries a
symbol of heaven. Confucius is said to have suggested that jade's smoothness
represented gentleness of character, its varying colors and texture wisdom and
nobility, its solidity for one's duty towards one's neighbor.

Jade ornaments as symbols of wealth, rank and power were commonplace in the
imperial courts of China and the emperor's accouterment, his scepter, sword,
throne and altar, even his sandals, were usually of highly prized, ornately
carved jade. A flat stone, shaped octagonally, with a hole in its center, is
often worn as a good luck talisman, to ward off evil spirits

Its mythology notwithstanding, jade is a highly regarded stone among all people,
and to shop for it in the Jade Street bazaar is an extraordinary experience.

You cannot help but be goggle-eyed as you watch the jade sellers unpack their
stones and ornaments from satchels, schoolbags, cookie tins, food containers and
plastic bags, and spread them out for inspection.

Know a bit about jade before you go, resolve to bargain hard and long mainly
because that is more than half the fun of shopping in Jade Street, and make up
your mind that you will spend no more than $20 or $25, and you will have a
rewarding time. Bear in mind that some of the imperial green jade might be
chemically color-enhanced (genuine imperial green jade is the most desirable),
that the men and women who sell jade know a good deal more than you do and will
give away nothing.

A bit about jade: What is known as jade is either jadeite or nephrite. Jadeite
comes in differing grades of red, called ''fei'' by the Chinese, or green,
called ''tsui.'' Green is most highly prized; when it is deep apple, pure in
color, with no traces of either deep bottle green or white, and almost
transparent, it is considered to be the finest. It is not unusual for a tiny
stone of imperial jade to sell for as much as $10,000.

Nephrite, which can be pale green but is mostly creamy white or off-white, is
often called mutton fat and is best for carving. But jade can come in shades of
brown, rust, almost yellow, peach, almost blue, gray and black. Some black and
gray jade, deeply carved into bracelets are highly thought of by the Chinese,
and often family members who have died are buried with jade bracelets of these
colors on their wrists. Such pieces are called, appropriately, Dead Jade.

The traders along Jade Street will tell you ''Chinese jade, Chinese jade,'' but
that is usually jade from Burma that has been imported into the People's
Republic, carved, then shipped to Hong Kong for sale. North Burma remains the
source of most fine jade.

Perhaps more than any other jewelry stone, jade is sold most often on esthetic
appeal alone. Its marbled texture; the way green will blend into black or into
white; whether the dragon and phoenix design, the yin and the yang of Chinese
culture, are carved to satisfaction; whether carving is new or old, or merely
looks old, all of these enter into one's purchase. And so should they for the
tourist, the casual buyer.

As you wander along the narrow sidewalk, with jade hawkers both right and left,
look for what pleases. Think what would look best hanging from a gold chain
around your neck, what would look best sitting on a carved teak stand on your
mantel, then either make an offer or ask a price and make a counter-offer. That
is when the fun begins. I remember seeing what I considered a nice piece of
carved jade, of a light green with some dark mottling. I asked the price.

''Three hundred fifty dollars, Hong Kong,'' replied the seller. This was the
equivalent of about $50 in American money.

''No,'' I said, and began walking away.

''How much?'' called the seller.

''One hundred,'' I called back.

''No,'' he said, shaking his head with great sadness.

''Okay,'' I said and continued walking.

''OKAY!'' he called after me.

Back I went and bought the carving for $100 Hong Kong, a little more than $15
U.S. And I was satisfied. Did I get a bargain? I thought so. Did the seller make
a profit? I'm sure he did. Were we both happy? I'm pretty sure we were. And that
is the essence of shopping along Jade Street.

How to find the Jade Market

That part of Canton Road called Jade Market or Street is convenient from both
sides of Victoria Harbor. From Hong Kong island the Jordan Road Ferry (fare
about 10 cents) will deposit you about two blocks from the intersection of
Jordan and Canton roads.  From the Kowloon Star Ferry Terminal the No. 9 Bus
(fare about 9 cents) will drop you off at the corner. A taxi will cost about 65
cents and all you need do is tell the driver Jade Street.  The new Hong Kong
subway will also take you there for about 30 cents. Get off at the Jordan Road
station and Jade Street is just at the top of the stairway.  The market is open
formally from 10 A.M. until 2 P.M. daily. But you can begin shopping as early as
9:30. By 2 P.M., however, most of the dealers have finished for the day and are
in the teahouses.F. F.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of a phoenix dragon pendant; map of Hong Kong, with Jade Market
area in detail

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 11, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TROUBLING QUESTIONS ABOUT DIOXIN

BYLINE: By JAN BARRY; Jan Barry lives in Montclair. He is a former reporter for
The Morristown Daily Record, for which he wrote a 1980 series on Agent Orange
carried by the Associated Press.

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 26, Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2007 words


THE news last June that dangerous levels of dioxin had been found on the site of
the former Diamond Shamrock chemical plant in Newark, which made Agent Orange
during the Vietnam War, was startling.

Like other reporters, I had written articles identifying that plant, in the
Ironbound section, as a former Agent Orange manufacturing site. That was more
than three years ago. At the time, no one in Government agencies had suggested
there might still be measurable traces of dioxin there.

The second thing that jolted me about the news out of Newark was the blow to the
credibility of Government experts. Those experts had repeatedly maintained that
Vietnam veterans need not worry about Agent Orange because dioxin residue in
Vietnam would, theoretically, have quickly dissipated in sunlight.

There was a third jolt - almost an aftershock - when I realized that dioxin's
presence in Newark had never occurred to New Jersey's journalists, many of whom
had done extensive reporting on Agent Orange.

How could experienced reporters hve failed to ask about dioxin at that Newark
site when the Federal Environmental Protection Agency first listed all the
former Agent Orange plants in 1980?

Why did it take three years for someone - reportedly an environmental
investigator in Puerto Rico - to ask the question that raised the lid on dioxin
in New Jersey?

There should be a thorough re- examination of how the Agent Orange medical issue
is being investigated.

Despite my being a Vietnam War veteran, I was ignorant of this issue until I
began reporting on it in 1978.

Until recently, the big story was focused almost exclusively on Vietnam and
veterans' accounts of illnesses they suspected were connected with the chemicals
widely used, from 1962 to 1972, to defoliate war-zone jungles and rice fields.
After several of my Agent Orange reports appeared early in 1980 - including one
about the plant in Newark - editors asked me if I'd be willing to go to Vietnam
if some way of detecting dioxin residue there could be found.

None of us thought of going to Newark to see whether dioxin could be detected
right here at home.

Consider what has become known since June:


- A dermatologist with the state University of Medicine and Dentistry said he
had treated dozens of Shamrock Diamond workers since 1962 for chloracne, a skin
disease associated with dioxin poisoning.


- A Diamond Shamrock spokesman disclosed that the company had known about the
skin disorders since the 1950's and had arranged for a dermatologist to
investigate the cause. Without naming the plant or its site, that investigator
reported his findings in the Archives of Dermatology in June 1964 - one of
several obscure reports that Vietnam veterans' groups for years have pointed to
as an indication of their health concerns.


- The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) announced in
Washington that a review of earlier studies of chemical workers at plants where
dioxin was present had turned up an unexpectedly high rate of deaths from
cancer, as well as hundreds of cases of chloracne.

The institute's news release, however, did not explain that a similar conclusion
had been reached in a review it had made earlier of health studies on United
States chemical workers. This review was published in a British medical journal,
The Lancet, in January 1981, according to Dr. Peter C. Kahn, a Rutgers
University biochemistry professor on the New Jersey Agent Orange Commission.

''There is lots of stuff that I've known about for years that, if the press were
of a mind to, something could be made of it,'' Dr. Kahn said recently. ''It's in
the (medical research) literature. The evidence is not conclusive, but certainly
there is strong circumstantial evidence.''

After I questioned Dr. Kahn, it occurred to me that all of the above information
could have been revealed three years ago if reporters had known enough to ask
the E.P.A. if dioxin was still at the old Agent Orange plant sites.

And if these latest pieces in the Agent Orange puzzle had been presented then,
wouldn't the efforts to solve this nagging health mystery have been three years
ahead of where things now stand?

Because of these questions, I'm concerned that news people and dioxin
investigators may still be groping in the dark, largely because of not knowing
what questions to ask.

When health questions about Agent Orange first arose in the late 1960's, the
focus was on new laboratory studies showing increased rates of cancer, birth
defects and deaths among test animals exposed to ingredients of the herbicide.
This news appeared after reports of birth defects, serious illnesses and deaths
among Vietnamese farm families and mountain tribes exposed to herbicide spray.

Incredibly, no one at the time - not in the Federal Government, not from
environmental groups, not from the press - asked about the possible health
consequences for G.I.'s.

Nearly a decade passed before Vietnam veterans began to discover that question
for themselves. This happened after a Veterans Administration case worker in
Chicago took her concerns about these chemicals and what she perceived to be a
pattern of illnesses among many Vietnam veterans - which the V.A. seemed content
to ignore - to the press early in 1978.

Since then, public concern about the health effects of exposure to
dioxin-contaminated herbicides has involved more than Vietnam veterans. Among
the new cases were:


- Pregnant women in rural Oregon who had been exposed to herbicide use in
forestry. (This resulted in a health study used by the E.P.A. in 1979 as reason
to ban most domestic uses of these herbicides.)


- Entire communities in Buffalo, N.Y., and in Missouri that the Federal
Government relocated because of dioxin contamination.


- Dioxin-tainted fish from Michigan were banned from sale in New York last
spring.

''More questions should be asked about toxic wastes,'' says Dr. Kahn. ''The
state is trying to find out where the Newark (Agent Orange) wastes went. But
there are also lots of other toxic chemicals that are far more widespread than
dioxin in our environment - PCB's, for example.

''Everyone knows that if you put toxic wastes in metal drums, eventually the
drums leak. You can't landfill this stuff. What really needs to be done is to
figure out how to detoxify it. Why isn't there a vigorous government effort to
resolve this?''

Victor Yannacone, a Long Island lawyer representing Vietnam veterans in a
class-action suit against Agent Orange manufacturers, offered another
perspective after a television appearance in Newark last month.

''Follow the trail of consumer products containing trichlorophenol - that's
where dioxin comes into the manufacturing process,'' he said. ''Dioxin's been
found in hexachlorophene and lots of other products besides herbicides. What has
the Food and Drug Administration done about this since it first learned about
dioxin in 1970? What has the Public Health Service done?''

Mr. Yannacone, who filed a new class-action suit against Diamond Shamrock in
Superior Court in Trenton in June, on behalf of former employees and
neighborhood residents, added another sobering question.

Consider, he asked, what the health effects may have been for Garden State
residents exposed to these same herbicides over decades of use along utility
lines and other areas.  Two years ago, in an article in a national trial lawyers
magazine, Mr. Yannacone wrote: ''As one scientist expressed his concern, 'We may
have stumbled on a cause for the rise in suburban cancer.' ''

This question is the one that first engaged my attention when a Roxbury
environmentalist investigating pollution of the Rockaway River in Morris County
discovered in August 1978 that Jersey Central Power & Light Company had sprayed
''the same stuff used in Vietnam'' along power lines crossing the river, a major
source of drinking water for Jersey City.

Indeed, a dilute mixture of the herbicides that made up Agent Orange had been
sprayed for 30 years along the utility's power lines around the state.

A year later, these herbicides were banned for such uses by the E.P.A. Since
then, to my knowledge, no follow-up health study on residents repeatedly exposed
to the herbicide has been made.

Wayne P. Wilson, a Vietnam veteran and executive director of the state Agent
Orange Commission, recently asked: ''Why isn't the V.A. reaching out and
coordinating (Government efforts on Agent Orange)?''

Although it was designated in 1979 the lead Government agency for Agent Orange
health investigations, the V.A.'s handling of this issue led Congress last year
to require that an epidemiological study of Vietnam veterans' health - ordered
three years before and still not started - be turned over to the National
Centers for Disease Control.

The state Agent Orange Commission was established in 1980 to help prod
Washington. Frustrated by the pace of Federal action, the state commission -
four veterans, three scientists and a staff of three with a $250,000 budget - is
planning its own health study of the state's estimated 90,000 Vietnam veterans.

This raises yet another question: Can a small state agency manage to establish
(where the Federal Government has clearly feared to tread) undisputed facts
about Vietnam veterans' cancer, death and dioxin exposure rates relative to the
rest of Americans?

Earlier this year, a lawyer for Dow Chemical Company showed up at the state
commission's monthly meeting with a tape recorder. Dow is a principal defendant
in the Vietnam veterans' class action suit scheduled to come to trial soon in
Federal Court on Long Island.

''I don't think it will be too much longer and the mystery (about Agent Orange's
health effects) is going to come to an end,'' Guy A. Wiener, the state Agent
Orange Commission chairman, said recently. ''Dow has already offered twice to
settle out of court.'' (Mr. Wiener resigned his post on July 26 but remains a
member of the commission.)

One question that the New Jersey Agent Orange health study will not address -
leaving it to the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta - is whether there have
been more birth defects among children of veterans.

Mr. Wiener's first child after his return from Vietnam 18 years ago was born
with multiple defects. In recent years, informal surveys at two spina bifida
associations in Morris County and on Long Island found that most of the fathers
had served in Vietnam.

Air Force Lieut. Col. Alvin L. Young said on a recent New Jersey television
program - and again late last month in Washington - that no unusual patterns of
health problems had shown up in the V.A.'s examinations of some 84,000 Vietnam
veterans since 1978.

''We're finding the diseases that one would expect to see in a population of men
growing old,'' said Colonel Young, who has been the Pentagon's chief
troubleshooter on the Agent Orange controversy.

(Colonel Young was a co-author of a 1978 report to the Surgeon General of the
Air Force that said that most dioxin in Agent Orange spray operations ''would
probably photodegrade within 24 hours'' and therefore could not have been a
serious health hazard for American troops.)

Mr. Wiener says he was diagnosed as sufffering from chloracne by a military
doctor years ago. Yet, he contends, when he went to the Veterans Administration,
doctors there expressed no interest in his skin problems.

So many Vietnam veterans have complained of similarly inadequate V.A.
examinations that the agency's ''Agent Orange Registry'' of 84,000 health exams
is ''almost useless,'' according to Mr. Wilson.

Scornful of years of such V.A. efforts, Mr. Wiener and Mr. Wilson have placed
their faith in the resolution of this issue in the more modest efforts of Dr.
Kahn and other to study the levels of dioxin in Garden State veterans who served
in Vietnam, compared with control groups of residents who did not serve in
Southeast Asia.

''This research has to be done,'' Mr. Wiener recently said, ''because no one
else is attempting anything.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of planes spraying fields

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

GREEN BERETS CHECK NUCLEAR PLANTS' SECURITY

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 930 words


The Nuclear Regulatory Commission is using Army Green Berets to help determine
whether nuclear power plants are vulnerable to attacks by saboteurs.

The program began earlier this year, according to Robert F. Burnett, the
director of the commission's safeguards office. So far, he said, four sites have
been inspected, including the two Salem reactors in Lower Alloways Creek, N.J.
In each inspection, he said, minor security problems were found and reported to
the utilities that operate the reactors.

The Green Berets are ''there to look at the facility through the eyes of an
adversary,'' Mr. Burnett said in a telephone interview. ''They can help us see
weaknesses we might overlook,'' he added.

Fewer than 12 soldiers are involved in the program, he said, and the commission
pays the Army for the troops.

In the mid-1970's, the commission first used Green Berets to check the security
of uranium fuel facilities.

More recently, the commission began to investigate more than a dozen incidents
of suspected sabotage by plant employees. The incidents, all reported since
1980, involved critical valves in the wrong position, miswired electrical
equipment and other flaws, all of them possibly attributable to human error.  In
May and June of this year, after a suspected incident of sabotage by an
employee, the commission notified all nuclear plants to watch for attacks by
utility workers. . No incident of employee sabotage has been proved, Mr. Burnett
said, and there have been no verified incidents of organized attacks on a
reactor in this country.

To check on plant security, the Green Berets first gather information ''that any
member of the public could get,'' Mr. Burnett said. This includes the designs of
reactors, which utilities are required to place in files open to the public. The
designs, Mr. Burnett said, often disclose the location of vital parts of the
reactor.

The troops, working with specialists from the commission, then go to the plant
sites, monitor the radio transmissions of plant guards, and observe guard
patrols and guard shift changes.

''They are able to postulate what they may think are weaknesses in the
perimeter,'' said Mr. Burnett.

The Green Berets and commission engineers also make an aerial inspection of the
plants and the surrounding areas, trying to determine if terrorists could
isolate the plants, perhaps by blocking roads or blowing up bridges.

No Break-Ins Tried

The teams also enter the plants with the permission of the utilities and check
for additional weaknesses in the security system.

The inspection teams, Mr. Burnett said, do not try to break into the plants.

Once the inspections are completed, the reports are given to the utilities, Mr.
Burnett said. These reports are ''highly classified,'' he said, and will not be
made public.

The Green Berets, formally known as the Special Forces, are based at Fort Bragg,
N.C. Their primary mission is insurgency, particularly in making contact with
dissidents behind enemy lines and training them in guerrilla operations and
sabotage. During the Vietnam War, the Special Forces were known for
counterinsurgency operations, including training the South Vietnamese to fight
Vietcong guerrillas.

A Congressman's Concern

The first public notice of the use of the Green Berets came in a letter last
week from Representative Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, to the
commission chairman, Nunzio J. Palladino. A copy of the letter was released by
Mr. Markey's office.

Mr. Markey, who has been seeking to have the commission give higher priority to
the issue of plant security, said in a statement that the use of the Green
Berets was an indication that the commission was taking the matter more
seriously.

There are 84 operating civilian power plants in the United States, at 53 sites.
At the current rate of financing, the security teams are expected to complete
the inspections in 1991, according to Mr. Burnett. In addition, plants are
scheduled to open at 22 sites in the next few years.

The two Salem reactors in Lower Alloways Creek, N.J., were among the first sites
visited. The inspection was made at the invitation of the operating utility,
Public Service Electric and Gas of New Jersey. The commission has said there
have been five incidents of possible sabotage at the two plants since 1980.

A Severe Breach

Also inspected were the Palisades plant, in South Haven, Mich.; the St. Lucie
complex, 12 miles south of Fort Pierce, Fla., and the Turkey Point plants in
Florida City, Fla.

Mr. Burnett said that in one of its inspections of uranium fuel facilities, the
security team found a breach so severe that the team stayed at the site until
corrections were made. Mr. Burnett would not disclose at which site the problem
arose.

The five commissioners of the N.R.C. are scheduled to meet Sept. 21 to consider
proposed rules meant to protect against sabotage by plant employees. The
commission staff has been working on the rules since 1977.

One proposal is that the Federal Government perform background checks on plant
employees. Government investigators would take information that employees
provided in pre-employment interviews - such as criminal history, previous
employment and education - and seek verification.

Mr. Markey complained in his letter to Mr. Palladino that the proposal ''raises
serious civil liberties questions concerning the Federal Government's
investigatory authority over private company employees.''

Another proposal would require psychological screening of job applicants and
workers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodia Rebels Attack A Vietnamese Base

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 148 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 11


Cambodian rebels attacked a Vietnamese base near the Thai-Cambodian border today
in a new offensive, Western military sources said.

The sources here said Vietnamese tanks and heavy trucks were bogged down because
of the monsoon season, giving the anti-Government guerrillas an opportunity to
widen their areas of operation.

Officers of the Pol Pot guerrilla group at the Thai-Cambodian border said they
attacked a Vietnamese base today at Nikhom Mahk Hoeun, three miles southeast of
the Thai border town of Aranyaprathet and 120 miles east of Bangkok.

About 30 rebels, armed with mortars and AK-47 assault rifles opened fire on the
base soon after dawn, scattering the 400-strong Vietnamese garrison, the
officials said.

Independent confirmation of the rebel assertions was unavailable but Western
diplomats here noted an upsurge in anti-Vietnamese military operations recently.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
THE HABIT OF WAR

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 807 words

DATELINE: OTTAWA, Sept. 12


The headlines these days are either about people declaring, demonstrating, or
even running riotous for peace, or about wars. Wars offer the greatest variety,
in practically every shape, size and color.

The list reads like the index of an atlas. Lebanon, Chad, Ethiopia, Afghanistan,
Iran-Iraq, Cambodia and Vietnam, Angola and Namibia, Salvador, Nicaragua, with
spills into Honduras and Guatemala. If scenes of bombardment, tanks, men in and
out of uniform hunkering down to shoot, weeping women running for cover with
their babies should pall, then there's communal massacre.

Sri Lanka, Sind, Assam, of late. Staves and stones and knives can also kill
effectively in crowds. If interest slackens with repetition, a new terrorist
attack provides a change: Armenian bombs and assassinations, hijackers, Basques.
Killing in Northern Ireland has worn out its novelty value.

Guerrilla outbursts in a lot of other countries don't get much attention because
it's hard for the world-hopping corps of reporters and cameramen to catch them
in living scream and gore.

That is an irony of the TV age. It brings all the blood and bursting guts up
close so that nobody can imagine the fighting as chivalry or a noble test of
courage any longer. But TV only shows what it happens to see, and it can't be
everywhere.

When fighting erupted again in Beirut, a French defense official said, ''But you
should hear what's happening in Tripoli,'' where Syrians, Palestinians and
Lebanese Moslems of various affiliations were having at each other. ''It makes
Beirut look like child's play.'' There didn't happen to be any newsmen in
Tripoli to watch. They were too busy in Beirut.

Political violence is spreading around the globe as seldom before. It may be
that modern communications bring word of many slaughters that used to be
ignored, except in the neighborhood. But there is such a lot of the violence now
that it's hard to keep track. The assertion of global U.S. interests makes every
oasis and hamlet seem strategic. The late 20th-century conscience in Western
countries makes the horror of it all more urgent, more immediate and ever more
senseless.

The only continent that hasn't recently had a war actively littering some part
of its landscape is Europe, which had its share before. It would be nice to
think the Europeans know better now, but it's unlikely. More probably they've
been restrained by the nuclear and conventional standoff. Deterrence has worked
so far.  But it has only worked in Europe and between the superpowers. Nor can
anyone with sufficient attention span to look at the list of issues imagine that
East-West rivalry is the cause of fighting elsewhere. East and West nourish it,
by providing more and better weapons so more people can get involved in the
mayhem. But there's plenty of local initiative these days when it comes to
people-bashing.  The fact is that nobody is running the world anymore and
keeping a semblance of order. The idea of the United Nations was to provide an
organization that could keep order on a cooperative basis, in place of the old
great power order that broke down in a paroxysm of rivalries.  Instead, with its
emphasis on sovereignty, pride of nation, expression of grievance, the U.N. has
become a log-rolling conclave to keep small disputes aflame while the big power
conflict festers. The international forum was supposed to provide a valve where
the steam of quarrels could be let off in palaver without burning live flesh. It
was intended to impose revulsion against war, isolating and shaming the
miscreants to civilized behavior.  But for all the fine words, enough people
still want to fight to keep the war habit going. Independence, which sounds a
noble goal, has often meant the independent right to shoot and to line up allies
who will trade support for their turn.  There is no occasion for Europe and
North America to crow superior sensitivity to the dementia of war now that the
ultimate weapon has been devised. The Falkland war made Prime Minister Margaret
Thatcher popular to the point of a resounding re-election victory. French
President Francois Mitterrand has reversed his slumping polls a bit at least
partly because of military action in Chad and Lebanon, though the outcome
remains to be seen.  The U.S. is hovering at the brink of wars in Central
America, and active involvement in Lebanon. Peace is in short supply.  Perhaps
we must admit that human society hasn't evolved to the point of seeking peace in
fact as well as in prayer. If that is so, the useful occupation for strategists,
arms technicians and policy makers would be to launch a reverse arms race for
simpler, less destructive weapons. Swords, spears, bows and arrows will permit a
lot more fighting to far less disastrous effect. Bigger isn't always better for
the perverse human compulsion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM BOAT PEOPLE AIDED BY 7TH FLEET

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 140 words


To the Editor:

Roland Paul's letter of Sept. 4 questioned why the U.S. Navy's Seventh Fleet
isn't deployed to assist the Vietnamese boat people.

For some years the Seventh Fleet has been doing just that, as it can, while
supporting the requirements of the national commitments in the Indian Ocean, off
the Persian Gulf, and in the Far East.

For example, in July 1983, coordinated efforts by patrolling P3 aircraft, marine
helicopters, the guided missile cruiser Sterett, and the destroyer Callaghan
located and picked up a total of 808 refugees in five separate incidents
involving overcrowded, foundering or disabled boats. In addition, other P3
aircraft located a 40-foot junk and vectored a French merchant ship to it to
pick up 39 people.
PAUL J. EARLY, Manhasset, L.I., Sept. 6, 1983; The writer is a retired U.S.N.
Rear Admiral.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER TO THE EDITOR

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS;
STANDING UP, SHELLING OUT

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 417 words


The McCarthy Hoax

The median age in America is 30, which means that half the population was born
since 1953 and thus has no recollection of what James Wechsler called ''The Age
of Suspicion.'' Younger Americans have trouble grasping just how suspicious, and
fearful, it was and how Jimmy Wechsler, who died Sunday at 67, resisted it with
clarity and courage.

The Daily Worker, the official Communist Party paper, sneered at him as ''the
frightened child who edits The New York Post.'' Joseph McCarthy snarled at him,
saying he and his paper consistently followed the line of The Daily Worker,
consistently attacked people (like Senator McCarthy) who fought communism.

That kind of crossfire was the ideal place for Jimmy Wechsler. He had tried
Communism briefly as a youth but then rejected it and spent the next 40 years
speaking out as an incisive, independent democratic liberal.

One of his brightest moments came in 1953 when Senator McCarthy called him to
testify. The hearing was to be about Wechsler books then in U.S. Information
Agency libraries abroad. Most of the five hours, however, dealt with Mr.
Wechsler's background and his paper's editorial policies. It could not have been
easy to bark back, as Mr. Wechsler did, ''Senator, let's face it. You are saying
that an ex-Communist who is for McCarthy is a good one and an ex-Communist who
is against McCarthy is suspect.'' He asked other editors for support. A few gave
it, recognizing the effort to intimidate the press. The reluctance of others
made clear how much it was an age of suspicion and fear.  Mr. Wechsler spent a
lifetime speaking out as a conscientious liberal. In 1956, for instance, he
pressed fellow editors to desegregate their association. In 1969, he denounced
the tactics of Vietnam War protesters: ''Anyone who thinks they can get their
opinion across by disrupting a meeting is just a fool.'' But his most memorable
time was the time of, again in his words, the McCarthy hoax. ''What (the
Senator) and like-minded men have done is to distort all reality by picturing
the bedraggled American Communists as far more menacing than the massive Soviet
power, and by identifying with the Communists all those who reject McCarthy's
intolerant version of history,'' he wrote. ''The right to be wrong is an ancient
democratic liberty; like the Soviet prosecutors, the McCarthyites would define
as treason anything that they regard as error.'' Today, that sounds merely wise.
Thirty years ago, it was also brave.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SOUTH KOREA'S AIRLINE AND ITS PILOTS HAVE REPUTATION OF BEING AGGRESSIVE

BYLINE: By STEVE LOHR

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea, Sept. 12


Korean Air Lines, whose off-course 747 carrying 269 people was shot down by the
Soviet Union, has a mixed reputation among aviation officials, industry
executives and pilots.

But all seem to agree that the Korean flag carrier is ''extremely aggressive''
in its quest for rapid growth, its bargain-basement pricing of tickets and its
willingness to assume huge debts to finance its ambitious plans.

According to some airline officials and pilots, the corporate inclination toward
aggressiveness is seen in the flying practices of Korean Air Lines pilots,
nearly all of whom are alumni of the South Korean Air Force.

For example, there is a practice some pilots use to land their plane before
others. Since ground control radar can reach only about 200 miles, a pilot will
give a false position to the control tower from outside its tracking range,
indicating that the plane is closer or better positioned for landing than it is.


Pilots Fond of Jumping Line

Sometimes the control tower will then give that pilot's plane priority for
landing when other planes are ahead of him. Pilots call this ''jumping the
line.''

If it works, the ploy can save fuel and shave several minutes off a flight that
otherwise might have been late.

Until recently, Korean Air Lines pilots had a reputation for being particularly
fond of jumping the line.  ''As you can imagine, they didn't win the love of
their peers for that,'' one pilot said. ''But the Koreans have reformed on that
score in the last couple of years.''

South Korea imports nearly all its fuel and the airline has long struggled to
break even, so Korean pilots are also known as tenacious fuel savers.

There has been speculation that the pilot of the plane that was shot down on
Sept. 1 near the Soviet island of Sakhalin flew over Soviet airspace to take a
more direct route from Anchorage to Seoul to conserve fuel. But foreign pilots
say it is all but inconceivable the pilot would have flown over Soviet territory
intentionally.

No Evidence of Pilot Error

There are no solid clues to why the plane was so far off course and no evidence
that pilot error was to blame.

''As individuals, some of the Koreans are tough, hard-edged characters,'' one
longtime American pilot said. ''That's the reason they have had a reputation
with some people for being kind of macho pilots, guys with more guts than
brains. But to suggest that the Korean pilots take risks with passengers' lives
is unfair and untrue.''

Indeed, the safety record of Korean Air Lines has been excellent. In 1978, a
Soviet jet shot at another Korean airliner, killing two passengers and forcing
the aircraft to land on a frozen lake near the Russian city of Murmansk.

Crashes are rare, however. The most recent one was in November 1980 when a
Korean Air Lines Boeing 747 landed short of the runway at Kimpo International
Airport in Seoul. A fire broke out and 16 people were killed, including the
pilot.



Growth Since 1969

Extraordinary growth has been Korean Air Lines' hallmark since the Government,
in 1969, decided that it should be placed in private hands and chose the Hanjin
Group to do the job.

Hanjin, a diversified transportation company, is headed by two brothers, Cho
Choong Hoon and Cho Choong Kun, and their hard-driving notion of corporate
management is characteristic of many of South Korea's industrialists.

The elder brother, Choong Hoon, or Harry as he is known to friends and
colleagues, is 63 years old. He received a big boost for his fledgling operation
from the Korean War, hauling drinking water by truck to United States troops.
The company also did contract hauling for the United States forces in Vietnam.
Hanjin trucks, it is said, would deliver ammunition to areas where other haulers
were reluctant to go.

130 International Flights a Week

When Hanjin took over in 1969, the revenues of Korean Air Lines were $6.8
million and its work force was about 500. Except for a few flights to Japan, it
was a domestic airline and its fleet consisted of one jet and seven smaller
propellor planes.

In 1982, Korean Air Lines revenues reached $1.1 billion at recent exchange
rates, nearly 180 times the 1969 level. The payroll had about 10,000 workers, 20
times the number in 1969. As of last December, it had 41 aircraft in its fleet
including 14 Boeing 747's and eight A-300's, the so-called European airbus.

Today, among its 130 international flights a week, K.A.L. flies to New York, Los
Angeles, Honolulu, Paris and Zurich, as well as the Philippines, Malaysia,
Japan, Taiwan and Hong Kong. It also flies regularly to the Middle East, where
Korea's construction companies are engaged in several large projects.

Yet in the pursuit of growth, the company has piled up huge debts and priced its
fares so cheaply that profits are scant. At the end of 1982, the company's debt
burden was $1.1 billion.

Can Charge Any Fare It Likes

Last year, Korean Air Lines posted a profit of $6 million. But that followed two
losing years in which the cumulative losses were $47.8 million.

However, K.A.L. has sacrificed profitability by pricing its fares cheaply to
increase its share of the market. For example, many of the passengers on the
flight from New York to Seoul were headed for Japan. Many travelers fly the
extra distance to Seoul and then back to Tokyo because it is so cheap.

A Tokyo travel agent said that with various discounts offered by K.A.L., a
one-way coach fare New York-Seoul- Tokyo could be as cheap as $938. The regular
Japan Air Lines fare from New York to Tokyo is about twice that price.

Under a Korea-United States agreement, Korean Air Lines can charge any fare it
likes for its trans-Pacific runs. Its two United States rivals, Pan American
World Airways and Northwest Orient Airlines, generally match those fares.

Competitors complain that K.A.L. offers rebates to travel agents, which they
call a shady practice and do not match.

In an inteview with a trade magazine last year, Cho Choong Kun called the
accusations ''invalid.'' ''Maybe some salesman who wants to make his quota will
underbid,'' he said. ''But we have to make money and we aren't going to give
away seats for nothing. There is a lot of talk against us by others who have
dirt on their pants yet criticize us for not being clean.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TRAVEL NOTES: WEINBERGER TALKS TO THE TROOPS...

BYLINE: By B. Drummond Ayres

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 827 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 12


Most Cabinet members dress as impeccably on the road as at home, if not more so.
Pinstripe suits, silk ties and glossy wingtips are de rigueur.

But Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger was an exception on his recent
swing through Central America, eschewing the usual ensemble a good part of the
time in favor of clothing more suitable for the task at hand, namely inspecting
grimy, sweltering United States and Central American military bases with an
if-this-is-Wednesday-it-must-be-Tegucigalpa vigor.

From somewhere in his wardrobe he produced a pair of trousers notable for their
cut - pockets low, cuffs high, waist more than ample. But serviceable.

Thus outfitted, and within only an hour or so of arriving in Central America, he
journeyed several hundred yards into a Panamanian jungle to watch a
demonstration of firing by a squad of American infantrymen. The mud was
calf-deep and the vines tugged at his arms and legs, but Mr. Weinberger pushed
on, confident and comfortable in his mufti, deftly avoiding the thorny black
palms and a colony of ''cutter'' ants that were taking apart a gigantic tree,
bite by bite.

Trailing Mr. Weinberger into all this was one of the Pentagon's vice admirals,
Arthur S. Moreau Jr., resplendent, for the first half yard of the hike, in his
starched summer whites and three gold stars. When the firing demonstration
began, he stood apart from the Weinberger party, and not just sartorially, a man
seemingly at sea, pondering the sweaty ''grunts'' who were slithering up the
slimy slope to starb'd.

Is this why men join the Navy?

He did not reply. But a smile as wide as the isthmus creased his face.

The next day, Mr. Weinberger helicoptered out over the Pacific and put down on
the stern of the battleship New Jersey, which fired off her nine 16-inch guns in
his honor, an event only a little bit this side of Armageddon. The Secretary of
Defense suddenly turned tourist, produced a camera and began snapping pictures.
People get a ''fever'' about battleships, said the Jersey's skipper, Capt. W. M.
Fogarty. ''Can you get an innoculation?'' asked the Army representative in the
party, Gen. Paul F. Gorman.

Everywhere Mr. Weinberger stopped on his three-day tour, he carefully emphasized
that the American assistance role in the region was limited to ''helping them
help themselves.'' There were no plans, he said, for Americans troops to engage
in combat against leftist guerrillas.

By all available evidence, uniformed American military advisers - ''trainers''
is the approved euphemism - are not exceeding their orders. But some mumbled
privately during the Weinberger visit that they would like nothing better than a
crack at the guerrillas, and many others seemed deeply frustrated by the
operational shackles placed on them.

At one point, while Mr. Weinberger was receiving a closed-door briefing on the
operations that American-trained government troops were conducting in El
Salvador, reporters accompanying him cornered some American advisers and began
peppering them with questions. Their answers dealt entirely with the troops'
training regimen. But how are they in combat, the reporters persisted.

''How should I know?'' one adviser shot back with a sardonic smile. ''I can't go
into combat with them.''

Mr. Weinberger picked up quickly on this frustration and, like a good commanding
officer, did what he could to alleviate it when he met briefly with a dozen of
the 55 American advisers assigned to El Salvador. ''I can understand your
getting a little discouraged at times,'' he said. ''But your work is important
and it is paying off. I have been very encouraged, very heartened.''

Two things stood out about the American military personnel who briefed the
Weinberger party. Most were fluent in Spanish and most wore the Combat
Infantryman's Badge, an indication that they had seen war somewhere else,
probably in Vietnam.

There may or may not be parallels between what is happening in El Salvador and
what happened in Vietnam. Mr. Weinberger apparently saw some because he
repeatedly spoke of the need to dovetail military action with civic action. In
fact, that was his most persistent theme at he toured Panama, El Salvador and
Honduras.

But whether or not there are parallels, because so many of the American advisers
in Central America know the language and because they have some historical
perspective, they speak with considerable authority when they compare Vietnam
and El Salvador.

''I will tell you a story,'' one American adviser said. ''The army here conducts
sweeps and pushes out the guerrillas, just like in Vietnam. Then the army here
leaves and the guerrillas slip back in, just like in Vietnam. But in recent
months, the people in the towns and countryside have begun reporting the return
of the guerrillas, and Government troops have been able to trap some units. If
that had happened more in Vietnam, that war would have turned out differently.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Caspar Weinberger

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
DAWKINS BECOMING A LEHMAN PARTNER

BYLINE: By Daniel F. Cuff

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 496 words


Maybe military discipline would help solve the financial problems of many
municipalities. This might explain, at least partly, why Lehman Brothers Kuhn
Loeb Inc. has named a retired brigadier general as its newest general partner.

Lehman Brothers, one of Wall Street's biggest securities firms, said it had
chosen Peter M. Dawkins, 45 years old, to head its public finance group. He was
the nation's youngest brigadier general on active duty when he retired from the
Army on July 29.

General Dawkins, who will join Lehman Brothers Oct. 1, has never worked on Wall
Street, and his appointment introduces him to the rarefied world of municipal
finance. In an interview, he conceded that he is just beginning to learn what is
required in financing the nation's towns, cities and states.

But General Dawkins said that his 24 years as a military officer would serve him
well in managing Lehman's 80-member public finance group. And he said that his
extensive education in politics and economics would help him understand public
finance. In addition to holding numerous high- ranking military posts, most
recently as director of strategic planning for the Army, General Dawkins studied
politics and philosophy as a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford and received a Ph.D. in
international politics from Princeton, and he is a member of the Council on
Foreign Relations.

''The attractiveness of public finance is that it will permit me to take
advantage of my experience in the public policy arena,'' General Dawkins said.

The financing problems awaiting General Dawkins in his new job will be
difficult. Although public finance has grown into a $65 billion-a-year business,
bigger than the market for corporate debt, many of Wall Street's municipal
clients (Lehman Brothers' customers included) are nonetheless facing widening
budget deficits while some citizens are growing increasingly resistant to tax
increases to close those deficits.

''There is no question that there is a problem finding the capital needed to
finance municipalities,'' said General Dawkins, who was decorated 16 times in
the Army for service and valor, including bravery in Vietnam. ''Since it is
becoming increasingly hard for cities to raise the money needed for sewers,
roads and the like through taxes, new means have to be found to get people to
invest in these entities.''

General Dawkins said he hopes to spend the first months of his Wall Street
career meeting with city and state officials to try to head off financing
problems before they arise. He also said he would try to improve the reporting
system that investors use to judge the creditworthiness of cities and states.

General Dawkins is a graduate of West Point, where he was president of his class
and winner of football's Heisman Trophy as a running back. He declined to
discuss his pay at Lehman Brothers. As a general partner, however, he will
receive stock in the firm, and his annual salary and bonus will likely be well
above $100,000.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Peter M. Dawkins

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 14, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'RESTLESS' MCGOVERN RENEWS QUEST FOR PRESIDENCY

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 887 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 13


George McGovern, who got only 17 electoral votes in his unsuccessful bid to
unseat President Nixon in 1972, announced today before a cheering college
audience that he would seek the 1984 Democratic Presidential nomination on a
platform of ''realism and common sense.''

''You have to do what you have to do, and I have to do this,'' Mr. McGovern said
as he joined six other Democrats competing for the nomination.

Mr. McGovern, who gained his party's 1972 Presidential nomination on a promise
to end American military involvement in Vietnam, said the issues today were
''far more grave'' and pledged changes in United States foreign policy from
Central America to the Middle East.

The former Senator from South Dakota, breaking with the party's 1980 platform on
Israel, told an audience of college Democrats at George Washington University
here that the time had come ''to tell the warring parties of the Middle East
that there will be no more American aid and no more American soldiers unless
Arabs and Israelis and Palestinians get to the conference table and begin at
long last serious negotiations for peace.''

'Even-Handed' Policy in Mideast Later, in a question-and-answer session with
reporters, Mr. McGovern was asked if he was proposing a change in the special
relationship between the United States and Israel.

''Only in the sense that they would be treated the same as other countries in
the Mideast if I became convinced that Israel was blocking reasonable
negotiations for a settlement,'' he replied.

Vowing an ''even-handed'' policy in the Middle East, Mr. McGovern said he would
recommend a ''significant'' cut in military aid to Israel or any other country
in the region that refused to negotiate in good faith.

''We should not reserve any influence and power that we have in bringing the
warring parties to the conference table,'' he said. ''It's the only way we can
exert any effective leverage.''

In response to another question, the 61-year-old candidate said anyone seeking
the Presidency had ''an obligation not to permit American foreign policy to
become hostage in the hands of any country.''

At Odds With Party Platform

Mr. McGovern's policy statement put him at odds with the 1980 Democratic Party
platform, which states: ''We have not and will not use our aid to Israel as a
bargaining tool.''

Mr. McGovern also said he would end all United States military involvement in
Central America, begin ''a new day'' in relations with Cuba, which he has
visited several times since his 1972 candidacy, and ''substantially'' reduce
military spending after ratification of ''a verifiable arms control agreement''
with the Soviet Union. The recent incident in which a South Korean airliner with
269 people aboard strayed off course and was shot down by a Soviet fighter off
Siberia ''underscores the folly of the present cold war tension,'' he said.

On the domestic side, Mr. McGovern proposed increased Federal spending for
education and job training, and a public-private partnership to create jobs and
build the ''finest railway system in the world.''

''I believe I am ready now as at no previous time in my life to lead this nation
toward justice, honor and peace,'' Mr. McGovern told his audience of students,
most of whom were no more than 12 years old when he made his unsuccessful bid to
unseat President Nixon in 1972.

In that election, only Massachusetts, with 14 electoral votes, and the District
of Columbia, with 3, went to Mr. McGovern. Mr. Nixon won by a record popular
vote margin of nearly 18 million out of 77.5 million votes.

Nixon's Resignation Recalled

Mr. McGovern said today that his failure in 1972 was ''honorable'' compared to
the ''shameful behavior'' of Mr. Nixon, who resigned on Aug. 9, 1974, rather
than face impeachment for his role in the Watergate scandals. He was the first
President in United States history to resign the office.

After losing a bid for re-election to the Senate in 1980, Mr. McGovern founded a
political action group called Americans for Common Sense to challenge the
policies of the Reagan Administration.

Mr. McGovern begins his latest Presidential campaign late, without any
organization, staff or money and against the advice of some family members and
friends. He explained his decision today by saying he had become ''increasingly
restless on the sidelines'' and hoped to ''take advantage of that great forum''
of Presidential politics to shape the national debate on important issues.  He
also said the performance of his six Democratic rivals in raising issues had
nothing to do with his decision to enter the race. Saying he was ''proud of
these candidates,'' Mr. McGovern added that he was particularly impressed by the
way Senator Gary Hart of Colorado had challenged old assumptions about military
spending.

Mr. Hart, who managed Mr. McGovern's 1972 Presidential campaign, was out of town
campaigning and not available for comment on Mr. McGovern's candidacy, according
to a spokesman, Kathy Bushkin.

On stage with Mr. McGovern were members of his family, former campaign aides,
including his longtime fund-raiser, Henry Kimmelman, and friends. His wife,
Eleanor, told reporters before her husband's announcement that she supported his
decision but would not become actively involved in the campaign.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George McGovern

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 14, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOTH SIDES AT BRINK'S TRIAL MAKE FINAL ARGUMENTS

BYLINE: By ROBERT HANLEY

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 762 words

DATELINE: GOSHEN, N.Y., Sept. 13


Final arguments were made in the Brink's trial today. The defense said the $1.6
million robbery and triple murder was an act of armed revolution, and the
prosecution called the crime ''barbarism.''

It was a day marked by defiant rhetoric from the three defendants, Judith A.
Clark, David J. Gilbert and Kuwasi Balagoon, who acted as their own lawyers, and
an appeal for justice from the prosecutor.

In an hour of statements before lunch, the defendants, in calm and measured
tones, denounced the court as a ''tool of imperialist rule'' and an ''armed
camp.'' They extolled socialism and likened themselves to insurgents in El
Salvador, Lebanon, Vietnam and Northern Ireland.

They said the robbery, which they called an ''expropriation,'' was a justifiable
way of financing black liberation and creating a black nation in five Southern
states.

Reconstruction of Robbery

After the three finished reading their statements and left the courtroom, the
prosecutor, Kenneth Gribetz, District Attorney of Rockland County, spent 2 hours
and 45 minutes summing up his case.

In staccato fashion, he reconstructed in minute detail the taking of six
moneybags from a Brink's armored car outside the Nanuet National Bank on Oct.
20, 1981; the slaying of a Brink's guard and the wounding of another; the
robbers' switch from a van to a larger getaway truck, and a roadblock shootout
minutes later, in which two Nyack policemen were killed in a hail of fire from
automatic weapons.

In equally deliberate fashion, he reviewed the testimony of most of the 86
eyewitnesses and law-enforcement officials he had called to the witness stand
during the trial. His presentation became impassioned only in its closing
minutes. The families of the three dead men, the guard, Peter Paige; Sergeant
Edward O'Grady, and Officer Waverly Brown, did not want ''one ounce of
sympathy,'' he said.

''They and I are simply asking that justice be done,'' he said. ''The evidence
is simply overwhelming.''

'A Most Critical Day'

He said the jury of seven men and five women was to begin deliberating robbery
and murder charges against the defendants tomorrow, after the charge from the
presiding judge, David S. Ritter, of Orange County Court.

''Tomorrow is, in fact, a most solemn day, a most critical day,'' Mr. Gribetz
said.

The tone of the defense's closing arguments was set by Mr. Gilbert, the first of
the three to speak. He said the defendants had not challenged any of the
evidence and testimony offered by prosecution witnesses.

''We have refused to contest the evidence because, regardless of which
individuals were or were not involved in this particular action, the fundamental
issue is the just struggle for New African national liberation from U.S.
imperialism,'' Mr. Gilbert said. ''An expropriation is a necessary and
legitimate tactic for oppressed people. Revolution is the only solution to the
strife and misery in today's world.''

'We Are at War'

Miss Clark, continued the theme. ''At issue is the right to raise up arms
against tyranny,'' she said. ''We say it was an attempted expropriation, because
revolutionary forces must take from the powers that be to build their
capabilities to struggle against this system. Revolutionary violence is a
necessary and liberating force.''

In the opening portions of his statement, Mr. Balagoon, said:

''It is not the people, but the United States Government and its oppressive
apparatus that we are at war against. It's clear the guerrillas intended to
shoot police, and that's who they shot. They shot the enemy.''

Mr. Balagoon turned to the fatal shooting of Mr. Paige, the Brink's guard, as he
sought to load moneybags into the truck. In the past, he said, the group called
the Black Liberation Army had taken credit for ''preplanned assassination'' of
police officers as ''retaliation for terrorist acts against black people.''

Criticism of Guard

''Never has a guard or a bank teller been shot down as part of a plan,'' he
said. ''No unit of the B.L.A. has ever done this, including the unit involved in
the expropriation of Oct. 20, 1981. Money couriers are safe as long as they
don't put their bodies in the way of somebody else's money. This is because the
goal of an expropriation is to collect revolutionary, compulsory tax and not
casualties.

''Had Peter Paige not acted the fool, he would've lived. Paige died for his
bosses, not for himself, his family or his fellow workers. Dead guards don't
bring us a step closer to land and independence and don't add a cent to the war
chest.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 14, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: CHILDREN OF 60'S IN WEEKEND REUNION

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 991 words


EARLY on in Kathleen Tolan's ''Weekend Near Madison,'' a new play about aging
moonchildren of the 1960's, a blocked painter named Jim (Randle Mell) explains
his views about art. For art to be vital, he says, it must be ''raw'' and
''without skin'': an artist must create because he has no choice, because his
work simply ''had to be done.'' Curiously enough, it is exactly this urgency
that proves to be missing from the play that follows. There are patches of
lively writing in ''A Weekend Near Madison,'' but the evening seems methodical,
not deeply felt. It's a novice playwright's exercise - a paint-by-numbers
portrait of its subject, rather than a heated creation.

Because the subject is far from new, the formulaic contrivances of Miss Tolan's
comedy stand out more visibly than they might otherwise. ''A Weekend Near
Madison,'' which has arrived at the Astor Place Theater following its acclaimed
March premiere at the Actors Theater of Louisville, belongs to a genre that is
now as familiar to present-day audiences as World War II battallion movies were
to audiences of another day.


Five former communards of the Vietnam War era - two brothers and three women in
their lives - come together for a weekend reunion at a house in the woods of
Wisconsin. Need I tell you the rest? Like the drifting idealists of Michael
Weller's ''Loose Ends'' or Lanford Wilson's ''Fifth of July'' or Deborah
Eisenberg's ''Pastorale'' or John Sayles's ''Return of the Secaucus Seven,''
Miss Tolan's lost hipsters must at last reconcile their youthful dreams to the
pressing realities and disappointments of onrushing middle age.

The talented writers who have previously worked over this undeniably fertile
territory have all, somewhat remarkably, made it their own. In her first act,
Miss Tolan sometimes does, too. The funniest and most biting interlude in
''Madison'' occurs when David (Bill Mesnik), a resolutely nonsexist
psychiatrist, challenges the ideological rhetoric of Nessa (Mary McDonnell), a
lesbian feminist. When Nessa makes the pronouncement that ''nothing's going to
change if we keep sleeping with our oppressors,'' David boils over to reply that
some aspects of the women's movement have left men ''so intimidated'' that they
just ''don't want to bother anymore.'' And David's wife, Doe (Robin Groves), a
nonproductive short-story writer (who, like Miss Tolan, seems an Ann Beattie
manque), chimes in by telling Nessa: ''Life is more complicated than you want to
admit.''

This debate, unlike much of the play, touches a real nerve, but it is also
stacked a bit. Nessa's arguments are so laced with psychobabble that she's a
paper tiger - a far from ideal proselytizer for radical feminism. But, to her
credit, Miss Tolan eventually probes this woman's self-contradictions more
forcefully.

For all Nessa's devotion to sisterly segregation, she desperately wants a child
- and, to get one, she must sexually exploit a man, her former boyfriend Jim, by
having him plant the seed in the most dehumanized carnal tryst imaginable.
Unfortunately, the complex and explosive dynamics of this situation are not
really explored in any depth. Except for one moving moment when the past bleeds
into the present - the hurt Jim plaintively asks Nessa, ''Do you remember me?''
- Miss Nolan milks her main plot for a series of progressively more tiresome
boulevard-farce gags.

The play's other conflicts are thin. The troubled relationships between the two
brothers, Dave and Jim, and between Dave and his wife, are vaguely stated and,
in Act II, resolved all too suddenly by authorial fiat. As is the case with too
many Louisville-spawned plays, melodramatic symbols and plot flourishes abound.
One first begins to lose confidence in Miss Tolan when a maple tree is
portentously struck down by lightning in Act I - and sure enough, this gambit is
soon followed by the manipulative, stagey revelations of one character's
inability to bear children and another, unseen character's pregnant-with-meaning
off-stage death.


There are some amusing digressions - notably one in which Doe, who's overdosing
on bucolic country life, yearns rhapsodically for the invigorating chaos of New
York City. But the playwright rarely gets a convincing conversational flow
going: Her people don't usually speak in the casual shorthand of old friends,
and Jim and Doe sound programmed when talking about their artistic callings.
Lacking the keen ear for the dialogue of her predecessors in this milieu, Miss
Tolan often relies on bombastic announcements (''I want to stop feeling that
I've had my womanhood wrenched from me!''), an excess of unreconstructed period
slang (from ''far out!'' on down) and some set pieces in which the characters
too pointedly reveal that they yearn to be ''connected'' again with the
traditional values of their bourgeois childhoods: When the going gets rough,
Nessa's childish lover, Samantha (Holly Hunter), calls home to Mom and the
doleful Jim sits down for some reassuring graham crackers and milk.

The production reflects the shortage of delicacy, repose and specificity in the
writing. Thomas Lynch's living room-kitchen set is so bland it could serve a
hundred other plays, and Emily Mann's staging pushes almost every joke and
catharsis too aggressively. Within these limitations and with the exception of
Mr. Mesnik's stilted psychiatrist, the cast is a good one - with the appealing,
reflective Mr. Mell doing the most to puncture the skin of artifice that, as his
character would say, deprives ''A Weekend Near Madison'' of art's raw,
spontaneous air.

Belated Discoveries

A WEEKEND NEAR MADISON, by Kathleen Tolan; directed by Emily Mann; scenery,
Thomas Lynch; costumes, Karen Gerson; lighting, Craig Miller; sound, Tom Gould.
Presented by Dasha Epstein. At the Astor Place Theater, 434 Lafayette Street.
Jim Randle Mell
Doe Robin Groves
David Bill Mesnik
Nessa Mary McDonnell
Samantha Holly Hunter

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Randle Mell

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 14, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Short Night's Work Likely for Mancini

BYLINE: Michael Katz on Boxing

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 564 words


The crowd, apparently a fair-sized one, will be coming to see Ray (Boom Boom)
Mancini tomorrow night at Madison Square Garden. According to one of the few
American experts on Orlando Romero of Peru, Mancini's undefeated but suspect
challenger, the crowd will not be kept long.

Vinnie Pazienza, a 20-year-old professional from Cranston, R.I., who has yet to
go beyond four rounds, was hired by Romero as a sparring partner. Pazienza, who
resembles Mancini facially as well as in boxing style, said his week's work
consisted of one round.

''Then they pulled me out of the ring,'' he said. ''He's weak. I was bulling him
around. And I was boxing him, too, picking him apart. His managers asked what my
rating was. When I told them I had only five pro fights, their faces dropped.''

Romero appears to be the latest in a long line of World Boxing Association
top-ranked contenders with minimal ability. A tall, thin southpaw with good
movement but no punch, he should not be able to keep Mancini off long.

One reason that Lou Duva, Scott Frank's former manager, was not in Frank's
corner Saturday night was a major strategy disagreement on how best to fight
Larry Holmes. Duva said he was dismissed from the corner because he wanted Frank
''to go out and throw everything, everywhere, and go as far as you can.''
Frank's fight plan was based on wearing out Holmes with his chin; he and his
manager, Nelson Gross, wanted to go as far as possible in the slim hope that
Holmes would tire.

Holmes, incidentally, found the four-and-one-half-round sparring session with
Frank useful. The heavyweight champion will be 34 years old when he faces Marvis
Frazier in November, and has been searching for his proper weight at that age.
He was 223 pounds for the Frank fight, but said he felt much stronger than he
did when he at 213 for Tim Witherspoon in May.

''I found out where I have to be,'' he said yesterday. ''I need to be about
three pounds lighter for Frazier.''

Holmes was 209 when he won the title 5 years ago from Ken Norton. But he said,
''The older you get, the more weight you need to feel strong.'' Last year, he
said, he was ''a little weak'' at 212 1/2 for Gerry Cooney and about right at
217 1/2 for Randall (Tex) Cobb.

When Aaron Pryor insists that only a fight against Mancini can stop him from
retiring, the 140-pound champion is careful not to rule out a comeback if, for
example, ''a Johnny Bumphus builds himself up.'' A Pryor- Bumphus fight now,
which is mandatory according to W.B.A. rules, would not be a bonanza. But if
Pryor were to retire and Bumphus won the vacant title, a bout against Pryor
making a comeback as challenger could be big.

Holmes, too, is aware of that sort of thinking. It would not be surprising to
see the heavyweight champion ''retire'' after meeting young Frazier Nov. 25,
then come back to meet his eventual successor.


Cobb, who has not fought since Holmes beat him in 15 rounds last Nov. 26, said
he would return to the gym soon. He took time out to make a movie, ''Uncommon
Valor,'' starring Gene Hackman. ''It's one of those 'Magnificent Seven' deals
where a bunch of Vietnam vets go back to rescue some M.I.A.'s,'' said Cobb,
meaning soldiers missing in action.

Holmes could not completely stop Cobb in the mismatch that drove Howard Cosell
from ringsides, but the Texan meets his match in the movie: an M-60 machine gun.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 15, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT PRESSED TO SEEK APPROVAL FOR MARINES' ROLE

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 910 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 14


Senate Democrats called on President Reagan today to acknowledge that the War
Powers Resolution had been set off by attacks on the United States marines in
Lebanon and to ask for Congressional approval for keeping the marines there.

In a statement adopted unanimously by the party caucus, the Democrats urged Mr.
Reagan to transmit to Congress a report required by the resolution when American
troops face hostilities abroad and to ask Congress for authority to maintain the
Marine peacekeeping mission in the Middle East.

The Democrats' action complicated continuing efforts by Congressional and White
House negotiators to reach a compromise way of invoking the War Powers
Resolution. After a day of talks on Capitol Hill, an aide to the Senate
leadership said several points of ''great division'' remained.

Lebanon Cease-Fire Sought

In other developments in the Middle East, Saudi Arabian and American negotiators
pressed Syria to agree to a cease-fire between Syrian-backed Druse militiamen
and Lebanese Army troops fighting for control of the mountains overlooking
Beirut. (Page A6.)

Administration officials and diplomats here said today that the United States
had asked Israel, on behalf of the Lebanese Government, to use its military
forces, including air power, to attack Druse positions in the Shuf Mountains
about a week ago and that the Israelis had refused. (Page A7.)

Senate Democrats, led by Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the minority
leader, seem determined to force the war powers issue if a compromise with the
White House could not be found. House Democrats said today that they would
proceed with their own action on the War Powers Resolution if attempts to reach
a compromise with the White House fell through.

What the Law Says

''We are not seeking a confrontation with the White House,'' Representative Jim
Wright of Texas, the majorty leader, said. ''We're seeking that the law be
carried out.''

The War Powers Resolution, which was adopted as a result of the Vietnam War in
1973, says the President must notify Congress when American troops face a combat
situation and must then withdraw those troops within 60 days unless Congress
gives specific authorization to keep them where they are. The 60-day period can
be extended by 30 days.

The first problem in reaching a compromise is that the White House does not want
to invoke the War Powers Resolution and would prefer a general statement of
support from Capitol Hill. Adminstration officials have expressed fears that
invoking the resolution will set a bad precedent and give Congress too much
authority over foreign policy decisions.

That position is unacceptable to most legislators, including many Republicans,
so negotiators have been trying to work out language that would ''save face''
for Mr. Reagan and make it clear that Congress, not the President, was invoking
the War Powers Resolution.

But today's statement by the Senate Democrats insisted that the President
recognize the authority of the resolution, which could increase the difficulty
of finding compromise language if the Democrats stick to this position.

The second stumbling block is how long Congress will let the Administration keep
troops in Lebanon without additional authority. One draft advanced by House
Democrats would give Mr. Reagan 18 months, but some party liberals have said
this is too long.

Creating an Election Issue

Representative Clement J. Zablocki, the Wisconsin Democrat who heads the Foreign
Affairs Committee, said he would favor a ''reasonable time'' and defined that as
''at least a year.'' A year's authorization, if enacted now, would expire during
next year's political campaign, and legislators are afraid the matter could then
become an election issue.

The third problem is deciding what will happen when the President's authority
runs out. The first draft by House Democrats would require the troops to come
home immediately, but the White House would like a provision requiring
consultations with Congress when the authority for keeping them abroad expires.

The overwhelming feeling on Capitol Hill among members of both parties is that
the War Powers Resolution should be invoked to cover the situation in Lebanon.
Many insist that the law automatically went into effect on Aug. 29, when United
States Marines came under hostile fire and two were killed.

Some lawmakers are uneasy about the presence of the Marines in Lebanon and worry
about where that commitment of troops could lead the United States. But for now,
there is strong support for the Administration's basic policy of keeping the
troops as a peacekeeping force.

Criticism of Congress

Where Congress and the President differ is over how much authority the lawmakers
have to endorse and authorize that policy. The lawmakers might support the
President's policy today, but they are determined to assert their right to block
that policy in the future if conditions change.

Not all lawmakers agree that Congress should insist on invoking its rights under
the War Powers Resolution, and some feel that their colleagues are too concerned
about protecting their interests in institutional power battles.

Representative Trent Lott of Mississippi, the Republican whip, said Congress
should not become immobilized over ''claims over our manhood.'' He said, ''We're
more concerned about the role we're playing than about what's happening and what
should be done.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Senator Robert Byrd

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 15, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT THE WAR POWERS RESOLUTION SAYS

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1341 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 15


Congress passed the War Powers Resolution in 1973 over a Presidential veto. It
was a reaction to the Vietnam War and was intended to control Presidential
discretion in introducing American troops into hostilities abroad. It has been
opposed by every President since then. The deaths of five marines in Lebanon
since President Reagan sent them there has raised the issue of whether Congress
should now have the opportunity of voting on their continued presence in
Lebanon. Here are excerpts from the resolution.

Purpose and Policy

(A) It is the purpose of this joint resolution to fulfill the intent of the
framers of the Constitution of the United States and insure that the collective
judgment of both the Congress and the President will apply to the introduction
of United States armed forces into hostilities, or into situations where
imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances,
and to the continued use of such forces in hostilities or in such situations.

(B) Under Article 1, Section 8, of the Constitution, it is specifically provided
that the Congress shall have the power to make all laws necessary and proper for
carrying into execution, not only its own powers but also all other powers
vested by the Constitution in the Government of the United States or in any
department or officer thereof.

(C) The Constitutional powers of the President as Commander in Chief to
introduce United States armed forces into hostilities, or into situations where
imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances,
are execised only pursuant to (1) a declaration of war, (2) specific statutory
authorization, or (3) a national emergency created by attack upon the United
States, its territories or possessions, or its armed forces.

Consultation

The President in every possible instanceshall consult with Congress before
introducing United States armed forces into hostilities or into situations where
imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances,
and after every such introduction shall consult regularly with the Congress
until United States armed forces are no longer engaged in hostilities or have
been removed from such situations.

Reporting

(A) In the absence of a declaration of war, in any case in which United States
armed forces are introduced

(1) into hostilities or into situations where imminent involvement in
hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances;

(2) into the territory, airspace or waters of a foreign nation, while equipped
for combat, except for deployments which relate solely to supply, replacement,
repair, or training of such forces; or

(3) in numbers which substantially enlarge United States armed forces equipped
for combat already located in a foreign nation;

the President shall submit with 48 hours to the Speaker of the House of
Representatives and to the President pro tempore of the Senate a report, in
writing, setting forth

(a) the circumstances necessitating the introduction of United States armed
forces;

(b) the constitutional and legislative authority under which such introduction
took place; and

(c) the estimated scope and duration of the hostilities or involvement.  (B) The
President shall provide such other information as the Congress may request in
the fulfillment of its constitutional responsibilities with respect to
committing the nation to war and to the use of United States armed forces
abroad.

(C) Whenever United States armed forces are introduced into hostilities or into
any situation described in subsection (A) of this section, the President shall,
so long as such armed forces continue to be engaged in such hostilities or
situation, report to the Congress periodically on the status of such hostilities
or situation as well as on the scope and duration of such hostilities or
situation, but in no event shall he report to the Congress less often than once
every six months.

Congressional Action

(A) Each report submitted pursuant to Section 4 (A)(1) shall be transmitted to
the Speaker of the House of Representatives and to the President pro tempore of
the Senate on the same calendar day. Each report so transmitted shall be
referred to the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives and
to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate for appropriate action. If,
when the report is transmitted, the Congress has adjourned sine die or has
adjourned for any period in excess of three calendar days, the Speaker of the
House of Representatives and the President pro tempore of the Senate, if they
deem it advisable, or if petitioned by at least 80 percent of the membership of
their respective houses, shall jointly request the President to convene in order
that it may consider the report and take appropriate action pursuant to this
section.

(B) Within 60 calendar days after a report is submitted or is required to be
submitted pursuant to Section 4(A)(1), whichever is earlier, the President shall
terminate any use of United States armed forces with respect to which such
report was submitted (or required to be submitted), unless the Congress (1) has
declared war or has enacted a specific authorization for such use of United
States armed forces, (2) has extended by law such 60-day period, or (3) is
physically unable to meet as a result of an armed attack upon the United States.
Such 60- day period shall be extended for not more than an additional 30 days if
the President determines and certifies to the Congress in writing that
unavoidable military necessity respecting the safety of United States armed
forces requires the continued use of such armed forces in the course of bringing
about a prompt removal of such forces.

(C) Notwithstanding subsection (B), at any time that United States armed forces
are engaged in hostilities outside the territory of the United States, its
possessions and territories without a declaration of war or specific statutory
authorization, such forces shall be removed by the President if the Congress so
directs by concurrent resolution.

Interpretation of Joint Resolution

(A) Authority to introduce United States armed forces into hostilities or into
situations wherein involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the
circumstance shall not be inferred

(1) from any provision of law (whether or not in effect before the date of the
enactment of this joint resolution), including any provision contained in any
appropriation act, unless such provision specifically authorizes the
introduction of United States armed forces into hostilities or into such
situations and states that it is intended to constitute specific statutory
authorization within the meaning of this joint resolution; or

(2) from any treaty heretofore or hereafter ratified unless such treaty is
implemented by legislation specifically authorizing the introduction of United
States armed forces into hostilities or into such situations and stating that it
is intended to constitute specific statutory authorization within the meaning of
this joint resolution.

(B) Nothing in this joint resolution shall be construed to require any further
specific statutory authorization to permit members of United States armed forces
to participate jointly with members of the armed forces of one or more foreign
countries in the headquarters operations of high-level military commands which
were established prior to the date of enactment of this joint resolution and
pursuant to the United Nations Charter or any treaty ratified by the United
States prior to such date.

(C) For purpose of this joint resolution, the term ''introduction of United
States armed forces'' includes the assignment of members of such armed forces to
command, coordinate, participate in the movement or accompany the regular or
irregular military forces of any foreign country or government when such
military forces are engaged, or there exists an imminent threat that such forces
will become engaged in hostilities.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 15, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AND SAUDIS PRESS SYRIA TO AGREE TO LEBANON TRUCE

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 983 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Sept. 14


Saudi Arabian and American negotiators pressed Syria tonight to agree to a
cease-fire between Syrian-backed Druse militiamen and Lebanese Army troops
fighting for control of mountains overlooking Beirut.

Both the Saudi Arabian mediator, Prince Bandar bin Sultan, and the American
special envoy, Robert C. McFarlane, were in Damascus for yet another attempt to
persuade the Syrian President, Hafez al-Assad, to agree to a truce on terms
acceptable to the Lebanese Government. After his talks there, Mr. McFarlane flew
back to Beirut for a meeting with President Amin Gemayel.

A senior Lebanese official, who declined to be identified because of his direct
involvement in the negotiations, said the Syrians had been holding firm to their
demand that the Lebanese Army withdraw from the Shuf and Aleih mountain
districts southeast of Beirut and be replaced by the largely Moslem Internal
Security Force, Lebanon's lightly armed paramilitary police organization.

Force Under Premier's Control

The Lebanese Government has often used the force, which is nominally under the
control of the Moslem Prime Minister, Shafik al-Wazzan, as an alternative to the
army when local leftist warlords have objected to the army's deployment because
of what they describe as its pro-Christian bias.

Lebanese Government sources said President Gemayel had rejected any restriction
on the deployment of the national army in Lebanon.

The sources said the Syrians wanted to do everything they could to prevent the
Gemayel Government from establishing effective control over any areas outside
greater Beirut.

The Syrians are said to believe that the weaker and more beleaguered the Gemayel
Government becomes, the less the chance of its ever putting into effect the
agreement it reached with Israel for the withdrawal of Israeli forces from
Lebanon. Damascus believes the accord, if carried out, would leave Lebanon in
the Israeli political orbit.

Druse Getting Syrian Arms

The Syrians, who have been providing the Druse with arms, logistical support
and, according to the Lebanese Government, manpower, have gradually come to
dominate the Druse negotiating position. Sources familiar with the negotiations
say Walid Jumblat, the Druse leader, is no longer in a position either to
approve or to reject any settlement without the prior consent of the Syrian
Foreign Minister, Abdel Halim Khaddam.

For the last three days the fighting in the mountains has occurred on two main
battlefronts. The first has involved continued artillery and small- arms
exchanges between Lebanese Army units bunkered in the strategic highway town of
Suk al Gharb, which sits atop the mountain ridge overlooking the capital from
the east, and Syrian-backed Druse militiamen trying to storm the town.

According to Lebanese Army sources, the Druse attacks have degenerated in
strength. The sources said there now was no chance that the Lebanese Army
position in Suk al Gharb would fall to the present array of forces facing it.

Christians Driven Back

The second front has pitted the Druse and Christian Phalangist militiamen in a
struggle for control of a string of villages, including Saadiyat, Mishrif and
Barja, dotting the coastal hills some 10 miles south of Beirut. These villages
are the Phalangist militia's last major strongholds around the Shuf region, the
Christians having been driven out of most of the mountain district during the
last two weeks of fighting.

Western military sources said that the Phalange militia had been dealt a serious
blow in the recent hostilities and that many of its best fighters had been
killed or wounded. The Phalange, one informant said, is ''no longer capable of
projecting power'' outside its traditional base in East Beirut and the mountains
to the north.

Both Sides Bolstering Forces

But the subdued fighting in the mountains, in the opinion of some Western
military analysts, may just be the calm before the storm. Both sides apparently
believe that their bargaining positions might be substantially improved by
further military action, and both are reported to be engaged in large-scale
buildups of arms and men.

The Lebanese Army has managed to build up its force defending Suk al Gharb to
1,200 men, according to army sources, and in the nearby villages of Brummana and
Monte Verde they are accompanied by both artillery and armor and are backed by
155-millimeter howitzers. The army has accelerated all its training programs to
get more men into the field, the sources said, and is also expected to receive
additional armor and artillery from the United States far ahead of schedule.

Western military sources said aerial reconnaissance had revealed that the
Syrians had built up a huge stock of ammunition around the Syrian-dominated Shuf
villages of Hammana and Bhamdun in apparent preparation for further fighting.

Convoy Reported Destroyed

The state-run Beirut radio said Lebanese Army gunners today destroyed a convoy
of ''foreign gunmen'' two miles east of Suk al Gharb, as they were advancing
toward the mountain battlefront. The gunmen were believed to have been either
Syrians or Palestinian guerrillas.

The radio also said a large number of Palestinian guerrillas, including one
convoy of 15 trucks and six anti-aircraft guns, were seen moving today through
the Bekaa, Lebanon's eastern valley, toward the Shuf Mountains.

Meanwhile, Syria's state-controlled newspapers and broadcasts heaped criticism
today on the Reagan Administration's announcement Tuesday that it had decided to
grant more latitude to American Marine and naval units participating in the
multinational peacekeeping force here to respond to attacks on them by Syrian
supported anti-Government forces.

The daily Al Baath said the Reagan Administration had ''taken the war decision
in Lebanon'' and clearly intended to ''change the area into another Vietnam.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Beirut

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 15, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Fight Against Apartheid

BYLINE: By Laurie Johnston and Susan Heller Anderson

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 211 words


Arthur Ashe and Harry Belafonte, with other athletes and performing artists,
urged their colleagues yesterday to join a newly organized boycott of South
Africa to protest apartheid.

At a news conference in the United Nations Secretariat, the two maintained that
South Africa refused to allows blacks to vote, to own property and to move
freely about the country. Therefore, they said, performers should not appear
there. The boycott is up for approval before the Screen Actors Guild and Actors
Equity, the two added.

Persuasion, they said, would be their weapon. ''John McEnroe was offered seven
figures to play tennis in Sun City,'' Mr. Ashe said. ''Once we explained why he
shouldn't go, he decided not to.''

Because the the group's members are well-known, Mr. Belafonte said, others might
be persuaded to join the boycott. ''Artists have had a powerful impact on many
issues in recent years - Vietnam, civil rights,'' he noted. ''We're part of
people's lives.''

Among the white boycotters is Joel Grey, who said he had declined to perform in
Sun City. His friendship with Mr. Belafonte dates back two decades. ''We worked
together in Las Vegas and he couldn't stay in the hotel,'' Mr. Grey recalled.
''I'll never forget that, and I'll never accept that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 15, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY OFFICIAL CALLS WESTWAY DELAY UNAVOIDABLE

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 818 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 14


Col. Fletcher H. Griffis of the Army Corps of Engineers spent last weekend in
his study on Governors Island poring over books on marine biology and stacks of
staff reports. The colonel, the corps's engineer for the New York district, was
trying to refute a scientific recommendation that further studies be made on
striped bass in the Hudson River.

The last thing he had wanted to do, he said today in an interview after a
Congressional hearing, was to cause another delay of the Westway project. But an
examination of the evidence and the requirements of law, he said, led him to the
decision he did not like.

''The public deserves a more rapid resolution of the permit application,'' he
said. Nonetheless, he said, he ''couldn't go along with the assumptions'' he
would have had to make in deciding not to do more studies. ''The data was too
scarce,'' he said.

Colonel Griffis, who has two master's degrees in engineering and a doctorate in
construction management, said he had first heard of the Westway project in
August 1982. He assumed responsibility for it in March.

In a letter delivered Tuesday to Governor Cuomo, he wrote that ''at least two
winters'' of additional study were needed to assess the impact of the Westway
landfill on the striped bass population. He said in the interview that the
important words in his decision were ''at least.''

The corps was directed by the Federal District Court judge who has been hearing
the Westway litigation to prepare an adequate environmental impact statement
before granting a permit for the project's landfill, which is designed to create
93 acres of parkland and a below-ground highway between the Battery and 42d
Street.

A Workshop of Experts

The judge, Thomas P. Griesa, instructed the corps to take into account whether
additional studies of the fish were needed.

Before making a decision, the colonel convened a workshop of experts, including
academic researchers and representatives from Federal environmental agencies and
the corps. One of the researchers had testified in court on behalf of an
environmental coalition opposing the project.

The workshop ''was to educate me on the biology and behavior of the striped
bass,'' the colonel said. ''I wanted to get answers. If I couldn't get the
answers, I wanted to know what studies had to be developed to get the answers.''

The colonel said he learned that there were no definitive answers to how the
landfill would affect the striped bass, in part, because no one knew how many
fish there were. The workshop concluded, he said, that ''at least two winters''
were needed for more exhaustive work to determine the size of the striped bass
population.

Colonel Griffis said that, in his research, he had found early reports that
described the striped bass as ''hardy fish.''

''What I'm getting now,'' he said, ''is that they are hardy fish, except during
some life stages - their first and second winters.''

He said he also read reports that reached widely differing conclusions. One, by
consultants to the New York State Department of Transportation, predicted that
less than 1 percent of the fish in the Hudson River would be affected by the
Westway. Another, by a corps biologist, estimated that 70 percent of the fish
would be affected.

''I think he's off,'' Colonel Griffis said. He said that other biologists had
estimated that 40 percent of the fish would be affected.

''I don't put any reliance on any of those studies,'' Colonel Griffis said.
''You have to know the total number of fish to get those numbers and no one
knows.''

What is known about the striped bass, he said, is that it spawns up river and
that the young striped bass shelter during the winter around the piers where the
Westway would be built.

The Hudson River and Chesapeake Bay are the principal spawning grounds for the
striped bass of the North Atlantic Ocean, according to experts, who say that the
Hudson is becomingly increasingly important.

Larocca to Seek Review

The State Transportation Commissioner, James L. Larocca, said he would ask for a
review of Colonel Griffis's decision by the colonel's superiors. Mr. Larocca
said he had been led to believe from the colonel's testimony today before
Representative Theodore Weiss, Democrat of Manhattan, that the colonel had not
considered the results of the sampling of the fish done last winter by
consultants hired by the Westway project.

Colonel Griffis, 45 years old, graduated from West Point in 1960 and received
his doctorate from Oklahoma State University. He has served in Korea, Vietnam
and West Germany and has taught mathematics at West Point. He also spent four
years at a waterways experimental station in Vicksburg, Miss.

The colonel sidestepped questions about what he thought of the merits of the
Westway project. ''Whether it is built or not,'' he said, ''I want to do what is
best in the public interest.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 15, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ART VERSUS HEALTH CARE, A QUESTION OF PRIORITIES

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 632 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 14


For the past 50 years, various Government agencies have earmarked a small
portion of their construction funds for artwork in public places, often a mural
in a lobby or a statue in a courtyard.

Now, however, in a time of fiscal constraint, there are signs that the policy
may be curtailed, starting with a re-examination of a program requiring that up
to $50,000 be spent for artworks as new hospitals are built by the Veterans
Administration.

Among those supporting the re-examination is Representative G. V. (Sonny)
Montgomery, the Mississippi Democrat who heads the House Committee on Veterans
Affairs. He says the practice ought to be reviewed in light of the hard times
the Veterans Administration is having in delivering essential health care.

''We are going to have a greater need for acute care,'' Mr. Montgomery said,
citing the World War II and Korean War veterans who will increasingly be placing
demands on V.A. hospitals.

''It is better to have the money go into bricks and mortar,'' he said.

Local Commissions Urged

The Deputy Administrator of the V.A., Everett Alvarez Jr., said no decision had
yet been made to cancel the program, although his own view was that such art
ought to be commissioned and paid for at the local level. However, another V.A.
aide said agency employees believed a decision to cancel had already been made.

Max Cleland, head of the V.A. in the Carter Administration, said he hoped there
would be no such change because art took ''a minuscule aspect of the budget that
supplied a nice touch, a small amount of money set aside to provide a piece of
art that is meaningful.''

Proponents of the program say the V.A. approved just $50,000 for the program in
the current year out of a total construction budget of $531 million, and
$110,000 in the previous year out of a construction budget of $611 million.

Speaking From Experience

Mr. Cleland, who is now the Secretary of State of Georgia, spoke of veterans'
hospitals from experience, stemming from severe injuries he suffered in Vietnam.
He said he had written a note to the current V.A. Administrator, Harry N.
Walters, to urge that the program be kept.

''I am very much for an institution not looking like an institution,'' Mr.
Cleland said. ''Anything that you can do to make a V.A. hospital more lively is
a plus - to the patients, the staff and the visitors.''

Lenore Jacobs, a Veterans Administration employee charged with the artwork
selection, said that many of the pieces acquired so far had been well received.

The hospital in Richmond, Va., has a sculpture by Lester Van Winkle that shows a
standing woman with her hand on an empty chair, symbolic of a patient who should
be home but is in the hospital. In the Bronx, she said, there are minimalistic
seven-foot- square panels by Al Loving that are in keeping with the modern V.A.
hospital there designed by Max Urbahn.

'Main Mission' of Health Care

Mrs. Jacobs and others expressed a concern that a decision to end the art
program could spread to other Federal agencies, such as the General Services
Administration, which provides art for most Federal buildings.

But Mr. Alvarez, the V.A.'s deputy administrator, said that the cancellation of
the program was being seriously considered.

''Our main mission is the delivery of health case,'' he said. ''Are we spending
money wisely if we spend $50,000 on such a thing? Some of us would prefer to see
that money go toward the delivery of health care.''

As to the quality of the pieces that the program has produced, he said, ''There
are some that are pleasing and some that are not. I would favor locally managed,
locally financed art. If there is a choice between Federal money for art or
medical care, I would prefer that it go to the medical care.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 15, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

6 ARE NAMED BY THE TIMES TO NEW POSITIONS AS EDITORS

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 416 words


Promotions and assignment changes in the news department of The New York Times
were announced yesterday by A. M. Rosenthal, the executive editor.

Mr. Rosenthal said the changes were part of a process of career development that
has gone on for some years and will continue. Other changes and promotions will
follow in the near future, he said. The new changes, to begin taking effect in
several weeks, are these:


- Craig R. Whitney, now foreign editor, will become an assistant managing
editor.


- Warren Hoge, correspondent in Rio de Janeiro, will become foreign editor.


- William Borders, deputy foreign editor, will become editor of The Week in
Review.


- Barbara Crossette, now an assistant foreign editor, will become deputy foreign
editor.


- Mitchel Levitas, the present Week in Review editor, will become editor of The
Times Book Review.


- Harvey Shapiro, now Book Review editor, will become a deputy editor of The
Times Magazine and will receive the new post of Times literary critic.

Mr. Whitney, a 39-year-old graduate of Harvard College, joined The Times in 1965
as an assistant to James Reston, the Washington columnist. He has worked as a
correspondent in Saigon, Bonn and Moscow.  Mr. Hoge, 42, joined The Times as a
reporter in New York seven years ago and served as an assistant metropolitan
editor and as the deputy metropolitan editor before going to Brazil. He
graduated from Yale University in 1963.

Mr. Borders, 44, joined The Times as a copyboy after graduating from Yale
University in 1960. He has served as a reporter in New York and Connecticut and
as a correspondent in Lagos, Montreal, New Delhi and London.

Miss Crossette, 44, joined The Times as a copy editor in 1973. She has served as
an assistant editor on the metropolitan desk, as an assistant news editor and as
a correspondent in Washington, Central America and the Caribbean. She graduated
from Muhlenberg College in 1963.

Mr. Levitas, 53, is a 1951 graduate of Brooklyn College. He joined The Times
Magazine in 1965 and later worked as an assistant metropolitan editor, as deputy
metropolitan editor and as metropolitan editor. He was a Nieman Fellow at
Harvard University in 1958.

Mr. Shapiro, 59, became Book Review editor eight years ago after more than 20
years on The Times Magazine. Mr. Shapiro, the author of several volumes of
poetry, received a bachelor's degree from Yale University in 1947 and a master's
degree in American literature from Columbia University in 1948.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BEGIN'S ERA IN ISRAELI POLITICS: A PEEIOD OF HISTORIC CHANGE

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2109 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Sept. 15


When Menachem Begin became Prime Minister in 1977, ousting the Labor Party from
government for the first time since the founding of modern Israel, many
political analysts saw his election as an aberration, an odd detour from which
Israeli politics would rapidly regain its old, well-worn path.

Today, Mr. Begin, 70 years old, formally submitted his resignation. But after
six years of his administration, no one is dismissing him as an insignificant
accident any more.

Instead, his era is being widely appraised, by both admirers and detractors, as
a time of historic evolution in Israel that is likely to leave durable marks,
both internationally and domestically. The man in the best position to succeed
him is Yitzhak Shamir, the new head of the Herut Party. (Page A6.)

Time of War and Peace

Mr. Begin presided over a period of peace and war, of compromise and
intransigence, of what was widely seen as moral righteousness and what his
critics considered moral blindness.

In the constant tension between nationalism and humanism that the country has
endured from its beginning, he infused Israel with a sense of nationalist
grandeur backed by a new ideological fervor and a faith in the power of armed
force to cut through the complexities of the Middle East.

He destroyed an Iraqi nuclear reactor with a stunning air strike. He annexed the
Golan Heights, captured from Syria in the 1967 war. He saw to it that enough
Jewish settlements were built in scattered fashion on the occupied West Bank to
make territorial compromise exceedingly difficult for any future Israeli
Government.

But he also negotiated a peace treaty with Egypt and relinquished the vast
buffer zone of Sinai, for which he shared the Nobel Prize for Peace with the
President of Egypt, Anwar el- Sadat. And at the end, in the morass of Lebanon,
Mr. Begin's ambitions demonstrated the limitation of military might in a way
that seems to have broken Israel's mood of bravado.

Internally, Mr. Begin's tenure brought something of a political revolution,
overthrowing the entrenched socialist, Labor elite and giving a voice to the
newer immigrants, the Sephardic Jews who had come mostly from the Arab countries
of North Africa and the Middle East. As Mr. Begin had lived his political life
outside the mainstream of moderate Zionism, many Sephardim had been outside the
mainstream of Israeli political life because of their non-European culture and
their relative poverty.

'A Very Important Thing'

''Begin destroyed the notion that elitism controlled the country,'' said Rabbi
David Hartman, a philosopher who is close to leading figures in the National
Religious Party. ''It's a very important thing to his credit. The Labor group
was like the Eastern intellectual establishment running America.''

Partly because Mr. Begin portrayed himself as a leader not only of Israel but
also of the Jewish people, he brought many Sephardim into a new feeling of
participation in the society.

''He was their voice,'' Rabbi Hartman said. ''He had the ability to say what
they could never say. He was the great orator. His fervor represented for them
some spark of life, some spark of dignity.''

Yaron Ezrahi, who teaches political science at the Hebrew University in
Jerusalem, is a critic of many Begin policies. But he sees the Begin phenomenon
as ''an important contribution to the political integration and the political
emancipation of people who were prisoners of an immigrants' mentality.''

'An Egalitarian Ideology'

''It was a kind of a shift of great historical importance from the point of view
of political psychology,'' Mr. Ezrahi said. ''He was able to speak more
effectively in terms of national symbols, which put all of us on an equal
footing. We are all Jews, Israelis, everything had to do with the Jewish people
- an egalitarian ideology of democratization.''

Some see Mr. Begin as having capitalized on a natural political evolution,
rather than having caused it. ''He is so different from the political culture of
the West,'' said Meron Benvenisti, a former Deputy Mayor of Jerusalem. ''He is
now the ideological umbrella under which Israelis from the second generation, or
from the Israeli political culture, find shelter. He came when the situation was
ripe for that last step. It feels extremist, but it is extremist only for those
people accustomed to a pragmatic style.''

This political upheaval has released angry tensions between Ashkenazic Jews -
those from European and American backgrounds - and Sephardim. ''The resentment
surfaces as a consequence of being an exploited group all these years,'' Rabbi
Hartman said.

No matter what the explanation, however, many Israelis fault Mr. Begin for
polarizing the country, or at least for never using his enormous influence to
dampen those ethnic tensions, which flared at times into violence. ''He knew
that once that group surfaced, he could not then say, 'Don't feel that
resentment,' '' Mr. Hartman noted. ''The resentment was very important for them
in recognizing themselves as a political group.''

Mr. Ezrahi said Mr. Begin catered to something of a non-Western political style,
which involved Oriental concepts of insult, honor and revenge.

''I have no doubt that he felt that criticizing this in the name of certain
European styles of politics would be politically costly to him,'' Mr. Ezrahi
said, but the result was ''a negative contribution to Israel democracy.''

''During his administration, political violence reached an unprecedented peak,''
the political scientist continued. This included attacks by Jewish settlers
against Arabs on the West Bank, actions that Mr. Begin never denounced, although
he frequently railed against violence by Arabs when Jews were the victims.

''The silence was very meaningful,'' Mr. Ezrahi said. ''There was no serious
attempt on the part of the administration to condemn the use of violence as a
legitimate form of expression. It was one of the factors that exposed the
fragility of the Israeli democratic tradition.''

Although Mr. Begin has been a dramatic and moving orator, he fell into that same
silence at other critical moments in his tenure. He has not said a word directly
to the country about his resignation, for example, reserving his remarks only
for his political colleagues in closed meetings and reportedly declining an
invitiation from Israeli television to speak to the nation.

Perhaps the most puzzling silence came in September 1982 after the Israeli Army
asked Lebanese Christian Phalangist militiamen to go into the Sabra and Shatila
refugee camps near Beirut. Once inside, they massacred what Israeli military
intelligence estimated were between 700 and 800 Palestinian men, women and
children.

Accused World of 'Blood Libel'

Mr. Begin issued a statement in the Cabinet's name accusing the world of a
''blood libel'' for suggesting Israeli responsibility. But beyond that
statement, he had nothing to say to the outpouring of grief and anguish of his
countrymen.

His initial refusal to designate a state commission to investigate brought
despair even among many of his own supporters, who suddenly saw his deep
sensitivity to the deaths of Jews masking an insensitivity to the deaths of
non-Jews. Later, he agreed to form the commission, which then held him and other
Israeli leaders ''indirectly responsible'' for the massacre.

Mr. Begin was born in Brest-Litovsk, then part of Russia. The Holocaust shaped
his deepest attitudes. Central in his view of history, some who know him
explain, are the momentous trials of the Jewish people along a continuum that
extends from their exile into Babylon, through their mass murder by the Nazis,
to their encirclement by the Arabs. Mr. Begin used this suffering through the
ages as a metaphor of current Middle Eastern strife, giving a tone of high
morality and sweeping history to his declarations on Israel's struggle.

Thus, his choice of the phrase ''blood libel'' to describe the world's reaction
to the Beirut massacre seemed to be an allusion to the old anti-Semitic
fabrication that Jews murdered Christian children at Passover to use their blood
in unleavened bread. His frequent invocation of the Holocaust to justify
militant Israeli policies was a reflection of his most powerful pride and his
angriest fear.

In June 1981, after Israeli aircraft destroyed a nuclear reactor near Baghdad,
cutting off any attempt that Iraqmight be making to manufacture nuclear weapons,
Mr. Begin justified the attack by saying: ''There won't be another Holocaust in
history. Never again, never again.'' To the chorus of international
condemnation, he replied: ''We are an ancient people. We are used to it. We
survived. We shall survive.''

Major General Opposed Raid

Last month the Director of Military Intelligence at the time, Maj. Gen. Yehoshua
Saguy, said on the Israeli television that he had opposed the raid, arguing that
it would create strife with the United States and that in any event, Iraq could
not have built a nuclear weapon for 5 to 10 years, giving time for a nonmilitary
solution.

Friction with Washington did result, as the Reagan Administration suspended some
aircraft deliveries after criticizing the Begin Government for bombing civilian
neighborhoods of Beirut in July 1981. After additional sanctions when Israel
annexed the Golan Heights in December 1981, Mr. Begin issued an outraged
accusation that the United States was treating Israel like a ''vassal state,''
and tolerating ''an ugly anti-Semitic campaign.''

''You don't have the right, from a moral perspective, to preach to us regarding
civilian loss of life,'' Mr. Begin said. ''We have read the history of World War
II, and we know what happened to civilians when you took action against the
enemy. We have also read the history of the Vietnam War, and your concept of
'body counts.' Let me tell you whom this Cabinet comprises. It is composed of
people whose lives were marked by resistance, fighting and suffering.''

Mr. Begin always had a clear sense of himself in history. Several years ago,
when Michael Elkins of the BBC asked him how he wished history to record him, he
replied, ''As the man who set the borders of Eretz Israel for all eternity.''

To Mr. Begin, this has meant securing Israel's hold over the occupied West Bank,
which he calls by its biblical names, Judea and Samaria, and which he has always
regarded as integral to the Land of Israel. The territory, where about 800,000
Palestinian Arabs reside, was captured from Jordan in the 1967 war.

Now, his Jewish settlement program in the area ''cannot be undone,'' in the view
of Mr. Benvenisti, who heads a research project studying the West Bank. ''He
just put the last weight that tipped the scales,'' Mr. Benvenisti said, adding,
in an inversion of Mao Zedong's famous dictum, ''All long marches end with one
short step.''

Rabbi Hartman says he believes Mr. Begin's decline in the last year is
attributable less to his depression over the illness and death of his wife,
Aliza, than to his waning ability to cope with issues by functioning in the
large categories of history.

'No More Glory'

''Begin knows the rhetoric of dignity, glory,'' Rabbi Hartman said. ''I think
one of the reasons he stepped down is that he saw there was no more glory.
Lebanon was the last attempt to see, 'Can I, with one great sweep, change
history?' He saw that that didn't work. Now comes the plodding, see what the
mistakes were, salvage a little. That's not his game. His game is to paint the
big strokes of history.''

Curiously, and perhaps significantly, Mr. Begin rarely mentioned the Holocaust
after the Beirut massacre. In the few occasions when he did so, he touched on it
only fleetingly, and he no longer used it as a symbol of modern Israeli
suffering.

Rabbi Hartman says he believes the war and the Begin resignation will end the
sense of nationalist grandeur that he brought. ''There's not an ideology of
grandeur now,'' he said. ''There's no ideological fervor at all. It's a question
now of who's going to be able to get us out of this mess. There's a sense of the
pragmatism of the everyday now.''

But Mr. Benvenisti sees it differently. Menachem Begin, he says, ''legitimized
the frustrations and the insecurity and the intransigence and the extremism.
It's like a genie out of the bottle. All this xenophobia and distrust of the
gentile world, and the extremist Zionism, became legitimate.

''As in other situations,'' he went on, ''liberal people must adjust to it. The
fact that his political culture became legitimate and in power can be undone,
but it is a long process.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POLL FINDS COUNTRY CONFUSED ON JET DOWNING

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 803 words


Americans are displaying a mood of frustration and contradiction over the Soviet
downing of the South Korean airliner on Sept. 1, a New York Times/ CBS News Poll
shows.

The survey indicates that people doubt the full story is being told, but that
they generally approve of President Reagan's handling of the matter even though
they do not find it tough enough.

Sixty-one percent said they felt the United States Government was ''holding back
information that people ought to know,'' a percentage only slightly greater than
the 56 percent who said Mr. Reagan was not tough enough. Yet 55 percent said
they approved of his approach overall, though among them nearly half wanted
tougher action.

Half of the 705 adults interviewed by telephone Wednesday night said they
favored halting grain sales to the Soviet Union in retaliation and 40 percent
were opposed to such a move. Nine percent had no opinion.

But by 2 to 1, the public spurned other moves, such as a halt in arms-control
talks or a break in diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union.

The poll recorded a slight increase since last spring in concern about the
Soviet Union as a military threat to the United States, and saw a similar drop
in support for a nuclear freeze. But it did not suggest that the incident was
providing any major increase in general support for Mr. Reagan, as foreign
crises often do for Presidents.

Forty-six percent of the public said they approved of how Mr. Reagan was
handling his job as President, while 39 percent disapproved. In the last
Times/CBS News Poll, in late June, the percentages were 47 approving and 39
disapproving. Moreover, a Gallup Poll taken for Newsweek last week showed 53
percent approving and 39 percent disapproving. Read against the latest Times/CBS
News poll, that finding suggests that any rallying of the public behind Mr.
Reagan was momentary.  One encouraging element for the President was that the
difference between men's and women's opinions of him has narrowed since June.
There was an 8 percentage point gap between men and women, with 50 percent of
men and 42 percent of women saying they supported his handling of his job. In
June the gap was 18 points.

Women were less likely than men to feel that Mr. Reagan's responses on the
downing of the airliner were too weak. Perhaps as a consequence, the ''gender
gap,'' as politicians and polltakers call the difference in the two sexes'
views, also narrowed on ratings of his handling of foreign policy generally.

Criticism Crosses Party Lines

Public criticism of his reactions as too weak has come most often from political
conservatives, but this tendency was not borne out in the national poll. While
the difference was not statistically significant, 59 percent of self-described
conservatives and 66 percent of liberals said he had not been tough enough.

The levels of skepticism about whether the United States Government was telling
the full story had no ideological tinge. Sixty-six percent of liberals, as
opposed to 62 percent of conservatives, said they believed the Government was
holding back.

Public doubts about Government accounts of controversial situations have often
reached high levels since the Vietnam War and Watergate.

In the case of the airliner incident, the high level of doubt about the
completeness of the story may be due to the fact that the Government has amended
it in two key particulars, first to announce that an Amerrican intelligece plane
had been in the area and then to reveal that a tape recording of a Soviet pilot
had him talking of firing a cannon, when an earlier transcription had no such
comment.

Among the population generally, the degree of doubt about the completeness of
the Government's account also showed little variation. In all, 23 percent of the
public said they believed ''the American Government has told the public all they
know about this incident.'' But 61 percent said they thought the Government was
holding back. And 16 percent said they did not know.

Pluralities of every demographic group surveyed said they doubted the whole
story was being told. The lowest percentages of doubters were among those over
64, of whom 47 percent said the story was incomplete, among those with less than
a high school education, of whom 51 percent said so, and among Republicans, with
53 percent.

The doubters were more likely than the believers to feel that the United States
had not been tough enough, and also more likely to disapprove of how President
Reagan handled the matter.

Those who doubted the full story had been told were also more likely than those
who believed to feel that the presence of an intelligence plane near Soviet
airspace two hours before the attack on the airliner meant the United States
''bears a significant share of the blame for the incident.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs of results of poll (Page A8)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
A NEW LOOK AT LEBANON

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 818 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The crisis in Lebanon has reached a turning point and requires a full new policy
review.

It is pure pettifoggery to pretend that U.S. marines and European troops are
still faced with the job they were sent to accomplish. That was, in the first
place, to oversee the withdrawal of the Palestinian forces. Then they were sent
back for a longer term after the refugee camp massacres to protect civilians
when the Israelis withdrew from Beirut.

Now, whether officially acknowledged or not, their mission is to prevent the
collapse of President Amin Gemayel's Government and thus to ''save'' Lebanon.
U.S. policy remains committed to the ''independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity'' of Lebanon.

It is now necessary to reconsider whether that goal is possible and what, under
the circumstances, might have a chance of promoting it even on the somewhat
fictional basis that has always been the foundation of Lebanon.

Only when the facts are acknowledged can there be any sensible approach to the
questions of what to do with the Marines and whether to invoke the War Powers
Resolution. At present, the debate is going on in a fog without a compass. The
only useful comparison with Vietnam is the repeated failure to examine reality.

The argument over whether Lebanon is fighting a civil war or resisting
intervention is a deliberately misleading polemic. There are elements of both
and there have been, at spiraling levels of violence, for over a decade.
Lebanon's tragedy is precisely that its internal factions keep seeking outside
support in an attempt to prevail, or even because it brings in money.

Nor is there much point in going back to apportion blame. All have made
mistakes, perhaps starting with France when it created ''Greater Lebanon'' out
of the debris of the Ottoman empire and then proclaimed it independent in 1943.
The Palestinians, Syrians, Israelis, the U.S. and the Lebanese themselves have
envenomed this roiling Middle East stewpot.  At present, Lebanon is in fact
partitioned. The one beneficiary of the changes provoked by last year's Israeli
invasion is Syria. It has consolidated its hold on the parts of the country that
interest it most. It has gained renewed backing from Moscow.  President Assad
has achieved decisive influence over the P.L.O. He has claimed and imposed a
power of veto to prevent Jordan from accepting the Reagan initiative on
negotiations for the West Bank, and to prevent a Lebanese settlement with
Israel.  Now he has also gained right of veto over composition of the Lebanese
Government itself. That is the meaning of repudiation of the agreement that the
Druse leader, Walid Jumblat, signed under the tutelage of the U.S. Presidential
envoy, Robert McFarlane.  It is also the meaning of Syria's new right to send an
''observer'' to participate in further negotiations for a power-sharing pact
among the Lebanese. Saudi Arabia also has an observer, but that is a fig leaf
affixed in hopes of a little Syrian modesty.  So the question of what can be
done to calm Lebanon cannot be answered without willing Syrian participation. At
this stage, Syria's ambition does not seem to include annexation. Nor does
Israel want to annex southern Lebanon with its largely Shiite population.

But both want to maintain a dominant influence in areas they consider vital.
This is in contradiction with the U.S. aim of a strong Lebanese central
Government. The only way the U.S. can achieve that now is by virtual occupation.
That is out of the question, and anyway it would destroy what is left of
Lebanese independence.

It is sad but unavoidable to conclude that there will have to be a compromise
with Syria, based on a tacit if not formal accord between Syria and Israel on
security areas in Lebanon, and therefore definitely limited independence. Only
when this is agreed can the U.S. make a rational calculation about the scope and
endurance of the burden it has undertaken by bumbling into the Lebanese impasse.
Certainly, the U.S. is not equipped to get involved in the intricacies of
Lebanese politics.

Neither Mr. McFarlane nor probably the most seasoned American Middle East
specialists can handle the elaborate and subtle ritual required for local
accommodation. It was a mistake to go so far as to try American glue to stick
Mr. Jumblat and President Gemayel together.

A cold, abstract calculation of U.S. interest would focus on how to get the
Marines out of the mess. The fact that this has become so difficult that it
can't be done on existing terms without provoking disasters for all involved
should be a warning about any more Washington- or Jerusalem-concocted bright
ideas for fixing up Lebanon.

There isn't any good solution. The best U.S. arms and diplomacy can do now is
try to gain time for the Lebanese and Israel to work out the least onerous terms
available from Syria and to convince the Syrians they can't get more.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U. OF TEXAS REACHES 100 RIDING HIGH

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 865 words

DATELINE: AUSTIN, Tex., Sept. 15


The University of Texas, a once provincial school that has gained a reputation
as a major intellectual center, threw a huge party today for its 100th birthday
with a convocation, marching bands, barbecue and an eight-foot-tall orange-and-
white birthday cake shaped like the university tower.

The cake, built in the main ballroom of the student union, presented such
structural problems that the architecture school was called in for design advice
lest the cake collapse from the weight of 250 pounds of flour, 200 pounds of
sugar and 40 dozen eggs.

The centennial gave the university a chance to flaunt its much prized and
growing status in the top ranks of American universities - and to put behind it,
many here hope, some unhappy recent memories.

''We can, I think, be confident that its founders would be pleased with its
century of evolution from a small public university in a rural state to an
internationally recognized comprehensive graduate research university that
satisfies fully the constitutional mandate to be first-class,'' Peter T. Flawn,
the university's president, told a convocation that drew academic leaders from
all over the country, along with thousands of students in jeans, cowboy boots
and shorts.

3 Nobel Laureates on Faculty

Starting relatively late as universities go - Harvard is more than three times
older - the University of Texas has blossomed into a school that rivals the
great East and West Coast institutions in such fields as linguistics, classics,
psychology, engineering and the sciences. It boasts three Nobel Prize winners on
its faculty.

These gains have been won with oil; that is, profits from the university's vast
oil fields, which have given it an endowment of $1.6 billion, greater than that
of Harvard. The endowment has enabled the university to grow at a time when
other schools around the country have been forced to contract.

Today the University of Texas at Austin is the flagship of a 14-campus system
and has grown from 221 students and eight professors in 1883 to nearly 50,000
undergraduate and graduate students and 2,150 faculty members holding 262
endowed professorships.

More than most state universities, the University of Texas is more than just an
academic institution. It is the breeding ground for Texas's elite, and the ranks
of its alumni include numerous political officials, powerful lawyers and
business leaders.

Today's convocation drew them back in legions, and the guests included Gov. Mark
White, four former governors and Lady Bird Johnson.

Much Less Provincial

''My wife and I are both distinguished alumni,'' said John B. Connally, one of
the former governors, dressed in a blazer of vivid orange, the school color.
''It's been a part of our lives since we were teens. She was the university
sweetheart and I was president of the student body. The university has entered
the realm of world-class. It is much less provincial than when I was here in
1933.''

In all the proud recitations of history and accomplishments today, there was no
mention of the darker episodes in the school's past. No one mentioned Frank C
Erwin Jr., the late regents chairman for whom the hall in which today's ceremony
was held was named.

Mr. Erwin, a politically connected lawyer who drove an orange Cadillac, won both
praise and bitter criticism, for he ran the university with intense love and an
iron hand. In the 1970's he clashed bitterly with students protesting the
Vietnam War and with many faculty members, and that gave Texas a reputation
among scholars around the country as being a place where new ideas were
unwelcome and where politicians meddled in academic affairs.

All that has quieted down now, but some feel the intellectual atmosphere remains
thin. ''It is a better university than this state deserves,'' said Joe B.
Frantz, a noted historian of Texas who has taught here since 1949. ''It is an
anti-intellectual state. They still don't like a free marketplace in ideas.''

Nor did Professor Frantz believe the school had reached its academic potential.
''It's a numbers game,'' he said. ''The biggest business school, biggest
journalism school, most endowed chairs. That's not class. We never hear anything
that has to do with the soul. The people I run into here are more interested in
making money than in thinking about anything.'' As for political interference,
he said: ''It comes in waves. We're civilized right now, but we'll turn savage
again.''

Still, the university has long provided refuge for iconoclasts like Joe Frantz.
And by virtue of its presence, the city of Austin is an oasis of liberality in
an otherwise very conservative state.  As today's gathering ended, students and
faculty members broke into ''The Eyes of Texas,'' raising their right hands with
index fingers and small fingers pointing out, like the horns of a longhorn
steer, the school's mascot. They do the same thing at football games, shouting,
''Hook 'em, 'horns.''

They then repaired to the union, which served a Texas-size barbecue consisting
of 3,500 pounds of beef, 2,000 pounds of sausages, 1,000 pounds of potato salad,
and lots of beans, bread, raw onions, jalapeno peppers and beer.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of U. of Texas band

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE 2 BRINK'S TRIALS

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 976 words


The Brink's robbery and murders in October 1981 have so far spawned two trials
in two different places with two widely varying verdicts. The verdicts were the
result of different charges against different defendants, different evidence,
different juries and vastly different legal strategies.  After barely three
hours of deliberations, a state court jury in Goshen, N.Y., this week convicted
three Brink's defendants of the full range of charges brought against them:
three counts of second-degree murder and four of first- degree armed robbery.

The three, Kuwasi Balagoon, David J. Gilbert and Judith A. Clark, had opted to
act as their own lawyers. They each now face up to three consecutive terms of 25
years to life in prison.

Earlier this month, a jury in Federal District Court in Manhattan, after three
days of deliberations, passed more ambiguous verdicts on six other defendants,
most of whom had lawyers arguing on their behalf. Two defendants were convicted
of conspiracy and racketeering charges, two were found guilty of lesser offenses
and two were acquitted altogether.

The state trial concerned only the Brink's robbery in Rockland County. The
charges in the Federal trial involved a number of robberies, one of which was
the Brink's holdup, and also included the 1979 prison escape of Joanne
Chesimard, a Black Liberation Army activist.

Much More Difficult'

John S. Martin Jr., the former United States Attorney whose office handled the
Federal prosecution, said yesterday that the Federal case had been ''much more
difficult to try'' than the state's case, largely because of the differing
strengths of the evidence against the two groups of defendants.

In the state case, for instance, Mr. Gilbert and Miss Clark were arrested at the
scene of the crime, while Mr. Balagoon's fingerprints were found on a bag of
money discovered after the shootout. The defendants in the Federal case, on the
other hand, were tracked down at a variety of locations months later, and were
linked to the charges against them primarily by the testimony of informers,
known as ''accomplice witnesses.''

As a general rule, jurors tend to consider such testimony suspect and self-
serving - in part because they consider such witnesses unsavory. Testimony in
the Federal case, for instance, revealed that one Government witness had killed
a Bronx armored-car guard and had skinned a woman alive while serving in
Vietnam; a second witness arranged 83 drug deals while being wiretapped by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Racial Makeup of Juries

Prosecutors and defense lawyers both said that the differences in the juries
that heard the two Brink's cases, particularly their racial makeup, could
account for the varying results.

In the Federal case, 7 of the 12 jurors were black. Defense lawyers say it is
doubtful that any of them shared the defendants' political ideology,
particularly their goal of establishing a ''Republic of New Afrika'' in the Deep
South.

They speculate, however, that black jurors would in all likelihood be more
sensitive to the language of racial oppression that punctuated the proceedings.

''It had to be a factor,'' said Jesse Berman, a defense attorney in the Federal
case. ''Black jurors are not going to acquit all black defendants, but they have
an appreciation of black culture that white jurors don't have. Black jurors from
the Bronx or Manhattan aren't threatened if someone wants to call himself Sekou
Odinga.''

Defendants Denounced Trial

In the state trial, on the other hand, none of the jurors were black. Indeed,
the relatively small number of minority-group members in Orange County is one of
the grounds on which Kathy Boudin, another Brink's defendant, is seeking to move
her forthcoming trial from Goshen to a more urban locale.

Technically, the defendants in the state proceeding enjoyed privileges their
counterparts in Federal court were denied. They were entitled, for example, to
have their lawyers interview potential jurors, a task performed by judges in
Federal court.

These advantages were nullified, though, by their nearly total boycott of the
trial, which they denounced as ''illegitimate.'' They called only one witness,
who sought to justify the killings in political terms rather than deny that the
defendants had committed them.

The Federal case included its share of political rhetoric. At the same time,
defense lawyers sought to humanize the defendants, pointing out that one of them
took classes in karate and acting and that another played the saxophone.
Moreover, the lawyers conducted a vigorous defense, seeking to discredit
prosecution witnesses, to counter Government evidence and to introduce
exculpatory evidence of their own.

Defended Our Clients'

Even in the most difficult of cases, defense lawyers say, such advocacy can
reveal mitigating or exculpating facts. None of the eyewitnesses to the Brink's
robbery, for instance, could place any of the Federal defendants at the scene of
the crime.

''Whenever there was an acquittal, it was because we defended our clients on the
facts,'' said one defense attorney, Jesse Berman.

The study in contrasts that the Brink's case has afforded students of the law is
not about to end. Preliminary hearings will soon begin in the trial of two other
Brink's defendants, Miss Boudin and Samuel Brown - a trial that, according to
Miss Boudin's lawyers, could take six months.

In Miss Boudin's case, the political rhetoric is likely to be nonexistent, the
constitutional and evidentiary points manifold.

Among the issues to be raised are the legality of hypnotically induced evidence;
the reliability of various scientific evidence related to fingerprints, hair
samples and shoe prints, and the constitutionality of the felony-murder statute
under which Miss Boudin is being prosecuted.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CBS SEEKS GENERAL'S NOTES

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 323 words


A Federal court in Washington, acting at the request of CBS, issued a subpoena
yesterday for the questionnaires that a retired United States Army general used
to prepare a book on Vietnam.

The network requested the subpoena in connection with its effort to gain
material to support its argument that it did not libel Gen. William C.
Westmoreland in a documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,''
broadcast last year.

The documentary, which prompted the general to seek $120 million in damages from
the network, accused him of manipulating information about enemy troop strength
during the Vietnam War.

Lawyers for the retired general subpoenaed yesterday, Douglas Kinnard, a veteran
of the Vietnam War who wrote a book based on questionnaires filled out by 110
generals who had served in Vietnam, said they would oppose the subpoena. They
said that the general promised anonymity to his sources and that the
questionnaires were protected by the First Amendment. The book, ''The War
Managers,'' was published in 1977.

An attorney for CBS, David Boies, expressed surprise when he was told that Mr.
Kinnard would oppose the subpeona. He said that the network's lawyers had no
intention of forcing Mr. Kinnard to disclose anonymous sources.

All Questionnaires Subpoenaed

The subpoena, Mr. Kinnard's attornies said, requires that Mr. Kinnard present
all the questionnaire responses that he received in preparing his book.

''We feel it is ironic that a news organization that has sought to protect its
sources in the past is now seeking to force a writer to disclose confidential
sources,'' said Ronald Schacter, lawyer with Goldfarb, Singer and Austern, the
Washington firm representing Mr. Kinnard.

After Mr. Boies had talked by telephone with an attorney for Mr. Kinnard
yesterday afternoon, Mr. Boies said the network would enter into further
discussions with Mr. Kinnard about the information they requested.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

News Analysis;
WAR POWERS DISPUTE

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 16


The political stalemate over keeping American marines in Lebanon springs from a
determined effort by Congressional leaders to establish an important legal
precedent that President Reagan wants to avoid.  ''There's almost perfect
unanimity on policy and the mission of the marines,'' said one White House
official. ''It's all a question of institutional pride, but it has big foreign
policy implications.''

Congressional leaders, and even many of President Reagan's frequent critics in
Congress, concede that there is general agreement on the substance of policy but
they insist that in the present case form is at least as important as substance.

From the legislature's perspective, the fundamental issue is whether Congress
will be accepted by President Reagan as a partner in the decision to put
American troops into combat situations overseas or, as in this case, in the
decision to keep them there once hostilities develop.

White House View

From the perspective of the White House, the basic issue is whether the
President will be allowed enough flexibility in the use of American troops or
whether Congress will dangerously tie his hands in ways that foreign adversaries
can exploit.

The immediate legal issue concerns the War Powers Resolution of 1973 and
whether, under its provisions, the President is required to seek Congressional
authority to extend the Marine Corps presence in Lebanon. That act grew out of
Congressional frustration over the longer American military involvement in the
Vietnam War without any explicit war vote by Congress.

But historically, the dispute has roots in what some see as a Constitutional
ambiguity that makes the President the Commander in Chief of the armed forces
but which also gives Congress the power ''to declare war'' and ''to raise
armies.'' The constitutionaly divided war powers have many times before in
American history seen the executive and legislative branches jealously guarding
prerogatives and reluctant to cede any portion of its share of the war power to
the other.

''There are few issues of greater importance than the issue confronting us - the
balance of powers between the legislative and executive branches,'' Robert C.
Byrd, the Senate minority leader, told the Senate in debate Thursday. ''This
issue is bigger than political pasrties, bigger than personalities, bigger than
any particular office of the Unied States.''

Threat to Powers of Congress

More concretely, Congressional Democrats joined by many Republicans contend that
if they do not now force President Reagan to seek their concurrence, it will be
a dangerous precedent, diminishing the powers of Congress.

''If we don't trigger the War Powers Act now, it will be a precedent that will
make that legislation a dead letter,'' said Representative Stephen J. Solarz, a
Brooklyn Democrat. ''What is at stake here is the ability of Congress to
exercise any control over the dispatch of American forces into combat
situations.''

The White House fears the opposite danger. If the President too openly accepts
the basic premise of the War Powers Resolution, officials say, he will lose
flexibility and be left naked to foreign military pressures in such delicate
situations as Lebanon today.

Specifically, the White House concern in centered on those sections of the War
Powers Resolution that Congress wants to use that require the President to
report to Congress in case American forces are involved in hostilities or face
imminent hostilites and also require him to withdraw the troops within 60 days
unless Congress explicitly extends their stay.

'A Gun to Our Own Head'

''What that means,'' said one White House official, ''is that some foreign
party, merely by shooting at your troops, can force you to withdraw them within
60 days if Congress fails to act, and there are lots of ways in which Congress
can fail to act. If that's true, then we've put a gun to our own head in a whole
host of difficult negotiating situations abroad.''

After days of fairly cuatious maneuvering, the debate sharpened when Senate
Democrats demanded on Thursday that President Reagan explicitly accept the War
Powers Resolution by sending Congress a message that invokes its provisions and
seeks Congressional authority to keep the marines in Lebanon. The White House
balked.

To try to force the President's hand, Senate Democrats introduced their own
resolution to trigger the 60-day time limit in the War Powers Resolution. If the
resolution is passed, it could technically force the withdrawal of the Marine
force within 60 days, but it is currently being held in committee.

The Speaker of the House, Representative Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., has been trying
a softer sell, hoping to lure the President into a political bargain by offering
to endorse Administration policy and authorizing the marines to stay in Beirut
another 18 months. Mr. O'Neill has not demanded that President Reagan take the
initiative.

House Democrats' Resolution

Instead, House Democrats drafted their own joint resolution, replete with
references to key provisions of the War Powers Resolution that would score
constitutional points for Congress in their view once the President signed it.

This resolution would give the President much of what he wants. It would
authorize the use of offshore air and naval firepower to protect the
peacekeeping force in Lebanon and would let the marines stay in Lebanon
indefinitely if there were a cease-fire.

But if there were hostilities after 18 months, this resolution would require
another report from the President to Congress and another Congressional vote to
extend their stay.

So far the Administration has refused to accept that and there are reports of
internal divisions. White House negotiators led by James A. Baker 3d, the Chief
of Staff, and Secretary of State George P. Shultz are said to favor striking a
compromise with Congress. But the Secretary of Defense, Caspar W. Weinberger,
and William P. Clark, the national security adviser, and Justice Department
lawyers have taken a tougher stand.

Many Republicans as well as Democrats believe the Administration so badly needs
Congressional support that the President will have to give some ground. If so,
the consensus here is that Congress will have affected the balance of power on
the delicate issue of war and peace and the gray situations in between.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of a Lebanese pilot rescued by U.S. Marine helicopter

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Rosemary Walsh and Stephen Osborn Wed on L.I.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 76, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 189 words


Rosemary Walsh, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Matthew C. Walsh of Manhasset, L.I.,
and Stephen L. Osborn, son of Mr. and Mrs. G. Keith Osborn of Cheyenne, Wyo.,
were married yesterday. Msgr. John J. Weist performed the ceremony at St. Mary's
Roman Catholic Church in Manhasset.

The bride's attendants were her nieces, Laura Rowell and Jean Rowan, and a
nephew, Philip O'Beirne. Vincent K. Osborn was best man for his brother.

The bride, a graduate of St. John's University, studied in London during her
junior year under the Ithaca College program. Her father is owner of Jimmy
Ryan's, the jazz club in New York, and her mother, Catharine R. Walsh, is a
director of the Archdiocesan Family Life Foundation in New York.

Mr. Osborn, an independent management consultant in Washington, graduated from
the United States Military Academy and served as a captain with the Army in
Vietnam. He received a master's degree in business administration from Syracuse
University and a master's in systems management from the University of Southern
California. His father recently retired as the Public Service Commissioner of
the State of Wyoming.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA LISTS 3 OBSTACLES TO CLOSER SOVIET RELATIONS

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 613 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Sept. 17


China's Foreign Minister indicated today after a week of talks with the Soviet
Union that Soviet military forces on China's frontiers were still ''subjects of
major disagreement.''

The Foreign Minster, Wu Xueqian, also said he was planning to meet in New York
with Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko of the Soviet Union during the session
of the United Nations General Assembly. Mr. Wu, who spoke before it was
announced that Mr. Gromyko would not go to New York, will himself be leaving for
the United Nations on Tuesday. He is scheduled to meet with Secretary of State
George P. Shultz.

Mr. Wu spoke at a news conference for American and Canadian reporters the day
after the departure of a Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Mikhail S. Kapitsa.

The talks Mr. Kapitsa had with Mr. Wu and with Deputy Foreign Minister Qian
Qichen were seen by foreign diplomats as evidence of China's interest, despite
its distrust of Soviet military strategy, in seeker better relations.

The Foreign Minister responded to one of several written questions at the news
conference by saying that he saw ''signs of some improvement'' in relations with
the United States. But he added that all the hopeful communiques would ''amount
only to scraps of paper'' if the United States did not act on its stated
intention of reducing arms sales to Taiwan.

The Chinese Foreign Minister said one sign of better relations with the United
States was that Washington had been willing to improve the terms of trade
between the two countries.

Mr. Wu sidestepped questions on what China expected to result from the visit
here next week of Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger. He said the question
of arms purchases from the United States was for China's Defense Minister to
comment on.

Foreign diplomats said the talks with Mr. Kapitsa, who is one of the Soviet
Union's specialists on Chinese affairs, had focused on what China considered to
be ''obstacles'' to a normalization of relations.

People's Daily, the principal Chinese newspaper, said in an editorial that
Soviet SS-20 nuclear missiles stationed along China's northern border were among
the unacceptable threats that the Soviet Union still posed to China's security.

The paper urged the Soviet Union to ''considerably reduce its missiles deployed
in Asia.''

''China has asked the Soviet Union to remove three hurdles in the way of
developing relations between the two countries,'' the editorial said. ''One of
the hurdles is the Soviet armed forces in the Chinese-Soviet and the Chinese-
Mongolian border areas, and that naturally includes the missiles.''

Mr. Wu identified the three obstacles as the Soviet military presence along
China's northern frontier, the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and Soviet
support for Vietnam's intervention in Cambodia.

Mr. Wu also mentioned the SS-20 missiles. Without linking their reduction
specifically to an improvement in relations, he said the numbers of these
missiles should be ''drastically'' reduced or ''destroyed on site.''

A senior Chinese journalist, Wang Fei, said, ''The Soviet Union is still
considered the first threat to the security of China.''

Mr. Wang said there seemed to be some difference of opinion within the Soviet
leadership about the importance of maintaining large forces along China's
northern border while at the same time supporting Vietnam in its intervention in
Cambodia.

In China's view, Mr. Wang said, the Soviet military supports such deployment,
while Yuri V. Andropov, the Soviet leader, has yet to make up his mind.

Mr. Wang is head of the international section of the Journalists Association and
a former Washington correspondent of People's Daily.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'WIENER WAR' INQUIRY LEADS TO INDICTMENT OF 12 IN JERSEY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 52, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 553 words

DATELINE: ATLANTIC CITY, Sept. 17


Undercover agents posed as hot dog vendors to investigate allegations of
underworld infiltration of the lucrative pushcart business in this casino
resort, the state police said this week as they announced the indictment of 12
men.

Those named in the indictment, including a reputed enforcer for an
organized-crime group, were charged with conspiracy in trying to control the
local vending industry through assaults and threats, the State Attorney
General's office said.

In what has been dubbed the city's ''wiener wars,'' groups of vendors are
competing for sidewalk space, mainly in front of the nine casino hotels that
attracted 23 million people here in 1982.

For the last two years, dozens of vendors lured to this seaside resort by the
promise of hungry gamblers, have been vying for a part of the tiny cottage
industry that has grown to a $6 million- a-year enterprise.

Carts Overturned

Violence has erupted at times in the battle for space, and stainless-steel carts
and their blue-and-yellow umbrellas have been overturned, spilling boiling
water, hot dogs and condiments onto the sidewalk.

The investigation of organized crime in southern New Jersey, known as Operation
Condor, led to an indictment last March of five of the men named in the
superseding state grand jury indictment unsealed last Wednesday, said Thomas
Cannon, a spokesman for Attorney General Irwin I. Kimmelman.

All but one of the men were arrested Wednesday and held at the Atlantic County
Jail in Mays Landing, the police said.

According to the police, the feud involves a group of men who formed a hot dog
vending company called Island Vets and their former employer, Digity Hot Dogs
Inc., which is owned by Peter Spalluto, a 37-year-old veteran of the Vietnam War
who claims to be the first hot dog vendor to reach town to take advantage of the
casino boom.

Mr. Spalluto gave up renting hot dog carts to veterans in July and limited his
business to the distribution of supplies to vendors.

Threats in Takeover Bid

The indictment charges that Island Vets - state law requires that pushcart
vendors in New Jersey be veterans in order to get a license - tried to take over
Diggity Dogs by threats and by creating the impression that Island Vets was
supported by the underworld, Mr. Cannon said.

Among those named in the indictment was David Tucci, 46, of Brigantine, who
authorities contend met here with Mr. Spalluto's brother, Michael, in March and
''did say words to the effect, 'Mike, stay out of this or I'm going to put a
bullet in your head.' ''

Also named in the indictment was Edward Casale, 38, of Margate, who Lieut. Col.
Justin Dintino of the state police identified during a United States Senate
hearing as an enforcer for the underworld family reputedly headed by Nicodemo
Scarfo.

Other suspects named in the indictment were Robert Ferrin, 33, of Linwood;
Robert Kahan, 37, of Atlantic City; Stephen Civitarese, 33, of Margate; George
Dunn, 43, of Ventnor; William Hamill, 57, of Margate, and Joseph Lamaina, 35, of
Northfield, Mr. Cannon said.

Named in Both Indictments

Charged in March and named in the recent indictment, he said, were Louis Chait,
47, of Margate; Stephen G. Mattis, 30, of Somers Point; John Taimanglo, 30, of
Atlantic City, and Gary Weller, 28, of Somers Point.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A FILM FESTIVAL WITH AN AMERICAN ACCENT

BYLINE: By LESLIE BENNETTS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2116 words


For Lawrence Kasdan, who wrote such colossally successful films as ''The Empire
Strikes Back'' and ''Return of the Jedi,'' the news that his latest film had
been selected to open the New York Film Festival was ''gravy. A nice extra,''
says the director, with enviable nonchalance. ''Another one of the pleasures.''

But for Jacqueline Ochs, a 31-year-old who has just directed her first
feature-length film, its inclusion in the festival was cause for jubilation.
''It was like the ultimate pat on the back in terms of recognition,'' says Miss
Ochs, whose film, ''The Secret Agent,'' is a documentary about dioxin, chemical
warfare and environmental pollution. ''I was absolutely elated.''

The New York Film Festival, which begins its 21st season this Friday and will
run through Oct. 9, always represents a range of significance to the directors
whose films are being shown; the festival's agenda has included many famous
names, but many more directors are unknowns making their professional debuts.

This year, however, for the first time the festival will open and close with
major American studio films, features whose prospects are radically different
from those of short documentary films on esoteric subjects. Mr. Kasdan's
contribution is ''The Big Chill,'' which he directed and co-wrote and which
features such stars as William Hurt and Kevin Kline. The festival will end with
Robert Altman's newest offering, ''Streamers,'' which is based on the
award-winning play by David Rabe, who also wrote the screenplay.

In between those features there will be the usual broadly varied mix of films
from around the world. They range from a Texas tale of male machismo in a
Houston bar to a Hungarian love story about incest between a brother and sister
to a documentary about the lives of American Communists of the 1930's.

The list includes films from India, Mexico, China, Canada, West Germany, Italy,
France, Mali, Hungary, Poland, Switzerland, Portugal, and the Soviet Union. One
marks the movie debut of Gabriel Garcia-Marquez, the Nobel Prize- winning author
who has written the screenplay for ''Erendira,'' the story of a 14-year-old
prostitute as filmed by a Mexican director. Another well- known name is that of
Jean-Luc Godard, whose films have often been shown at the festival. This year's
entry is called ''Passion'' and is about two Eastern European filmmakers making
a movie called ''Passion.'' The Polish director Andrzej Wajda, another festival
veteran, returns this year with ''Danton,'' starring Gerard Depardieu.

But despite the festival's customary international scope, this year's selection
is characterized by a more distinctly American flavor than previous groupings.
The program features 32 films of more than 30 minutes in length, and 11 of these
are by American directors, the largest proportion in the festival's history.


''The purpose of the festival is to bring the most interesting films with the
greatest artistic merit from all over the world to the attention of the New York
film community,'' says Joanne Koch, executive director of the Film Society of
Lincoln Center, which presents the festival every year. ''This year we have more
American films than we've ever had before. I don't know that this means there
were more wonderful American films being made than ever before, it's just that
more were available to us through the cooperation of the studios and because the
timing was right.'' Mr. Kasdan and Mr. Altman are not the only established
American directors on the program; Francis Coppola will be represented by
''Rumble Fish,'' a drama about two brothers, starring Matt Dillon and Mickey
Rourke, with Dennis Hopper as their father.

In addition to having been made by American directors, the festival's opening
and closing films are uniquely American in their choice of subject matter and
perspective. Both are rooted in the cultural and political turbulence of the
1960's.

''The Big Chill,'' which Mr. Kasdan describes as a ''comedy of values,'' focuses
on a group of people who were close friends during their college years, which
they remember as a time of idealism about the application of one's beliefs to
one's life. Fifteen years later they come together again to attend the funeral
of one of their number, who has committed suicide, and to spend a weekend
reexamining where they have been and what has happened to them. One former
antiwar activist has become a running-shoe tycoon; an aspiring actor has made a
fortune as a television star in a car-chase-and-crash adventure series. A
successful career woman unable to form a lasting relationship with a man ponders
single motherhood; another woman who has made a boring, safe marriage to a
boring, safe man wonders whether she should divorce him and opt for passion
instead.


For Mr. Kasdan, who is 35, the film offered a way to make some observations
about his own generation - and about himself. ''This movie is about so many
issues in my life,'' he reports. ''One of the issues these people are
confronting is how are their values applicable to their everyday lives, and what
kinds of contortions and rationalizations are they willing to go through to do
what they want. What kind of clothes do they dress up their desires in? They're
willing to justify all kinds of things. That's why it's a comedy, because I find
that whole process kind of funny. And I find myself doing it all the time.''

A far different mood is evoked by ''Streamers,'' which uses the anguish of the
war in Vietnam as the backdrop for its exploration of the interaction of four
young American men from very different backgrounds who are thrown together at an
Army camp while awaiting shipment to Vietnam.

His previous track record notwithstanding, Mr. Altman says that he welcomes the
chance to show ''Streamers'' at the festival. ''Each film is a new film,'' says
the director, whose credits include ''Nashville'' and ''M*A*S*H.'' ''They're
like babies. That's especially true for a film that doesn't fall into a
pigeonhole. This film does not fall into a genre that is immediately going to
attract a commercial audience. It doesn't have any movie stars or automobiles. A
film like 'Streamers' can only succeed on a word-of-mouth basis; the audience is
going to come not because of full-page ads but because someone saw it and said,
'Oh, you've got to see this!' To get exposure in the manner of a festival like
this is good for the film.''


For directors whose names are not widely known and whose subjects are more
arcane, that kind of exposure can be critical, particularly if their films are
not backed by a major studio. ''The festival has been a real legitimizing factor
for independent filmmakers,'' says Julia Reichert, who co-produced and
co-directed a documentary called ''Seeing Red'' about the subsequent lives of
Americans who had joined the Communist party in the 1930's. ''What happens at
the film festival is very much paid attention to around the country. It's been
very important for getting these films seen, and it makes us able to continue to
do the work we want to do instead of having to go Hollywood. It's very difficult
to convince theater owners to show independent films, especially documentaries.
The film festival gives you a foot in the door of many theaters around the
country.''

Many of the directors say that the festival represents a kind of professional
stamp of approval in both artistic and commercial terms. ''The film festival is
more of a marketplace for theatrical and full-length feature films than for
documentaries, but our film is specifically designed for television, and I think
it will influence any network or syndicator looking at the film,'' says
Jacqueline Ochs. ''It's very important as a verification of the quality of a
film; if somebody's looking for a film on this subject and sees that this was
shown at the New York Film Festival, they'll know it's a quality product. It
will help to sell the film.''

Some filmmakers also see the festival as a way to reassure prospective
audiences. ''Normally I guess you might expect a documentary about William
Burroughs to be bizarre and inaccessible for an audience, since Burroughs's
writing is difficult and inaccessible for many people,'' says Howard Brookner, a
29- year-old director whose portrait of the author is titled simply
''Burroughs.'' ''The festival will give it a kind of official stamp that this is
a film you can actually watch and get something out of, instead of just a film
for 10 people.''


The concern that a film will not find its audience is one of a filmmaker's major
fears, particularly with an unusual film. Jonathan Kaplan, who made a dramatic
movie called ''Heart Like a Wheel,'' is worried that the profession of its
heroine - she is a housewife-turned-drag racer - will put off potential viewers.
He was therefore ''overjoyed'' to hear that ''Heart Like a Wheel'' would be
shown in New York.

''The festival is known for choosing quality films, and it takes the stigma off
the drag-racing element,'' he explains. ''This will give my film the chance to
be judged for what it is, rather than dismissed on the basis of a one-liner
about drag racing that does not really represent what the film is about. I hope
it will launch the film in a way that will get it the proper distribution
nation-wide. By showing it at the festival you're definitely going to get it in
front of an audience that would not go if the people knew what it was about. We
did not set out to make a movie about drag racing. In this film, drag racing is
something the woman has a passion about; it's her profession, her career. But
you could substitute 'musician' or 'journalist' or 'doctor.' It's not an
exploitation film or an action film, it's a people film. And the fact that it's
in the film festival means that somebody's taken it seriously. For me, it's the
first chance to get into the big leagues.''

That chance is available to any director interested in competing for such a
forum. In order to arrive at this year's selection of films, the festival's
program committee screened 400 offerings from around the world. ''We're an open
festival, and we'll look at anything anybody cares to send us to see,'' says
Richard Roud, the festival's director and chairman of the program committee.


Although he acknowledges that ''a lot of people have the idea that there is a
'festival kind of film,''' Mr. Roud maintains that there is no such thing.
Indeed, he is hard pressed to describe what the program committee wants to see
in a movie. ''It's impossible to put into words,'' he says. ''We're looking for
good movies. I guess there are two things we look for: either innovation, with a
film that's not like any other film, or just plain old straight, solid
achievement. We have a committee of five people who vote, and we just hope that
when we do get a consensus, we have some chance of being right.''

However, while films are originally judged on the basis of merit, other factors
may be considered during the final shaping of the series. ''Geography or type of
film never comes into play with the initial selection of films,'' Mr. Roud
explains. ''Only on the last day, when you've narrowed it down to 30 films for
25 slots and all seem about equal, you might say, 'Well, maybe we should take
this one because we don't have any films from Asia.' But it's only with all
other things being equal, when you can't decide how to whittle it down.''

Committee members may also feel a sense of responsibility to give certain films
a chance to be seen. ''Occasionally, if it's a question of two films and you
already know one is coming out, but the other you think isn't, that could swing
the thing,'' Mr. Roud says.


The committee makes no claims of infallibility, however. Mr. Roud admits that
there have been numerous films ''we should have chosen and didn't'' over the
years, citing a Jamaican film called ''The Harder They Come'' as one example
that was not approved by the committee. ''There have also been films we wanted
and couldn't get, because the producer or the studio thought it wasn't a good
idea,'' Mr. Roud adds. ''But as long as the films come out, that's the main
thing.''

In addition to screening new films, the festival will present several special
events. A 1928 Russian silent film called ''The New Babylon'' will be shown at
Radio City on Oct. 3. The film was originally made in collaboration with Dmitri
Shostakovich, the Russian composer, who wrote its score in 1928-29. The music
will be performed by a live orchestra during the screening. The festival will
also show ''Rear Window,'' the Alfred Hitchcock suspense classic starring Grace
Kelly and James Stewart.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of scenes from movies

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A FILM FESTIVAL WITH AN AMERICAN ACCENT

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2537 words


When he was an English major at the University of Michigan, Lawrence Kasdan knew
exactly what he wanted to do when he got out into the real world. He wanted to
be a film director. Between studying and going to the occasional demonstration -
this was the 60's, after all - he spent a lot of time going to the movies and
writing scripts, and like most of his friends, he assumed that everything would
work out. Those were the heady days, remember, when everything seemed possible;
and for a generation convinced of its ability to effect durable social and
political change, the prospect of leading ''a full and satisfying creative
life'' seemed a small thing to take for granted.

Upon graduating, however, Mr. Kasdan discovered that it wasn't easy to break
into the film business; that his map of expectations, drawn in college, barely
corresponded to the world outside. He spent the next five years working in an
advertising agency, writing scripts at night. In time, those scripts would lead
to recognition as one of Hollywood's most gifted writers and directors - among
his writing credits are ''Raiders of the Lost Ark'' and ''The Empire Strikes
Back'' - but those early years of frustration made an indelible impression on
Mr. Kasdan, and he resolved one day to make a movie about the shock his
generation experienced in entering the world. That film is ''The Big Chill'' -
which stars Tom Berenger, Glenn Close, Jeff Goldblum, William Hurt, Kevin Kline,
Mary Kay Place, Meg Tilly and JoBeth Williams - and it opens the New York Film
Festival on Friday.

Like Mr. Kasdan's last film, ''Body Heat,'' ''The Big Chill'' is an intensely
personal movie; and like ''Body Heat,'' it is about a group of young people who
believed that the world belonged to them, then rudely discovered that ''you
can't always get what you want.'' At once affectionate and ironic, the movie
follows a group of college friends, who reunite some 10 years later, at a
classmate's funeral. And on one level, it documents the difficulties members of
that generation - which grew up during the radical 60's and reached maturity in
the introspective 70's - had in coming to terms with their past.

The soundtrack of hard-driving rock 'n' roll; the characters' cool, crackly
banter; their joking references to marijuana, cocaine, herpes and jogging - all
these serve to situate the movie in a specific time and place. And the dilemmas
of the individual characters also reflect a host of contemporary issues - from
the difficulties women face in balancing a family and a career, to the problems
former radicals have adjusting to their loss of anger.

For many young people in the 60's, however, the demarcations between public and
private dislocations, between their disgust with society and a more personal
sense of disillusion, were never very clear. And in a sense, ''The Big Chill''
is about something every generation experiences. It is about friendship and how
it endures and changes, and it is about the irrevocable loss of innocence that
comes from growing up. Indeed, the title ''The Big Chill'' refers to the
intimations of mortality that the characters experience in coming to terms with
their friend Alex's suicide. ''All these people think of themselves as kids,''
says Mr. Kasdan. ''These are people who have an endless belief in their own
possibilities, and suddenly they see that for Alex, the possibilities are
over.''


For Mr. Kasdan, the phrase ''big chill'' had another meaning as well. It
described a sort of frisson of recognition that he'd experienced more and more
often in recent years. ''It's this feeling I would get when I was talking to
someone with whom I felt I shared a lot of sympathy,'' he explains. ''Suddenly
they would say something - or I would say it - that was so out of bounds or so
cold or so cynical that a chill would pass over me. It's this feeling of being
totally reversed.''

Mr. Kasdan, himself, became acutely conscious of this phenomenon when he came to
Hollywood - a place in which intimacy and personal relationships are routinely
used as business tools, a place in which ''people, who are almost invariably
charming, will do almost anything to you for their own purposes.''

Some of the ideas for ''The Big Chill,'' in fact, grew out of a dialogue about
values in the movie business that Mr. Kasdan and the producer of the movie,
Michael Shamberg, had carried on over the years. ''The tension of the 'Big
Chill' generation,'' says Mr. Shamberg, ''that tension between ideals and
ambitions, is inherent in this business. Take what happened at the time of the
baby moguls: You have these former radicals, who are now in a position of power,
and they're turning out exactly like the people before them. It makes you ask
what happened to our generation.''


Clearly every generation traces a trajectory from rebellion to conformity, but
the 60's - a period remarkable for the intensity of its anger, its costumes and
its nervous rhetoric - were especially easy to mythologize. As Mr. Kasdan sees
it, what distinguished the group of people who came of age then was their sense
that they were different. It was a generation that prided itself on its loss of
political innocence - the legacy of Vietnam and the assassinations - and yet it
was a generation that in many ways remained peculiarly naive. The attention paid
to the anti-Vietnam protests; the startling social changes wrought by the
''sexual revolution'' - these events only helped confirm many students' belief
that change was easy to effect. And having grown up on the promises of postwar
prosperity, they did not expect to compromise - either their political ideals or
their personal ambitions - the way their parents had.

As a consequence, their subsequent entry into the world of adult reponsibilities
seemed all the more jarring when it occurred, and those who embraced
materialistic values became practiced at the art of rationalization. One of the
people Mr. Kasdan and his collaborator on the script, Barbara Benedek, talked to
before writing the movie was a former radical who has since become a
high-powered agent and now a studio executive. ''He thought the skills he'd
developed raising money for certain radical groups,'' says Mr. Kasdan, ''were
not so different than what he'd been doing as an agent - trying to get a better
deal for a client.''


There is a lot of reminiscing about the commitments of the 60's in ''The Big
Chill,'' and one of the characters says, ''I just hate to think that it was all
just - fashion.'' It is a question that Mr. Kasdan has asked himself.

''I think the atmosphere was so heavily politicized you could not avoid being
involved,'' he says. ''And there's nothing more exciting than having an army of
cops bearing down on you with tear gas - it made it easy to believe you were
doing something important. And sometimes, we probably were - I'm not cynical
about that, but I don't think it necessarily sprang from any deep-rooted
convictions. And the only reason I think I come out a little bleakly on it now
is because of the 70's - the evidence is in. In the 70's the sanction for this
creative selfishness was given, and I think it was all we wanted to hear.''

At one point, the differences between the 60's and the present were dramatized
in ''The Big Chill'' by a flashback scene - since cut - which showed the
characters as they were in college. To shoot the scene, Mr. Kasdan outfitted a
house on location with artifacts from the 60's: old Rolling Stones and
Temptations albums; posters depicting the clenched revolutionary fist and the
Moratorium peace sign; magazines with pictures of Kent State and Watts.

The actors spent much of a month- long rehearsal period in that house, and for
those in their early 30's, it was like entering a time warp. The nostalgia
evoked not only took the form of happy reminiscing, but also triggered
melancholy thoughts about how much they and they friends had changed.

''In the film, we were using questions about that period to talk about something
every generation goes through,'' says William Hurt, who plays a Vietnam veteran.
''It's about lost hope. At the same time, though, it's the best home movie ever
made.'' In looking back on the 60's, Mr. Hurt feels a mixture of ''fear and
shame and independence.'' He had never been one to join large movements of any
kind, and his reticence to march sometimes left him feeling like ''a
wallflower'' at the ''party.''

In contrast, JoBeth Williams, who did participate in antiwar demonstrations,
remembers the period as a ''wonderful, exciting time, full of possibilities.''
''I vowed, as did a lot of my friends, that even though we went out into the
big, bad, ugly world, we'd continue to be part of the Movement,'' she says.
''I've supported certain antinuclear campaigns in recent years, but I haven't
given a lot of my time and energy, and I think that instills a sort of guilt.''

Unlike her character in ''The Big Chill'' - who has given up her dreams of a
writing career to become a housewife - Miss Williams is still doing what she
wanted to do at Brown University. In those days, however, she saw her vocation
in terms of working for a small, politically-oriented theater; she never
imagined that she would one day be starring in Hollywood movies. ''I remember
saying, 'I will only do Art, I will never do entertainment,' '' she recalls,
''but there are all sorts of considerations out here - like you need the
exposure, you need the money - that never occured to you in college.''


Over the years, the practical problems of working as an actor have had a
sobering effect on other cast members as well. Jeff Goldblum, for instance - who
plays a would-be novelist, turned People magazine reporter - also remembers the
days when ''my life was going to be art.'' ''It's sort of different now,'' he
says. ''Now I'm interested in buying furniture for my house and stuff like that.
Back then, what did I care about furniture? I could fly, I wanted to fly - who
needed even to sit down? You don't realize till later that things aren't so
easy. You go up for things you don't get and are not sought after for things you
want, and I'm sure that's had not a little effect on my personality.''

Tom Berenger, too, has discovered that a decade of working in ''the
establishment of show business'' has diminished both his ideals and
expectations. ''During a two year period where I was hardly working,'' he
recalls, ''I got to the point of hating show business and hating myself for
being an actor. I started feeling that being an actor was being a self-indulgent
child, that I'd wasted my life on this ambitious dream and meanwhile let other
things slide by. I'm getting my sense of humor back only now.''

Whereas the character Mr. Berenger plays in ''The Big Chill'' espouses a kind of
guilty cynicism - he is a former radical who has since become the star of a TV
sit-com - Kevin Kline's character is someone trying to cope with his
contentment. A pragmatist who believes that one can best change the world by
living an honorable life and taking care of one's family and friends, he was
never really an activist in college and is now a successful businessman.

As a student at Indiana University and later Juilliard, Mr. Kline was not
particularly involved in politics either, though he performed in such
''radical'' theater productions as ''Viet Rock.'' Most of his time was spent
studying music - and later, acting. ''At times I've had doubts about whether I'm
of any use to society as an actor or whether I'm just perpetrating useless
illusions,'' he says. ''But most of the time I think, 'This is what I do best,
and this is how I can best contribute to society.' Perhaps one can't change the
world by doing, say, 'Pirates of Penzance,' but if one reminds people to laugh -
that's a good thing. You can nudge or jar people's perceptions.''


For Mr. Kline, as for many of the actors, ''The Big Chill'' ''articulated a lot
of things we were already asking ourselves.'' It not only made them re- examine
their political commitments, but also made them look at the shape of their own
lives. ''A lot of it is turning 35 and assessing oneself at that ripe old age,''
says Mr. Kline, ''and I think the film focused that for me. I know a lot of
people my age who are asking themselves, 'What have I become?' 'Have I become
too self-absorbed?' 'Is it too late to be anything but an actor?' You think, 'My
God, I have a history and based on this history, am I stuck with what I am?'
It's a feeling time is running out, and you see your own mortality is not so far
away.''

In the movie, Meg, the character played by Mary Kay Place, also realizes that
time is running out - in a slightly different sense. Although she's always
wanted a family, she has dedicated most of her time since college to becoming a
successful attorney; now in her mid-30's, she is still single and realizes that
she is subject to the ''ticking biological clock.'' Miss Place has also been
extraordinarily busy during the last decade, building a career - as an actress,
writer and singer - and she found that playing the role of Meg focused many of
her own concerns about balancing a family and a career. ''Since 31,'' she says,
''I've had these heavy maternal urges that would come and go. It had never
occurred to me before that I wouldn't automatically have kids and be going to
Little League games. So, the movie's really made me go through a major
re-examination of choices in my life.''

In reassessing her life, Glenn Close, who plays a physician married to ''the
perfect man,'' realized that she is now at a point where she feels ''extremely
challenged and fulfilled'' by her work; and instead of romanticizing the 60's,
she looks back, with wonderment, at the na"ivete of her earlier self. ''That
person back then is in many ways a stranger to me,'' she says. ''It's
mind-boggling. I was married when I was going to college, and I remember I had
no other role models except my parents. So for the first two years in college, I
was going to class, making meals for my husband, doing the laundry, everything -
never even thinking we could share the work. It took a long time to learn how to
stick up for myself.''

If making ''The Big Chill'' served as a kind of emotional memory trip for Mr.
Kasdan and most of the actors, it was more of a lesson in history for Meg Tilly.
In the movie, Miss Tilly plays the part of the late Alex's girlfriend - who
observes the others through the innocent, youthful eyes of an outsider - and
she, herself, is a good decade younger than the others. Her one memory of the
60's, prior to making the movie, was that her sister had a poem published in
Ramparts.  At 23, Miss Tilly is also unacquainted with the sense of reduced
expectations shared by so many of the others; her idealism and optimism are
still intact. Having come to New York at the age of 17, she quickly made a
career for herself as a dancer, then easily made the transition to acting. ''I'm
still at the point where I feel I can do whatever I want,'' she says. ''If I
want something, I just go for it. So far it's worked. Maybe in a couple years
I'll come across those limitations everybody talks about.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of actors in 'Big Chill'

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE TESTING OF MARTIN FELDSTEIN

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 4575 words


WASHINGTON THE rumors began the moment Ronald Reagan won the election and they
spread as the President-elect kept putting off the choice of chairman of his
Council of Economic Advisers. Surely, the press and much of the academic
community speculated, he would turn to Martin S. Feldstein, the 40-year-old
Harvard professor who was president of the respected National Bureau of Economic
Research. Mr. Feldstein was the best known of the younger generation of
conservative economists that had emerged in the wake of the Democrats' failure
to stem inflation or generate steady growth.

Mr. Feldstein says he had heard the rumors, but had not been approached. ''I
didn't want to come,'' he recounts now. Taking the initiative, he wrote the
White House asking not to be considered. But when Murray L. Weidenbaum, the man
who did take the job,decided to return home to St. Louis in the summer of 1982,
the White House called and Mr. Feldstein was ready - even eager.

But that was more than a year ago and there are many who think now that there
must be moments when the 43-year-old, balding Harvard professor wonders whether
he should have held off until the election of a different Republican President.
In temperament, timing and strategy, Marty Feldstein - as he's widely known - is
proving to be the odd man out in the economic policy ranks of the Reagan
Administration. ''He has failed at making the transition from academic economist
to political economist,'' said Lawrence A. Kudlow, who was economic policy
director in David A.  Stockman's Office of Management and Budget until he left
this year.

Part of Mr. Feldstein's problem was timing. The keystone of Mr. Reagan's
Economic Recovery Program - the three-year, 25 percent cut in individual income
tax rates - was in place a year before Mr. Feldstein arrived. When he moved into
the Old Executive Office Building adjoining the White House the economy was in a
tailspin and it was the Federal Reserve, not Congress, the President or the
C.E.A., that had seized the initiative. Its anti-inflation policies had brought
on the recession, and its loosening of monetary policy in mid-1982 had set the
groundwork for the recovery.

But timing wasn't Mr. Feldstein's only problem. He has shown little clout even
in areas, like Social Security policy, where his academic credentials were
strongest and his timing, superb. Unlike his most influential predecessors at
the council's helm, Alan Greenspan under President Ford and Walter Heller in the
Kennedy Administration, he does not whisper advice into the President's ear at
regular private meetings. He relies instead on memos and group meetings to
assert his views.

That situation may not be entirely his fault. ''My impression is that more than
any President in postwar history, President Reagan has very firm and fixed ideas
on the course of economic policy,'' said Charles L. Schultze, who was President
Carter's chief economist. ''He has a gospel - all you have to do is unleash the
private enterprise system - and he found the key to it: cutting taxes. He is not
about to change his mind.''

In soliciting advice, Mr. Reagan is more likely to turn to his White House
political counselors, or to Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan - with whom the
C.E.A. chief has been publicly feuding in recent weeks - or to Secretary of
State George P. Shultz, an economist 20 years Mr. Feldstein's senior who has
strong academic credentials as well as policy making experi ence in the Nixon
years that dwarfs Mr. Feldstein's.

But the President's top economist must take some responsibility for his limited
influence. He lost face, some credibility and earned the nickname Dr. Gloom with
his first forecast, which was used to shape the President's 1984 budget. His New
Year's figures, predicting only a limp recovery, almost immediately proved
stillborn. Bursts of good news erupted in the weeks following their publication,
and he admitted that his numbers were too low. In an unusual move in April, the
council issued a detailed new forecast, showing faster growth. Then in the
normal mid-year review in July, with the economy behaving in a typical
post-recession boom, he revised his figures upward once again.

Preparing the forecast is the chief economist's most important function and in
that area, said Paul W. MacA voy, a member of Mr. Greenspan's council, Mr.
Feldstein is off to a doubtful start. ''It's early,'' he said, ''and it's a hard
year. But the record isn't good.''

In a city where political sensitivities are essential to survival, Mr.
Feldstein, who is serving his first official stint in Washington, has proved an
amateur - at least so far. Advisers in the President's election-wary White House
criticize him for raising doubts about the recovery's strength. They wish he
would stop bemoaning the huge Federal budget deficits, which stand as an
appalling defeat and embarrassment to many in an Administration that came to
Washington promising to balance the books.

While nearly everyone acknowledges Mr. Feldstein's facility with numbers and his
fact-packed analyses of economic phenomena, many fault his tone and his style.
The White House, for example, no longer wants to push its proposal for a
''contingency'' tax rise to take effect two years from now if budget deficits
keep growing. Talk of taxes, it has decided, is too risky with an election
approaching.

BUT Mr. Feldstein still promotes the idea whenever he gets the chance. ''He
thinks it's important that someone stand up and say that,'' said a senior White
House staff member. ''He's the only one who thinks that way.'' The official
added, ''He bothers people, continually talking down the recovery. Whenever
there's a silver lining, it's Feldstein who points out the dark cloud.''

Mr. Feldstein, for his part, downplays the friction. While he concedes that he
has fought the White House on some issues - such as the need for contingency
taxes - he sounds content with his work and disputes the view that he opposes
the President on basic questions such as the importance of the deficit.

''The President and I agree on most things - spending, free trade, budget
deficits, monetary policy,'' he said. ''I think I know his general reactions,
and they were mine before I came.''

One ranking Administration official said President Reagan still listens to Mr.
Feldstein, but ignores his advice. Other officials even say he ought to move
back to Cambridge before next September, when his two- year leave from Harvard
is up.

''I think he has a decision to make'' about whether to stay on board, said
Manuel H. Johnson, the Treasury's assistant secretary for economic affairs and a
low-church practitioner of the supply-side theology that the chief economist
calls ''extremist.'' Mr. Johnson, a 34-year-old economist who came to the
Administration from George Mason University in Virginia, where he was an
associate professor, is one of the C.E.A. chairman's strongest internal
adversaries.

He, and his boss, Treasury Secretary Regan, contend that there is no proof to
support Mr. Feldstein's belief, one shared by many mainstream economists, that
high deficits cause high interest rates.

Just last week Mr. Regan appeared before a group of automobile dealers and
attributed such theories of the relationship of deficits and interest rates to
the ''soured wisdom of some defunct or obsolescent economist.'' He said that
economists who espouse these views should come down from ''their celestial
observatories and acquaint themselves with terrestrial fact.'' Mr. Feldstein's
response to such attacks is to continue arguing his side of the case.

In part, his disputes with the White House - and the Treasury - may arise from
the inevitable friction between academic analysis and partisan politics that has
plagued council chairmen for decades.

''Whenever I can, I give my best professional advice and my best professional
judgment,'' he said. ''Sometimes I give it privately, and sometimes I feel I
cannot, in my position, not give it openly. You're not going to see me making
speeches saying I see black when I see white.''

Outside the Administration, in Congress, on Wall Street and in academia, Mr.
Feldstein's reputation remains largely unsullied. ''I put extremely high
confidence in him,'' said James R. Jones, the Oklahoma Democrat who is chairman
of the House Budget Committee. ''He's a solid individual who if he were listened
to could get the Administration and Congress out of this fiscal box we're in.''

Another prominent Capitol Hill observer of economic affairs, Senator William
Proxmire of Wisconsin, suggests ''a Machiavellian explanation'' for the
performance of Mr. Feldstein: ''They have him take a tough line on the deficit
and taxes,'' he said. ''Then the Administration can say 'we won't do it' and
that makes them seem like good guys.''

Mr. Feldstein's difficulties might arise from his reflective, professorial
nature. He is cerebral, pleasant enough but hardly convivial. He is reserved,
cautious and correct in speech, and describes his skin as ''pretty thick.''

NONE of the criticism of him, in any case, appears to have penetrated Mr.
Feldstein's well-tailored office, at the end of a long, imposing corridor of the
Old Executive Office Building. The office's rich molded walls and ceilings have
been given a fresh coat of white paint, and White House decorators, at Mr.
Feldstein's behest, have furnished it with reproduction Queen Anne and
Chippendale furniture - upholstered wingback chairs, a pair of camelback sofas,
an inlaid mahagony conference table with straightback chairs and bookcases.

There is no real desk. Mr. Feldstein, when alone, sits at a small mahagony table
in a corner, before a window that overlooks the Mall and the Washington
Monument. There, with a pocket calculator, he crunches numbers from stacks of
black, three- ring notebooks. The office has a look of new or temporary
occupancy. In a city where photographs of the office holder at his swearing in
or posing with his staff or testifying before Congress are as common as ID
badges, there's nothing on Mr. Feldstein's walls, not even pictures of his
economist wife, Kathleen, or two daughers, Margaret and Janet.

Mr. Feldstein wears large, tortoise- rimmed glasses which, with his large, very
round eyes, give him a look of fixed incredulity. He dresses nearly always in
trim, dark blue suits, black shoes, Brooks Brothers white button-down shirts,
and printed silk ties - even last Sunday afternoon, when he came in to do some
work.

His staff of about 50, half economists, half support personnel, is one of the
smallest, busiest and youngest at the senior level of Government. Typically,
members of the junior economics staff, people in their twenties, remain only a
year for intensive, on- the-job experience in Government and then return to
academia. More senior economists, mostly in their thirties, rarely stay more
than a couple of years.

He relies on the young economists for research and counsel more than on the
other two council members, William Poole from Brown University and William A.
Niskanen from the Ford Motor Company and the University of California at Los
Angeles. Staff meetings are rare. Of the 10 to 15 appointments he schedules at
his office each day, most are one-on- one or one-on-two, and most involve
projects analyzing the effects on the economy of changes in official policy and
assessing the economy's week- by-week performance.

For staff economists, it is an exciting assignment to work with an economist of
Mr. Feldstein's stature. He, for example, has won the John Bates Clark Award
from the American Economic Association, the profession's highest honor for a
practitioner under 40.

Mr. Feldstein, like many other members of the Administration, starts early.
Every Tuesday morning at 7:30, he goes to breakfast at the Treasury with Mr.
Regan, Mr. Shultz, Mr. Stockman, Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige, John V.
Svahn, assistant secretary for domestic policy development at the White House,
and sometimes Paul A. Volcker, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. Every two
weeks, he goes to the Federal Reserve for a private breakfast with Mr. Volcker.
All other mornings, at eight, he goes to the White House for a staff conference.
With other economic officials, he goes to a meeting every two weeks with Mr.
Reagan, and Mr. Feldstein says he prepares the agenda. He sits on at least four
other committees that meet regularly, and he makes a speech about every two
weeks.

OF the senior Administration personnel he deals with, none is allied with Mr.
Feldstein on all issues. But Mr. Stockman has worried in public about the
deficit and agrees with Mr. Feldstein on the urgency of tax increases. In the
White House, he sometimes has the support of James A. Baker 3d, the President's
chief of staff, and Richard G. Darman, Mr. Baker's deputy. Mr. Feldstein and Mr.
Baldrige are aligned on some issues but have split sharply on trade matters -
the Commerce Secretary taking the more protectionist position. Mr. Feldstein's
closest ally on broad economic policy is probably Mr. Volcker, who is
independent of the Administration, and he was a vigorous supporter of Mr.
Volcker's reappointment to a second term. In that affair, Mr. Regan is believed
to have been the lone dissenter.

Conflict for Martin Feldstein was as inevitable as it was for his predecessors
in an office that President Truman established just after World War II. It is
the C.E.A. chairman's assignment to prepare the forecasts on which the President
bases his annual budget and to give the President and other executive officers
solid professional analyses. He also is expected to help the President sell his
economic policies to the nation.

However, since chief economic advisers nearly all come from the universities,
and nearly all return, professional integrity is a surer meal ticket than
political loyalty. But there are many ways to avoid public disputes. In the
1960's, the late Arthur M. Okun urged President Johnson to raise taxes to
finance the war in Vietnam. Mr. Johnson, trying to protect his Great Society
programs, refused, and rather than compromise his reputation in defending the
President's policies, Mr. Okun stopped making speeches. Mr. Feldstein, by
contrast, has told everyone all, in congressional testimony, in columns in
newspapers, in news briefings, in speeches.

The politics-vs.-professionalism conflict has been exacerbated in the Reagan
Administration, which remains a caldron of conflicting conservative ideologies
even though several of the most outspoken theorists have left. ''It's a very
tough road for a professional economist in that sort of environment,'' said Alan
Greenspan. ''This Administration put together an amalgam of supply-siders,
monetarists and all other,'' he said. ''It has turned out that the differences
between these groups have not disappeared. That's why you get these public
disputes.''

Mr. Feldstein, furthermore, faces immense competition in the Reagan
Administration. George Shultz, though preoccupied lately with Lebanon and the
Korean plane affair, is an awesome presence in major discussions of economic
policy. Other agencies - the Treasury, the Office of Management and Budget, the
Commerce and Labor departments - have large staffs of economists, and some have
teams doing research similar to the C.E.A.'s. ''There is only one adviser to the
President,'' said Manuel Johnson at the Treasury. ''However, he is only one
factor in the economic policy-making process. The Treasury, in this office, does
the same thing the C.E.A. does.''

On top of all that, there was little real innovative work for Mr. Feldstein to
do upon taking over from Mr. Weidenbaum, who returned to his Center for the
Study of American Business in St. Louis after 18 months trying to fashion
compromises among the Administration's warring economists. Mr. Weidenbaum left
behind few harsh critics. He was known best for his studies of Government
regulation and less might have been expected him than of a superstar like Mr.
Feldstein. Also, however, Mr. Weidenbaum rarely went public with his own
philosophical differences with the White House.

Still, Martin Feldstein came to Washington promising candor and realism. Above
all, he was anxious to produce academically defensible forecasts, unlike the
wildly optimistic, wildly wrong scenarios that the Administration and the
Weidenbaum C.E.A. had prepared. Instead, he produced a forecast showing only 3.1
percent growth from the end of 1982 to the end of 1983, which, only weeks later
and then again in July, he was forced to modify to show the healthy, 5.5 percent
growth that the economy now appears to be experiencing.

Mr. Feldstein has attributed the economy's acceleratred recovery to the
unexpected speed with which business started depleting its inventories, setting
the stage for faster production and recovery. Mr. Kudlow contends that
insufficient importance was put on the leading economic indicators that often
anticipate a recovery. Economists then had become wary of the indicators,
however, because for more than half a year they had been signaling a recovery
that never came. The Treasury and O.M.B., nevertheless, were privately
predicting 5 percent growth, but they gave in to the new chief economist, and as
luck would have it, the politicians were finally right.

IN criticizing the C.E.A. chairman,

Treasury and White House officials most often now point to his position on
taxes. Here the distinction seems subtle. Others acknowledge that tax rises
might be necessary eventually - eventually usually meaning after the 1984
election. In public comments, Mr. Feldstein agrees, but he also wants early
approval of the three-year contingency tax plan - a surcharge on corporate and
individual incomes, plus an excise tax on oil - to take effect in late 1985 if
the deficit keeps growing. That, he believes, will convince a fickle Wall Street
that the deficit will be brought down and that, in turn, will help bring down
long-term interest rates and the strong dollar. Congress has rejected the
proposal, and the White House, while supporting it in principal, would just as
soon not push it.

The differences come down to differences in schedules. The Administration wants
policies assuring a strong, rollicksome economy and a satisfied electorate
through 1984. Mr. Feldstein worries that too strong a recovery will rekindle
inflation and upset the economy prematurely. His goal therefore is slow, steady
growth right through the 1980's.

Mr. Feldstein's views of the President's tax cuts have also brought criticism.
Before coming to Washington, he had urged postponement of the third year of the
cuts, which took effect in July. Then early this year, Mr. Regan suggested that
the third cut be advanced to last January, and Mr. Feldstein openly objected.
The earlier cut, he believed, would overstimulate the then-incipient recovery.
Congress opposed the advancement, too, so it died aborning.

On one important issue - Social Security - Mr. Feldstein is one of the country's
experts, and also among the most controversial. He once produced a report
showing that as Social Security benefits rise, individual saving sharply
declines, but other economists found flaws in his methodology. Right or wrong,
Mr. Feldstein might have been expected to orchestrate the Administration's
successful effort to rewrite the Social Security law this year to save the
system from bankruptcy. But the President turned to Mr. Greenspan to shepherd
the project, and Mr. Feldstein operated mostly behind the scenes.

A NEW TAX

WASHINGTON The Administration's proposal for a ''contingency'' tax was born in a
secret meeting at the Treasury last Jan. 2, when the President's top economic
advisers - known as the ''Quad'' - struggled to find a way to shrink the Federal
deficit in the budget for fiscal 1984 then under preparation.

The group that gathered on that Sunday evening in the office of Treasury
Secretary Donald T. Regan, included six, not four members, despite its name:
Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige, budget director David A. Stockman, the
President's chief economist Martin S. Feldstein, Mr. Regan and Secretary of
State George P. Shultz. Edwin L. Harper, the President's director of domestic
policy development, was there too.

Before the dinner, said one aide, some thought had been given to solving the
deficit problem with a ''revenue plug,'' a largely wishful number that might
help the Administration show higher revenues than really expected and a lower
deficit. Other Administrations had exaggerated revenues in budget proposals, and
Mr. Reagan's had, too, the year before, when it estimated vastly higher receipts
from the sale of oil leases than it anticipated or, indeed, eventually received.

Mr. Shultz wondered instead about introducing a ''flat tax'' that would require
most taxpapers to pay the same rate. Depending on the rate, it could produce
higher revenues than the current tax system. Mr. Feldstein suggested setting an
ceiling on the deficit and then using the tax system in some way to keep it
below the limit. Mr. Harper liked the idea and suggested some kind of
''conditional'' tax that would be enacted into law but that would not take
effect unless the deficit exceeded the budget's targets.

It fell to Mr. Feldstein and Mr. Stockman, primarily, to put the ''flesh on the
bones of the thing,'' said one source. Untimately, what the President came to
call a ''contingency'' tax and others called a ''standby'' tax would actually be
two taxes, a one- percent surcharge on individual and corporate incomes and an
excise tax on oil, both domestic and imported, of about $5 a barrel. It would
take effect in October, 1985, and it would remain in effect for three years.

It was a novel thought, but Congress was unimpressed, and the Administration,
worried that proposals to increase taxes with an election ahead, no longer
promotes it.  The 12 Before Feldstein Edwin G. Nourse 1946-49 First council
chairman. Appointed by President Truman. An outspoken opponent of government
intervention who fought to keep the council invisible. Refused even to appear
before Congressional committees - and infuriated Truman with his
on-the-one-hand, on-the-other-hand economic advice, which prompted the President
to lament, ''Can't somebody bring me a one-handed economist?'' Retired to
private life until his death in 1974.  Leon Keyserling 1950-53 Served under
Presidents Truman and Eisenhower and, unlike his predecessor, favored high
levels of government spending and intervention. The only non- economist to head
the council, he was criticed for shaping economic forecasts to fit political
goals. Has served as president of the Conference on Economic Progress in
Washington since 1954 and advocated last year drastic changes in Federal Reserve
Board to reduce interest rates.  Arthur F. Burns 1953-56 Came to the council
during the Eisenhower years, bringing with him a pipe as ubiquitous as the cigar
of today's Fed Chairman, Paul A. Volcker. Called competition in business ''the
great energizer, and a basic determinant of high productivity.'' Became
president of the National Bureau of Economic Research, Martin Feldstein's alma
mater, too, in 1957. Chairman of the Federal Reserve, 1970-78. Currently, United
States Ambassador to West Germany.  Raymond J. Saulnier 1956-61 Chairman during
second Eisenhower term. Considered much less of an articulate political force
than his predecessor. Opposed wage and price controls to curb inflation,
suggesting instead balancing the budget and manipulting Federal Reserve policy.
Now a professor emeritus of economics at Barnard College.  Walter W. Heller
1961-64 Served under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson. An articulate economics
professor from the University of Minnesota who wielded more influence in the
Oval Office than any of his predecessors. Called himself an ''educator of
Presidents.'' Persuaded both Presidents to adopt a huge, Keynesian tax cut
despite a growing deficit. Returned to Minnesota. Has compared Reagan's plea to
''stay the course'' with a similar plea by the captain of the Titanic.  Gardner
Ackley 1964-68 Another economist who became one of President Johnson's most
trusted advisers. Architect of wage-price guidelines used to fight inflation
during the Vietnam years. Chastised American industry for inflationary price
increases. Left post in 1968 to become Ambassador to Italy. Has since returned
to the University of Michigan. Has spoken out against a balanced budget
amendment, saying it would be ''extremely awkward'' and ''bad public policy.''
Arthur M. Okun 1968-69 At 39, was youngest council chairman. Appointed to top
spot by President Johnson after serving as council member during the Ackley
years. Fought for government to correct imbalances in the economy with frequent
changes in tax and spending policy. Frustrated during Vietnam War buildup at
inability to convince Johnson to offset inflation by raising taxes. A key
Democratic economic adviser at the Brookings Institution until his death in
1980.  Paul W. McCracken 1969-71 Concentrated his efforts on trying to cool
inflation. A quiet professsor from the University of Michigan, overshadowed in
Washington by another Nixon economist, George P. Shultz, currently Reagan's
Secretary of State. Now again at Michigan. Supported President Reagan's 1981 tax
cut, but later expressed reservations about the deficit: ''There is a hard-core
part of the deficit that's going to have to be covered by additional revenue.''
Herbert Stein 1971-74 A pungent spokesman for the Nixon Administration whose
forecasts were often attacked for over-optimism. A long- time opponent of
government intervention who nevertheless helped engineer the nation's first
peacetime wage and price controls program in 1971. Has been a critic of Reagan's
supply-side tax cuts and of simplistic solutions to the budget deficit from his
post at the American Enterprise Institute. Teaches at University of Virginia.
Alan Greenspan 1974-77 Hired by President Nixon, but served President Ford.
Ranked with Walter Heller as a chairman with enormous clout in White House whose
tenure greatly enhanced the council's stature in Washington. An economic
consultant with a bent for forecasting and a believer in free enterprise. Headed
Reagan's Social Security Commission. Now back at his consulting firm. Was a top
candidate for Fed chairman before Reagan renamed Paul A. Volcker.  Charles L.
Schultze 1977-81 A former budget chief appointed by President Carter, who
struggled with little success against recession and inflation. Overshadowed by
Carter's White House domestic policy staff. Once described himself as a ''hair
shirt'' economist, who generated facts but had little influence on policy. Now
at his post at the Brookings Institution in Washington, he is a frequent critic
of Reagan's economic policies.  Murray L. Weidenbaum 1981-82 An academician and
late-comer to the Reagan economic team. Spent much time not making policy but
mediating disputes between the President's monetarists and supply-siders.
Brooded over large deficits and objected to Administration's overly optimistic
forecasts. Returned in the summer of 1982 to teaching post at Washington
University in St. Louis and position as director of Center for Study of American
Business.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of head of the council listed at end; photo of Martin Feldstein;
table of Feldstein's changing forecasts

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHERE SOME SEE A FOREST OTHERS SEE A TREE FACTORY

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 913 words

DATELINE: HALIFAX, Nova Scotia


In a case that attracted worldwide attention in the spring, 15 residents of Nova
Scotia's Cape Breton Island, including lobstermen and Indian chiefs, sued to
stop a pulp and paper company from spraying forestry herbicides tainted with
dioxins near their homes. Last week, Judge D. Merlin Nunn ruled in favor of the
company, finding that the spray was not dangerous in the quantities used.

The herbicides were the same two chemicals which, in greater concentrations,
were used in Vietnam as the jungle defoliant called Agent Orange. Although both
contain various dioxins, one of them, 2,4,5-T, carries trace amounts of what has
been identified as the most dangerous, TCDD. As a result, 2,4,5-T has been
banned or restricted in the United States and at least six other countries. In
Canada it is not only legal, but heavily subsidized by the Government as a
forest management tool.

Emotions were pitched, just as they have been for years in the United States'
Pacific Northwest where similar ''phenoxy'' herbicides have been widely employed
in forestry. Residents there have sabotaged timber companies' equipment and
taken potshots at helicopters that spray the woods. Complaints on both sides of
the border have been fueled by health worries and the feeling that any argument
should be decided on the side of caution. But while health matters are obviously
paramount, more and more experts have begun to doubt the usefulness of the
herbicides themselves.

The problem grows out of what might be termed the industrialization of the
continent's woodlands. This involves restricting production to essentially one
or two similar species of trees, weeding out competitors with herbicides,
applying large doses of chemical fertilizers, and widely spraying insecticides.
The idea is to adopt the successful techniques of the ''Green Revolution'' in
field crop agriculture to forests.  In the absence of 2,4,5-T, American
foresters now use 18 other chemicals, including the phenoxy herbicide 2,4- D.
(In 1978, President Carter issued an order requiring Federal agencies such as
the Forest Service to either comply with state pollution control standards or
secure a Presidential exemption for the spraying of 2,4-D.)

''It's been generally understood since the time of the Great Pyramid that if you
don't weed your garden, you won't get much of a crop,'' said Michael Newton, a
professor of forest ecology at Oregon State University.

Do It Naturally

Critics, however, suggest that forests do best naturally and that diversity of
species is necessary for healthy growth. They point to the death of Europe's
forests 200 years ago as a consequence of shifting to single- species
plantations.

''You really wonder how these poor trees got along before we came along with
pesticides to help them,'' said Jan Newton, an environmental economist in San
Francisco unrelated to Prof. Newton. She calls the massive use of chemicals
''knee-jerk forestry.'' Her own studies suggest that if weeding is necessary,
manual means might be nearly as cost-effective.

The antiweeding advocates firmly believe that, however inconvenient, some
hardwoods are good for a softwood forest. They argue that hardwoods hold soil
from erosion; act as ''nurse'' trees for slower-growing conifers; use a deeper
root system and thus pump more nutrients to the surface; and fertilize the soil
through nitrogen fixation and the annual fall of leaves. ''The policy of
hardwood removal is an example of mismanagement that reflects short-term
economic goals over long-term forest productivity,'' said Alexander Jablanczy, a
retired forester who testified at the trial.

Spray proponents contend that the case for herbicides is self-evident. Competing
vegetation is the biggest obstacle a seedling faces in its first year, making
weeding an economic necessity. They further argue that the huge areas involved
obviate alternative methods, such as manual weeding. ''The scale of the need is
such to defy any reasonable effort to do the weeding by hand,'' Prof. Newton
said. He estimates more than one-fifth of American woodlands have been taken
over by ''trash'' trees.

The argument is complicated by the fact that forest chemicals have only been in
use for about 40 years, long enough for only a single crop to begin to be
harvested. What 78 studies analyzed by the United States Forest Service in 1980
indicated was that increased conifer growth resulted from suppressing competing
vegetation by whatever means. But this does not mean the ultimate timber yield
will necessarily be greater.

In a report for the Council on Economic Priorities published last year,
researcher Kass Green said extrapolation of the growth data indicates harvests
will be greater if weeding is done. But in her study area of Western Oregon, the
case for herbicides did not appear to be so clear. The maximum projected yield
loss from a total ban on phenoxy herbicides would be just 7 percent, she
calculated. This would not necessarily translate into economic losses for
timberland owners, she wrote, because the demand for uncut timber is relatively
inelastic.

In any case, the economic debate about phenoxy herbicides pales next to the
furor over their possible health effects. ''The decision demonstrates that there
is a tremendous difficulty in bringing a scientific issue before the court,''
said Elizabeth May, a lawyer for the Cape Breton Islanders. ''How does a court
deal with an issue where scientists disagree?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of North Atlantic, showing Cape Breton Island

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACKS: NEW AND NOTEWORTHY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 43, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 871 words


FAMILY INSTALLMENTS: Memories of Growing Up Hispanic.  By Edward Rivera.
(Penguin, $5.95.) A graceful, powerful family saga by a Puerto Rican writer who
grew up in New York's barrio, ''Family Installments'' uses fictional names, but
our critic, Phillip Lopate, noted that its strongest sections seem to derive
from memory rather than imagination. Major characters include Papi (''a
masterpiece''), his wife Mami, their older son Tego and their younger son
Santos, who narrates the story and emerges as ''a subtle, ironic and educated
observer.'' The book soars, Mr. Lopate said.

THE SILMARILLION.  By J. R. R. Tolkien. (Houghton Mifflin, $7.95.) Tolkien's
chronicle of all that happened in his imaginary kingdoms of towers, dwarfs,
elves and men before ''The Lord of the Rings'' takes the form of a collection of
legends that features some particularly memorable devil figures. Reviewing the
book in 1977, John Gardner said, ''What is finally most moving is not the
individual legends but the total vision, the eccentric heroism of Tolkien's
attempt . . . to rejuvenate the medieval Christian way of seeing and feeling,
although - as all his legends reiterate - we can no longer see clearly . . . and
our main feeling is now tragic dread.''

IN COLD TYPE: Overcoming the Book Crisis.  By Leonard Shatzkin. (Houghton
Mifflin, $8.95.) Innovator and gadfly, Leonard Shatzkin draws on 35 years of
experience in the book business to analyze problems that currently beset
publishers, booksellers, writers and readers. His argument is aimed at the
general public (which ''will find it hard to believe that an industry manned and
directed by our intellectual elite can function so poorly,'' he says) and for
people inside the industry, where his proposed solutions are controversial.

TENNYSON: The Unquiet Heart.  By Robert Bernard Martin. (Faber and Faber,
$12.95.) Victorian England's most popular poet emerges in Robert Bernard
Martin's literary biography as a shambling, eccentric, unkempt genius whose
family history reads like Gothic melodrama. In his 1980 review, James Atlas
noted that it reflects ''our contemporary habit of candor.'' Mr. Martin's ''tone
is irreverent, even cheeky,'' the review said, and his ''summations of
Tennyson's contrary character are authoritative and shrewd.''

TOUCH THE DEVIL.  By Jack Higgins. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Liam Devlin, who has
grown older and wiser since his appearance in ''The Eagle Has Landed,'' and
Martin Brosnan, an American veteran of Vietnam serving a life sentence on
France's Belle Isle, are the good guys in last year's exciting and believable
Jack Higgins spy novel, which features Frank Barry, a psychopath involved with
the Russians, as villain. Mr. Higgins ''knows what he's about, and he does his
job with skill, speed and a certain amount of sang-froid,'' Evan Hunter said in
his review.

BACK TO BASICS: The Traditionalist Movement That Is Sweeping Grass-Roots
America.  By Burton Yale Pines. (Morrow/Quill, $6.95.) Burton Yale Pines's
enthusiastic study of America's recent right- wing revival maintains that the
key to the conservative renaissance ''is not so much the right's rising
resentment as its ability to use modern political techniques to make that
resentment felt,'' our reviewer, Alan Brinkley, said. Mr. Brinkley, who thought
the book's characterizations of both right and left were too broad, found much
to admire in its descriptions of the way the right-wing resurgence has occurred.


THE MAGIC FINGER.  By Roald Dahl. Illustrated by William P ene du Bois. (Harper
Trophy, $3.95.) Because she can't stand hunting and her neighbors won't be
talked out of it, the 8-year-old narrator of Roald Dahl's 1966 story puts the
magic finger on them, whereupon they find themselves building nests in trees as
giant ducks shoot at them from below. George Woods, children's book editor of
The New York Times, found this tale for readers 7 to 10 ''enjoyably bizarre,''
although more modest than Mr. Dahl's ''Charlie and the Chocolate Factory.''

THINKING ABOUT THE NEXT WAR.  By Thomas Powers. (NAL/Mentor, $2.95.) Thomas
Powers, who believes that ''we have not seen the last of big wars, and the next
one will probably involve the use of nuclear weapons,'' intersperses accounts of
visits to military installations with historical reflections and musings on
''what to tell the kids'' in a book our reviewer, Joseph S. Nye Jr., found
personal, honest and engaging. The essays it comprises originally appeared in
Commonweal magazine.

THE IMPOSSIBLE COLORING BOOK: Oscar Reutersv"ard's Drawings in Japanese
Perspective.  (Putnam/Perigee, $3.95.) Above is a two-dimensional figure but you
perceive it as three-dimensional. It couldn't possibly exist but similarly
impossible figures have been constructed. Using axonometric, or Japanese,
perspective - a system in which parallel lines remain parallel instead of
converging at the vanishing point - Oscar Reutersv"ard has created drawings that
challenge our ways of seeing. In a foreword to this collection, a paperback
original, the philosophy professor Don Ihde suggests that coloring the figures
may promote understanding of ''a richer dimensionality of the world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing in excerpt from the Impossible Coloring Book

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 18, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS MASS MARKET

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 696 words


Mass market paperbacks are soft-cover books sold at newsstands, variety stores
and supermarkets, as well as in bookstores. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from bookstores and representative wholesalers with
more than 40,000 outlets across the United States.

1

THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) A fictional saga of
human survival at the dawn of civilization.

2

MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $3.95.) The secret behind a
woman business tycoon's rise to power: fiction.

3

ACCEPTABLE LOSSES, by Irwin Shaw. (Avon, $3.95.) A New York literary agent's
life is threatened by a mysterious stranger: fiction.

4

DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.

5

TOUCH THE DEVIL, by Jack Higgins. (NAL/ Signet, $3.95.) Tracking down a K.G.B.
agent who has stolen NATO secrets: fiction.

6

MAX, by Howard Fast. (Dell, $3.95.) The birth of the film industry in New York
at the turn of the century: fiction.

7

SPELLBINDER, by Harold Robbins. (Pocket, $3.95.) From soldier in Vietnam to
television evangelist: fiction.

8

CLOAK OF DARKNESS, by Helen MacInnes. (Fawcett, $3.95.) A counter-terrorist
agent finds himself on an assassination list: fiction.

9

19 PURCHASE STREET, by Gerald A. Browne. (Berkley, $3.95.) A Mafia operation
that has become ''respectable'': fiction.

10

THE CASE OF LUCY BENDING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $3.95.) The aberrant
society of Florida's Gold Coast: fiction.

11

FRIDAY, by Robert A. Heinlein. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) The adventures on
Earth of an Artificial Person: science fiction.

12

JADE, by Pat Barr. (Warner, $3.95.) An English girl, kidnapped to China, makes
her way in Oriental society: fiction.

13

LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Pocket, $3.95.) Life in the international glitter set:
fiction.

14

TRULY TASTELESS JOKES TWO, by Blanche Knott. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor.

15

THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) The beginning of
the saga continued in ''The Valley of Horses.'' TRADE

Trade paperbacks are soft-cover books usually sold in bookstores and at an
average price higher than mass market paperbacks. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States .

1

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $5.95.)
Black men and women in the South: fiction.

2

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $7.95.) Three generations of a wealthy
San Francisco family: fiction.

3

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F. Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Inspirational
talks by a California professor.

4

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson. (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.

5

LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy

Shaw. (Warner, $10.95.) How to add years to your life and life to your years.

6

BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon strips
featuring some very odd characters.

7

LINDA EVANS BEAUTY AND EXERCISE BOOK, by Linda Evans. (Simon & Schuster/Wallaby,
$9.95.) How-to by the television personality.

8

THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $4.95.) Philosophical humor.

9

ROYAL SEDUCTION, by Jennifer Blake. (Fawcett/Columbine, $5.95.) A New Orleans
belle, a

European prince, international intrigue: historical romance.

10

WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?  by Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press,
$7.95.) Guide for job hunters and career changers.

11

MISS MANNERS' GUIDE TO EXCRUCIATINGLY CORRECT BEHAVIOR, by Judith Martin.
(Warner, $10.95.) Etiquette prescribed by an amusingly bossy lady.

12

GARFIELD EATS HIS HEART OUT, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) Cartoon humor.

13

THIN THIGHS IN 30 DAYS, by Wendy Stehling. (Bantam, $2.95.) How-to.

14

THE RAPTURE, by Hal Lindsey. (Bantam, $6.95.) Predictions about an approaching
global event based on an interpretation of the Bible.

15

FIT OR FAT?  by Covert Bailey. (Houghton Mifflin, $4.50.) Exercises for fitness.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Split Over Radio Marti

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 678 words


This is only the second time in 50 years that a Republican President has had a
Republican majority in the Senate, and you might think that mutual gratitude
would promote a harmonious working relationship. Some days you would be wrong.

Last week, before Congress had been back in town two days, the issue of
establising an anti-Castro radio facility aimed at Cuba sparked an angry dispute
between Howard H. Baker Jr., the Senate majority leader, and William P. Clark,
the President's national security adviser. It culminated in Senator Baker's
sending word to Mr. Clark on Tuesday that the Senate was proceeding with a
compromise bill opposed by the President ''and if you want to stop it, you'd
better get yourself elected to the Senate in the next 30 minutes.''

The Senate had been considering legislation for Radio Marti, the proposed news
and propaganda facility, for more than a year, with filibusters, threatened and
actual, blocking action. During the August recess, a fragile compromise was
produced under which the station would be part of the Voice of America and
compensation would be provided for any adversely affected domestic broadcasters.
All Senate factions agreed to the compromise, but the White House, through Mr.
Clark, rejected it, insisting on the President's proposal to make Radio Marti
independent, like Radio Free Europe.

Mr. Clark asked Senator Baker to delay a vote for 48 hours so President Reagan
could submit a letter of opposition. The Senator, fearful his compromise might
collapse, refused to delay and indicated any letter would be left in the
mailbox.

Mr. Clark said that the White House would rather have no legislation at all than
the compromise. Senator Baker responded with the suggestion that Mr. Clark get
elected to the Senate if he wanted to influence its work.

A few moments after that, the Senate approved the Radio Marti bill unanimously
after routine discussion. Mr. Reagan's letter of opposition was never read or
referred to.

A Diplomatic Feast

Diplomacy is not all caviar and champagne in fluted glasses. When their husbands
were both attached to the United States Embassy in Rome a few years ago, Efrem
Funghi Calingaert and Jacquelyn Days Serwer found they had a common interest in
cooking and eating in general and in Italian food in particular. They decided to
collaborate on a cookbook, and, despite the vagaries of the Foreign Service,
which separated the couples and reunited them, the manuscript was completed last
year.

For the official presentation of ''Pasta and Rice Italian Style'' at the Italian
Embassy here tonight, the authors are reassembling once again, from embassies in
London and Brasilia. They actually flew in early and spent the weekend marketing
and cooking up some of the 250 recipes in their book for fettuccine, gnocchi,
risotto and the like, for the diplomats, Government officials, Italian-Americans
and Washington gourmets who have been invited.

A Post for Paul Harvey

The White House is planning to

nominate Paul Harvey, the outspoken conservative radio broadcaster, for a
six-year term on the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, which distributes
funds to the nation's public radio and television stations. If confirmed by the
Senate, he would fill the vacancy left by the resignation of Diana Lady Dugan,
who received a recent State Department appointment.

Mr. Harvey, who has been heard twice daily over the American Broadcasting
Company radio network from Chicago since 1944, is known for his highly
opinionated approach to the news - ''I've never been objective or pretended to
be'' - and his unusual delivery, from a dramatic ''Hello, Americans!'' to a
clipped ''Good Day!''

Danny Kaye once told the commentator: ''You'd better be right because you sound
like God.'' And on most issues, Mr. Harvey has been quite to the right. His few
ventures outside the conservative pantheon of God, country, the flag and middle
class morality included opposing the war in Vietnam in 1966 and criticizing
former President Nixon for the invasion of Cambodia in 1970.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IF THE QUESTION IS MILITARY, ASK NUNN

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1051 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 19


On the Senate floor the older men cluster around the slight, dapper figure with
oversize spectacles, a pinstripe suit, glistening loafers and a soft Georgia
drawl.

''When I came here in 1972 it wasn't very popular for new Senators to be
involved in military issues; there was the residue of Vietnam,'' said Senator
Nunn. ''I wanted to get involved. For me, personally, I guess I was born and
bred into it.''

At the age of 45, Sam Nunn, who has emerged in recent years as one of the most
formidable and influential military specialists in Congress, is set to replace
his mentor, the late Henry M. Jackson, as ranking Democrat on the Armed Services
Committee.

The new job, and the possibility that, at a relatively young age, Mr. Nunn may
one day take over as chairman of the powerful committee, should the Democrats
regain control of the Senate, places Sam Nunn deep inside the fabric of power in
the Washington establishment and makes him a dominant figure in Congress.

He speaks with a trace of mixed feelings about his new role and his voice shakes
a bit when he is talking about ''Scoop'' Jackson. ''From the day I got into the
Senate I looked to Scoop for friendship and leadership,'' said Senator Nunn,
seated in his office, staring at the window. ''What I'll miss is being able to
talk to him on a day to day basis about everything. He was one of those people
you sort of took for granted, he was always available. The impact of his loss is
not easy to comprehend.''

Hard to Place Ideologically

Even before Mr. Jackson's death, however, Senator Nunn was wielding considerable
power in the Senate on military issues, a man whose rapid climb was attributed
to his grasp of military data no matter how complicated, a prodigious appetite
for work and a streak of independence that made him difficult to place
ideologically. He speaks carefully, for example, about the Soviet downing of a
Korean airliner and voices concern about the way the Reagan Administration has
handled the details of what took place over Soviet territory.

''We would have been much better had we ascertained the facts and put out the
worst side of our case first, rather than having it creep out incrementally,''
said Mr. Nunn, alluding to the disclosure several days after the fact that there
had been an American reconnaissance plane in the area.  ''There's a real
obligation of leadership in a crisis, in spite of the huge pressures, to try and
get as complete a picture as possible before going to the world with charges,
particularly in a nuclear age.''

Mr. Nunn said quietly: ''For the first time you've got a country that can, even
by accident, destroy a huge segment of this country. Mistakes in the past, false
charges, have never been that serious. Now they are. The public, the Congress,
the news media, the Administration has got to realize that in the future, as we
have other crises, it's enormously important to hold your tongue unless you
really know all your facts.''

Served in State Legislature

Samuel Augustus Nunn grew up on a large pecan farm in Perry, Ga. After
graduating from Emory University Law School in 1962, he went to Washington and
took a job with the House Armed Services Committee. Six years later he was
elected to the state Legislature, and in 1972, when one of the Senate's titans,
Richard Russell of Georgia, died, Mr. Nunn successfully ran for the vacant
Senate seat.

Mr. Russell, who had made his name on military issues was, in fact, one of Mr.
Nunn's models. So was Mr. Nunn's great-uncle, Carl Vinson, who for 51 years was
a member of the House and the first chairman of its Armed Services Committee.

Mr. Nunn immediately sought a seat on the Senate Armed Services panel, partly
because Georgia has numerous Army and Air Force bases, as well as a large
retired military population. Under the tutelege of two senior committee member,
Senators Jackson and John C. Stennis, Democrat of Mississippi, Mr. Nunn quickly
emerged as a forceful debater and analyst in the fields of nuclear weapons, the
Atlantic alliance and manpower.

What made Mr. Nunn somewhat unusual, too, was that he shunned the kind of
publicity that some of his colleagues craved. He once turned down a staff
suggestion to subpoena Meyer Lansky to a narcotics hearing ''because he wasn't
relevant.''

Mr. Nunn describes himself as a ''common-sense conservative.'' A liberal group,
Americans for Democratic Action, gave him a rating last year, based on stands on
20 key issues, of 45 percent.

'Huge Buildup' in Hardware

Mr. Nunn speaks with mild approval of President Reagan's military policies.
''They've made defense their No. 1 priority, and I think that's appropriate and
overdue,'' he said. ''I would say manpower quality has improved significantly,
both in terms of recruitment and retention, although this is due to high youth
unemployment. That's the upside of the economic downside.''

He expressed worry, however, that there is no ''real soul searching'' on the
part of the Administration about priorities, that the ''huge buildup'' in
military hardware will be accomplished at the expense of certain programs viewed
as essential by Mr. Nunn. These include ''readiness'' measures such as purchases
of spare parts and ammunition, better training, more flying time for pilots.
These relatively mundane programs, while crucial, have rarely held top priority
within the military and Congressional establishment.

Mr. Nunn said there was ''an overload in the strategic budget,'' with two
missile programs and two bomber projects that he said would ''squeeze
readiness.''

''I don't think they've thought through their overall military strategy,'' said
the Sentator. ''I don't think there's an adequate sense of what we really expect
our military forces to do.''

Mr. Nunn said he had not yet decided who to support in the Democratic
Presidential race, but would probably make up his mind before the Georgia
primary next March. ''I'll make my decision on the basis of who is strong on
defense and foreign policy and who I think can carry the South,'' he said.  Mr.
Nunn said he was still somewhat concerned that elements of the Democratic Party
who support a nuclear freeze would seek to take over. ''I hope not,'' he said
with a slow smile. ''I'll do my best to prevent that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Senator Sam Nunn

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TYPICALLY, LEBANON STRATEGY DELEGATES AUTHORITY

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1036 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 19


Modern military communications have become so swift and global that they have
put an American President in the position, if he chooses, to call the shots on a
distant battlefield from his armchair in the Oval Office or from the Situation
Room in the White House basement.

During the Vietnam War, President Johnson became so enmeshed in the politically
sensitive details of the fighting that he personally picked or approved specific
daily targets for American bombing raids against North Vietnam.

But as White House officials describe it, this has not been the operating style
of President Reagan in the current crisis in Lebanon. Mr. Reagan has long since
established his penchant for delegating authority as a hallmark of his
Administration.

In his first 100 days, for example, he set the basic objective of cutting the
Federal budget and then gave David A. Stockman, the director of the Office of
Management and Budget, wide authority to carry out that strategy. On revising
the Social Security system, he left negotiations with Congress to his chief of
staff, James A. Baker 3d.

Some in Congress Are Edgy

On Lebanon, he has struck a characteristic contrast with other Presidents by
delegating authority well down the line to Col. Timothy Geraghty, the commander
of the American marine unit in Lebanon, and other military commanders in the
field.

Some members of Congress have become a bit edgy about where this approach may
lead as evidence mounts of widening American military involvement in Lebanon and
as the off-shore naval forces are used not only to protect the marines directly
but also to bolster Lebanese Army positions or to hit hostile artillery
positions in territory controlled by Syrian forces.

But White House officials insist that Mr. Reagan has set firm enough ground
rules to prevent the situation from getting out of control. The Reagan approach,
they say, has been to set the policy, fix general guidelines and then turn over
the daily decisions to the military chain of command, while the national
security adviser, William P. Clark, keep close tabs on what is done.

''There are two philosophies about these things,'' said a White House official.
''One is Lyndon Johnson sitting around the table picking the targets and
micro-managing the war.

'That's What Happened'

''The other is this President saying, 'These are the criteria; this is what
force you can use and this is when you can use it. Now, Mr. Secretary of
Defense, you decide at what level in the chain of command certain decisions are
going to be made.' And that's what's happened in this case.''

The President set the ground rules for American action in a series of intensive
National Security Council meetings over the weekend of Sept. 11-12 after attacks
on the Lebanese Army position on the hilltop town of Suk al Gharb alarmed the
White House.

To provide for what Administration officials call ''aggressive self-defense,''
Mr. Reagan approved in advance measures to defend the marines on shore, to
provide an umbrella of air and naval support for the multinational force, to
protect the American ''diplomatic presence'' including the embassy and
Ambassador's residence and, on a case by case basis, to support vital positions
of the Lebanese Army.

Specifically, officials said, Mr. Reagan authorized naval and air support, if
necessary, for the Lebanese position at Suk al Gharb because he and his policy
advisers felt that if that high ground position fell to antigovernment forces,
it would menace the positions of American marines and the entire Lebanese
Government.

Specific Lines of Authority Set

Under those ground rules, as fleshed out by the Defense Department, the
President freed various military commanders from checking with Washington before
responding to hostile fire. He set up a calibrated echelon of response as a way
to guard against drifting into unchecked escalation.

Colonel Geraghty, the marine commander on the ground, was given authority to use
his 155 milimeter howizters and four Cobra attack helicopters to defend his
1,200 men around Beirut International Airport. And Capt. M. M. France, the naval
officer in command of the five-vessel amphibious Task Force 61 off shore, was
given authority to use naval gunfire in protection of the targets the President
had designated.

But any decision to use the F-14, A-6 and A-7 tactical air support planes from
the aircraft carrier Eisenhower would have to be made by the headquarters of
Gen. Bernard W. Rogers, the commander of all American forces in the European
theater.

Officials say that these ground rules mean that military commanders have
authority to return hostile fire even if it comes from Syrian-controlled areas.
''Our position is if our people are fired upon from within Lebanon, we're going
to return fire regardless of who is manning the positions,'' an official said.
This approach reflects Mr. Reagan's assertions in the 1980 campaign that once
American forces are committed to the field they should be given the means to
carry out their mission.

Referring Sensitive Decisions

But the White House and Pentagon, which are immediately informed of all
significant battle actions, expect military commanders to refer to Washington
politically sensitive decisions, such as actions against an organized Syrian
unit. ''When it would tend to expand the conflict or get us into war, those
decisions would be made at the political level,'' a White House aide said.

Nonetheless, there is mounting uneasiness in Congress over the risks of rising
American involvement. ''It seems to me that it's going to be much more difficult
to take responsive action if the fighting spreads,'' said Representative Thomas
S. Foley of Washington, the House Democratic whip. ''It's likely to escalate our
heavier use of force,''

''It's one thing to take reprisals if you are shelled from military positions on
the hilltops,'' Mr. Foley added. ''It's another thing when there is mortar fire
coming at you from rooftops in populated areas. What will we do then?

''The Israelis will tell you, everybody starts shooting at you in these
situations. I dread to see us getting embroiled in that confusion over there.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 21, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS AND REAGAN BACK COMPROMISE ON WAR POWERS KEEPING MARINES IN LEBANON

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1671 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 20


Congressional leaders from both parties and President Reagan agreed today on a
compromise resolution that would authorize the continued deployment of American
marines in Lebanon for an additional 18 months under the War Powers Resolution.

Many lawmakers expressed serious reservations about the compromise and voiced
fears that before the 18- month period expired American troops could be drawn
deeper into the fighting in Lebanon. Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the
Democratic leader in the Senate, said that he had not ''signed on'' to the
compromise and that a majority of Senate Democrats thought the 18-month deadline
was too long.

But the predominant feeling on Capitol Hill today was that the compromise
resolution would be approved quickly, because most lawmakers feel there is no
practical alternative to continuing the troops' mission in Lebanon.

'No Good Solution' ''There is no good solution,'' a senior Democrat in the House
said. ''Staying in is bad, but leaving is worse.''

President Reagan told reporters that while he had substantial reservations about
the compromise he would be willing to sign it if it reached his desk in its
current form. Senate aides said the President was expressing his doubts to write
''legislative history'' and leave himself free to challenge the
constitutionality of the act if it is ever tested in court.

Late this afternoon the resolution was introduced in the House by Representative
Clement J. Zablocki, Democrat of Wisconsin and chairman of the Foreign Affairs
Committee, and in the Senate by Senator Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the
majority leader. Swift action is expected in both houses, probably by the
beginning of next week.

A Constitutional Clash

The compromise formula has apparently forestalled a constitutional collision
that was developing between the legislative and executive branches over the War
Powers Resolution. That legislation, adopted 10 years ago in the waning days of
the Vietnam War, says that when American troops are faced with hostilities, the
President must notify Congress and then withdraw those troops within 60 days
unless Congress gives specific authorization to keep them in the war zone.

While most members of Congress support the Administration's policies in Lebanon,
they feel strongly that the War Powers Resolution was set off on Aug. 29, when
the marines first came under hostile fire. Accordingly, they feel Congress has
the right and responsibility to authorize the continued deployment of the
troops. The White House has resisted invoking the War Powers Resolution on the
ground that it infringes on the President's flexibility as Commander in Chief.

In the compromise reached today, each side gains a major point. While Mr. Reagan
continues to express reservations about the War Powers Resolution, Congressional
leaders say he has recognized its authority.

'A Very Significant Step'

''This is a very significant step forward in establishing the legitimacy of the
War Powers Act,'' said Representative Stephen J. Solarz, a Brooklyn Democrat who
is on the Foreign Affairs Committee.

The Administration wins the backing of Congressional leaders for a policy in
Lebanon that could become politically risky as the 1984 election approaches.

''I'm especially pleased,'' the President said today, ''that this proposed
resolution not only supports our policy in Lebanon but now enables us to advance
United States peacekeeping interests on the solid bipartisan basis that has been
the traditional hallmark of American foreign policy.''

Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the Speaker of the House, stressed several times that it
was the President, not Congress, who first sent troops to Lebanon. But the
Massachusetts Democrat conceded under questioning that by endorsing the
resolution Democratic leaders were ''agreeing on the philosophy and policy of
the White House - to protect the marines in Lebanon.''

One key to the compromise is that Congress, on its own, determines that the War
Powers Resolution is in effect. This means that the White House does not have to
send Congress formal notification under the act and as a result Mr. Reagan
avoids directly acknowledging the validity of the act in the current situation.

Other Parts of Compromise

These are other important elements of the compromise:


- The size of the Marine contingent is limited to the current force of 1,200
men, as stipulated by the original agreement last September when the Americans
joined a multinational force in Lebanon. In addition, the marines are limited to
their current positions in the Beirut area. Administration officials argue that
this limit on the force assures that there will be no significant increase in
the American role in the next 18 months.


- American air and sea forces based outside Lebanon would be allowed to take
''protective measures'' that may be necessary to ''insure the safety'' of the
American troops, but would not be allowed to take any offensive measures.


- The President would have to report to Congress at least every six months and
describe the activities performed by American troops and the continuing search
for ''national political reconciliation'' among Lebanon's warring factions.


- The 18-month authority for the troops would begin on the day the resolution is
signed into law. Either the President, or Congress, can move to bring the troops
home at an earlier date. If the President wants to extend their stay in the war
zone, he must seek Congressional permission.


- The Administration would be directed to ''promote discussions'' leading to the
withdrawal of all foreign troops from Lebanon, and the replacement of the
current multinational force with a United Nations contingent.

The 18-Month Limit

By far the most important provision of the compromise is the 18-month time
limit. Supporters of the proposal argue that if it were limited to six months,
the Syrians and other forces who want to disrupt Lebanon would simply wait for
the Americans to withdraw. And if the date were set a year from now, they add,
it would fall due in the middle of the Presidential election and run the risk of
becoming a political issue.

After Democrats on the Foreign Affairs Committee discussed the proposal today,
Representative Peter H. Kostmayer, Democrat of Pennsylvania, said, ''There looks
like pretty widespread support for 18 months.'' But, he added, ''there is no
enthusiastic support.''

Representative Sam Gejdenson, Democrat of Connecticut, sounded a similar note
when he said: ''Obviously, there are some down sides to the compromise, and
clearly, the President is looking to Congress to give him some political
protection on the issue. But at this point, it's the only course of action we
can take.''

But Senator Byrd insisted that the Administration had not given sufficient
justification for the 18-month period and that many Senate Democrats were not
committed to the compromise.

'Keep Our Options Open'

''We have not bought on to this package,'' he told reporters. ''We want to keep
our options open.''

White House officials have considered Senator Byrd a more stringent critic than
Speaker O'Neill, who gave his approval to the package today. And supporters of
the compromise agreed to push ahead without the backing of Senator Byrd, in the
hope that he would eventually support the bill.

In addition to the time limit issue, many lawmakers express the fear that while
American troops went to Lebanon to bolster the Beirut Government, their mission
''is changing every day,'' in the words of Senator Byrd. Increasingly, the
critics say, the Marines seem to be supporting the Lebanese Army in a gathering
civil war.

''There is a concern,'' said Representative Dante B. Fascell of Florida, a
senior Democrat on the Foreign Affairs Committee, ''that even under the
limitations of the multinational force, in some way, the dynamics of events
might force a greater United States commitment. That's the stumbling block.''

A Desire to Move Fast

Congressional leaders want to move swiftly on the issue, in part because they
worry that lawmakers are starting to hear from constituents back home who want
to get the troops out entirely.

''In my district,'' Representative Marcy Kaptur, Democrat of Ohio, said, ''there
is not a sense we should be involved there. People don't understand why the
troops are shot at, and they don't want to repeat Vietnam. Our objectives have
to be clearer.''

On Wednesday, Secretary of State George P. Shultz is scheduled to appear at a
hearing before the House Foreign Affairs Committee, and the Senate Foreign
Relations might also take up the resolution. Floor action could come later this
week or early next week.

Aides to Mr. Reagan described themselves as pleased that the accord with
Congress essentially backed Administration actions in Lebanon and that the
resolution would persuade the forces ''opposed to strong central government in
Lebanon'' that the United States was unified in its support of the Government
there.

'Something Very Substantial'

''We got something very substantial,'' a White House official told reporters
aboard Air Force One during Mr. Reagan's trip to Columbia, S.C. ''What we got
was the legislative branch, Congress, acting in support of the President's
policies in Lebanon.''

The official characterized the agreement as ''an historic example of
bipartisanship on an extremely difficult issue that had major constitutional
overtones.'' He said both Mr. Reagan and Congress ''rose above politics'' in
their negotiations.

He said Mr. Reagan would give more details of his own reservations when he signs
the legislation. He added that Mr. Reagan had been assured that both the House
and the Senate would take up the resolution at the same time so that it would
not have to be initiated in one or the other body.

The official also said Mr. Reagan ''will assert the inherent constitutional
powers of the Commander in Chief'' when he signs the resolution.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 21, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 48 words


''In my district, there is not a sense we should be involved there. People don't
understand why the troops are shot at, and they don't want to repeat Vietnam.
Our objectives have to be clearer.'' - Representative Marcy Kaptur, Democrat of
Ohio, on the situation in Lebanon. (A16:5.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 21, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ALL OVER TOWN, THE CULINARY HEAT IS ON

BYLINE: By BRYAN MILLER

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Living Desk

LENGTH: 3103 words


AT Tanjore, an Indian restaurant at First Avenue and 66th Street, when a
customer asks for chicken vindaloo, a hot and spicy dish from the southwestern
state of Goa, the owner asks how he would like it prepared: hot, very hot, extra
hot, dynamite or double dynamite.

''About 35 percent of our customers say they want it at least very hot,'' says
the owner, Ashok Seth. ''And about 15 percent ask for the double dynamite.''

What the extremist group receives is a dish that packs enough B.T.U.'s to heat a
small apartment for a week in February. Mr. Seth makes a point of standing near
the table, poised to race up with a bowl of mint- laced yogurt at a moment's
notice. That moment usually comes within 30 seconds.

Mr. Seth, who has worked in various New York restaurants for 10 years, says that
four years ago only 10 percent of his customers would ask for something mildly
hot to very hot. Double dynamite was unmarketable.

The scene at Tanjore is being repeated all over New York, and other cities as
well, as the national passion for hot foods spreads like a brush fire. It began
here a decade ago, when Sichuan food came on the scene, albeit sometimes in a
watered-down, Americanized form. Then the even hotter Hunanese food became
popular, followed by Indian, Thai, Korean and Vietnamese. Now the latest rages
are Tex-Mex, Mexican and Louisiana Cajun, which has several hot dishes.

As with any commercial craze, there are serious, talented practitioners involved
as well as those out to make a quick dollar while a good thing lasts. Anyone who
has left a restaurant with raging heartburn and lips ablaze is aware that there
is a distinct difference between good hot food and bad hot food.

Why are some of these dishes pleasing and invigorating while the others merely
inflict pain? This question was posed to a number of authorities on hot cuisines
from around the world and several points were raised repeatedly.

The major difference, they stressed, is that well-prepared hot dishes have an
intrinsic heat that results from careful blending of chilies and other
complimentary spices, as well as cooking techniques that make them harmonize.
Poorly prepared hot dishes merely offer a superficial searing sensation, usually
the result of a last-minute dusting with dried chili seeds or dousing of hot
oil.

''In a good hot dish you should not be able to taste the chili right away,''
says Julie Sahni, author of ''Classic Indian Cooking'' and a cooking teacher in
New York. ''It will get to you a few moments after, like a good wine.''

Josefina Howard, chef at Cinco de Mayo, a new Mexican restaurant in SoHo, says
that the same principle applies to her style of cooking. ''Chili should leave a
glow in the mouth, but it should not burn,'' she said.

While cooking techniques vary from one cuisine to another, there are certain
common denominators. The first rule is that hot ingredients, whether fresh
chilies, dried chilies or various white or black peppers, must be cooked into a
dish, never dumped onto it.

''You cannot add hot spices at the last minute,'' Miss Sahni said. ''A good
vindaloo, for example, receives its hotness from the frying of all the ground
spices together before adding the meat.''

Miss Sahni says she makes her vindaloo by first searing the meat, whether
chicken or pork, in a few tablespoons of oil, removing it, then preparing the
sauce. The sauce, which balances sweetness and hotness, combines onions and
cinnamon, garlic, ginger, cloves, cumin seeds, mustard seeds, turmeric, paprika
and cayenne pepper. These are fried in oil over medium heat until a thick and
pulpy sauce forms. Then the cooked chicken is added and tossed well.

''This can be a very hot dish, but the blending of all the spices creates a
mellow hotness that you can enjoy without getting burned,'' Miss Sahni said.

Vietnamese cooking often employs a technique that involves marinating meat or
fish in a chili-laced liquid before cooking to impart hotness. Bach Gnu,
co-author of ''The Classic Cuisine of Vietnam'' and owner of a restaurant in
Branford, Conn., called Chez Bach, prepares a dish called lemon grass beef that
comes from her native city, Hue, in central Vietnam. It calls for marinating
slices of beef in strips of lemon grass, chopped fresh chili peppers, sesame
seeds, fish sauce (called nuoc mam), sugar, garlic, shallots and black pepper
for a minimum of a half hour (or overnight).

As with the vindaloo sauce, there is a vital balance here between sweetness and
hotness. The meat is then broiled or barbecued and served with a blazing dip
called nuoc cham, which combines lots of diced chili peppers, fish sauce, water,
lime juice, sugar and diced garlic. A similar dish can be made with chicken,
although in this case all ingredients are cooked in a wok.

In Hue, diced hot peppers, either alone or mixed with fish sauce, are served as
a condiment at every meal, no matter how hot it is to begin with.

''Many people there can't eat a bit of food without spreading that all over,''
Mrs. Gnu said.

Another fundamental rule in hot cooking is that as the level of hotness
increases, so should the level of complimentary spices, such as sweet, pungent,
salty and so on, depending upon the dish.

''When you have a hot and spicy Chinese dish, the hot comes from chili and the
spicy comes from ingredients like garlic, ginger and scallions,'' said Michael
Tong, owner of Shun Lee West, Shun Lee Palace, Shun Lee Dynasty and Hunan
Restaurant in Manhattan. ''When customers ask for extra hot the chef must raise
the level of all seasonings to keep it in balance,'' he said.

If only extra hot pepper is added, Mr. Tong said, a burning sensation will
overwhelm other flavors in the dish. Mr. Tong, who grew up in a part of Hunan
where families routinely slather a condiment made of diced hot red peppers,
sesame oil and vinegar over everything, says that he too has noticed a marked
increase in the number of Americans asking for very hot dishes in his
restaurants.

''Our waiters are pretty good at guessing how much a customer can handle,'' he
said. ''An interesting thing is that people in our restaurants on the West Side
can eat hotter food than those on the East Side.''

Another Oriental method of imparting hotness to stir-fried dishes is to saute
chopped fresh chilies, perhaps with garlic, in the cooking oil before adding
other ingredients. The chilies can be left in the dish or removed, depending on
level of hotness desired. It is the chili seeds that pack the most power; they
should be removed before sauteing if you want a mild hotness.

Florence Lin, author of ''Florence Lin's Regional Chinese Cooking,'' says a good
example of this technique is her shredded chicken with fresh chili peppers.

First she shreds chicken meat finely and dices the amount of fresh green chilies
desired (serranos or jalapenos are the most commonly available in New York). The
chicken is marinated in egg whites, salt and cornstarch for a half hour or more,
then stir-fried in hot oil (about 350 degrees) until it is about 90 percent
cooked. The chicken is then drained well and set aside. The hotness in this dish
comes from sauteing a few tablespoons of chili peppers and garlic in two or
three tablespoons of oil until the garlic is just golden. To that combination is
added some bamboo shoots, mushrooms, salt and sugar, and finally the chicken.
Everything is stir-fried quickly, then served.

''When you finish off the dish this way the spicy hot oil coats the chicken
evenly and gives a nice flavor,'' Mrs. Lin said.

Miss Howard of Cinco de Mayo, a native of Cuba who lived in Mexico for 22 years,
observes that much of Mexican cuisine, contrary to popular perception, is not
excessively hot compared with some Oriental and South Indian foods.

''The hotness in Mexican food is not always cooked into the dish,'' she said.
''It comes from the sauces or chili pepper relishes that are always on the
table.'' Mexicans add hot relishes at the table to suit individual tastes. One
common version, called salsa cruda, combines diced jalapeno peppers, fresh
coriander, onions and tomatoes.

Another source of hotness is the various versions of mole, the ubiquitous dark
sauce usually combining toasted ground chilies and a variety of other
ingredients such as tomatoes, onions, garlic, nuts, coriander, chicken stock and
sometimes bitter chocolate (mole poblano).

Miss Howard said that in Mexico, where more than 100 varieties of peppers grow,
the combination of hot sauces is limitless. ''It took me three years just to
figure out the basic ones,'' she said. In New York one can find a dozen or more
chilies, dried and fresh, in ethnic groceries, such as Casa Moneo on West 14th
Street, and in stores throughout Chinatown.

Miss Howard says that while Americans have come a long way toward appreciating
the titillations of hot foods, there seems to be a cultural as well as culinary
gap that will forever confine them to the minor leagues of fire eating.

''I remember the first dinner I had in Mexico many years ago,'' she said.
''There was a man at the table chomping on chili relish with his meal and he was
crying and sweating and mopping his brow the whole time. I asked him why he was
doing it to himself. He replied, 'I'm Mexican, and I think we have always liked
to suffer a bit.' ''

Chicken Saute With Lemon Grass and Chili Peppers (From Bach Gnu)

1/2 pound skinless chicken breast, cut into one-inch cubes (roughly the breast
meat from one 3- to 4-pound chicken)
2 to 3 fresh hot chili peppers, diced (or 2 teaspoons dried, crushed chili
peppers) 1/2 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
1 stalk fresh lemon grass (see note)
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
4 cloves garlic, chopped
4 teaspoons fish sauce (sold in Oriental groceries under that name)
1 1/2 teaspoons sugar
2 tablespoons vegetable oil for cooking
1/4 large onion, quartered
1 cup chicken stock
1 scallion, chopped into 1-inch pieces.

1.* In a bowl, mix the chicken cubes with the chili peppers, black pepper, lemon
grass, 1 tablespoon vegetable oil, 2 cloves garlic, fish sauce and sugar. Let
stand for a half hour minimum, or overnight.

2.* Heat 2 tablespoons of vegetable oil in a wok over medium-high flame. Add the
onion and stir-fry for a minute, then add the remaining 2 cloves of garlic.
Saute until the garlic is golden but not brown.

3.* Add the marinated chicken to the wok along with the marinade. Stir quickly
and constantly for 5 minutes over high heat.

4.* Add chicken stock, reduce heat to simmer and cook for 5 minutes. Add
scallions, simmer another minute and serve with steamed rice.

Yield: Serves 2 as a main course or 4 as part of a multicourse meal.

NOTE: Fresh lemon grass looks somewhat like giant scallion stalks. Cut off the
top third and remove any hard, dry outer strips. Slice the lemon grass
lengthwise as finely as possible, then dice it extremely well. If you buy dried
lemon grass, which is sold in packages, soak it in warm water a minimum of 30
minutes before chopping and using.

Pork Vindaloo (From Julie Sahni)
1 medium size onion, quartered
4 large cloves garlic
1 two-inch thick chunk of fresh ginger, peeled
1 stick cinnamon, chopped
1/2 teaspoon cloves
1 tablespoon cumin seeds
1 tablespoon mustard seeds
1/2 teaspoon turmeric
1 tablespoon paprika
1 1/2 tablespoon cayenne pepper
8 tablespoons vegetable oil
Medallions from 6 medium-size pork chops, fat trimmed off
2 medium-size onions, diced
2 tablespoons white vinegar
1 teaspoon ground mustard powder
2 tablespoons chopped fresh coriander
Coarse salt to taste.

1.* Combine the onion, garlic, ginger, cinnamon, cloves, cumin and mustard
seeds, turmeric, paprika and cayenne pepper in a blender or food processor and
puree well, stopping to scrape down the bowl occasionally. Set mixture aside.

2.* Heat 2 tablespoons vegetable oil in a large shallow pan until very hot.  Add
pork pieces and sear over medium-high heat until they are lightly browned on
both sides. Remove pork and set aside.

3.* Add 4 more tablespoons of oil to the pan along with the 2 diced onions. Cook
over medium heat until they turn caramel brown (about 15 to 20 minutes),
stirring constantly so they do not burn. Add remaining oil and ground spice
mixture and continue frying until the sauce is thick and pulpy, about 5 minutes.

4.* Add pork to the pan and mix well. Add a few tablespoons of water, cover the
pan and simmer until the pork is cooked thoroughly (about 20 minutes).

5.* Stir in the vinegar, mustard powder, coriander and salt. Transfer contents
of pan to a serving platter and garnish if desired with chopped fresh coriander.
Serve with white rice.

Yield: 4 servings.

Sichuan Kumpao Chicken (From Man Sundao, chef at Shun Lee West)
1 egg white
1/8 teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon water
2 tablespoons cornstarch
8 ounces skinless chicken breast (the breast from one 3- to 4-pound chicken),
cut into bite-size cubes
1 tablespoon sugar
1 tablespoon white wine vinegar
2 tablespoons rice wine (or dry Sherry)
2 tablespoons dark soy sauce
1 tablespoon chili paste (sold in jars in Oriental groceries)
1/4 cup chicken stock
1 tablespoon cornstarch mixed with 1 tablespoon water
1 tablespoon sesame oil
2 1/2 cups vegetable oil for cooking
10 small dried hot red peppers
1/2 tablespoon diced garlic
1 cup diced scallion
1 cup peanuts, walnuts or any favorite nuts.

1.* In a bowl, combine the egg white, salt, water and cornstarch and add
chicken. Marinate for at least half an hour.

2.* In another bowl make the chili paste sauce by combining sugar, vinegar, rice
wine, soy sauce, chili paste, chicken stock, cornstarch and sesame oil. Mix well
and set aside.

3.* Heat vegetable oil in a wok or skillet to 350 degrees. Add chicken and
marinade and stir fry quickly to avoid sticking. Cook about one minute. Remove
and drain chicken well. Remove all but 2 tablespoons of vegetable oil.

4.* Cook dry hot peppers in the wok over medium high heat until they begin to
darken (about 1 minute). Add garlic and scallions and stir for 5 to 10 seconds.
Add partially cooked chicken to the wok and pour the chili paste sauce over it.
Stir-fry over high heat until the sauce thickens (about 1 minute). Add nuts,
stir-fry briefly and serve with white rice.  Yield: Serves 2 as a meal, 4 as an
appetizer (ingredients may be increased proportionately to make larger
servings).

Beef With Leeks Hunan Style (From Florence Lin)
1 egg white
1/4 teaspoon salt
2 teaspoons cornstarch
1 teaspoon vegetable oil
1 tablespoon water
3/4 pound beef fillet, cut into bite-size cubes (about 1 1/2 cups)
3 tablespoons dry Sherry
3 tablespoons soy sauce
1 teaspoon sugar
1 teaspoon sesame oil
2 teaspoons cornstarch
2 tablespoons water
2 cups peanut oil
1 cup bamboo shoots sliced into bite-size pieces about 1/8 inch thick
4 dried mushrooms, soaked until soft, stems removed and cut into 1/2-inch-thick
strips
2 to 3 dried hot chili peppers, coarsely chopped
4 cloves garlic, thinly sliced
1 small leek, trimmed, washed and finely shredded julienne style
1 tablespoon hot brown bean sauce (sold in jars and cans in Oriental groceries,
sometimes called chili sauce).

1.* In a mixing bowl, combine egg white, salt, cornstarch, vegetable oil and
water. Add the beef chunks and mix well by hand. Set aside for a half hour or
more.

2.* In another bowl combine the Sherry, soy sauce, sugar, seasme oil, cornstarch
and water and set aside. Place a strainer over a pot near the cooking area.

3.* Heat a dry wok until it is very hot, then add peanut oil and heat to about
300 degrees. Deep-fry the beef, bamboo shoots and mushrooms. Stir until the meat
chunks separate and lose redness (1 to 2 minutes). Pour contents of wok into a
strainer and drain well.

4.*Reheat 2 tablespoons of the drained oil in the same wok. Add the dried hot
peppers and garlic. Stir-fry until garlic loses whiteness and then add the
leeks. Stir briefly and add bean sauce, meat, mushrooms, bamboo shoots and sauce
ingredients. Stir everything over high heat until a clear glaze coats the
ingredients. Serve immediately with white rice.

Yield: Serves 4.

Red Snapper With Chili Poblano Sauce (From Josefina Howard)
8 fresh chilies poblanos
1 red sweet pepper
1/4 cup water
1/2 cup vegetable oil
2 cloves garlic, bruised
3 tablespoons chopped onions
Salt to taste
6 large fillets of red snapper
3 large egg yolks (or 4 small ones).

1.* Place whole poblano chili peppers and the red sweet pepper directly over a
gas flame to char the skins evenly all over. (This also can be done with an
electric range, a hot skillet or under a broiler.) Turn the chilies occasionally
to get an even blackness and blistering all over (about 5 to 7 minutes).

2.* Place the chilies in a plastic bag or wet cloth for five minutes to
''sweat.'' Afterward, peel away the blistered skin with your hands. Cut open the
chilies and remove the stems and cluster of seeds clinging to them (Leave any
scattered seeds on the inside flesh). Rinse the outside of the chilies briefly
under cold water to remove any remnants of the charred skin.

3.* Place all the green chilies poblanos in a blender or food processor along
with 1/4 cup water and reduce to a fine puree. Reserve the red sweet pepper.

4.* In a large frying pan, heat 1/2 cup of vegetable oil over medium heat. Add
garlic and cook until just golden. Add onions and cook until they are
translucent. Remove the garlic cloves and discard.

5.* Add the puree of chilies poblanos to the frying pan and stir constantly for
2 minutes over medium-high flame. Salt to taste. Lower flame and simmer for 3
minutes, stirring occasionally.

6.* Pour the sauce through a fine strainer into the top of a double boiler.
Press it gently through the strainer and discard the pulpy material left behind.
The double boiler should be over very low heat.

7.* In a fish poacher or deep pan, poach the fish fillets in water that has been
lightly seasoned with salt and pepper (5 to 7 minutes, depending on thickness).

8.* While the fish is cooking, gradually stir the beaten egg yolks into the
strained chili poblano sauce, constantly mixing with a wooden spoon. Make sure
the double boiler is over low heat or the eggs may curdle. Taste for seasoning.

9.* When the fish fillets are cooked, drain them well and arrange them on warm
serving plates. Pour the chili sauce over them and garnish with strips of red
pepper.

Yield: 6 servings.

SERVING NOTE: Rice or beans are appropriate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 22, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

MILITARY MISCUE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 23, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
EDITORS' NOTE

Under this heading, The Times amplifies articles or rectifies what the editors
consider significant lapses of fairness, balance or perspective. Corrections,
also on this page, continue to deal with factual errors.


On page A1 of yesterday's paper, The Times published a photograph distributed by
The Associated Press that purported to show Secretary of State George P. Shultz
holding his hands to his face in response to a misstatement by Gen. P. X.
Kelley, the Marine Commandant.

The general, speaking during a House hearing Wednesday, had inadvertently
described American forces in Lebanon as ''the marines who went into Vietnam.''

The Times caption, which was based on material provided by the A.P., left the
impression that Mr. Shultz's gesture had been a direct and immediate reaction to
the general's misstatement.

Last night, the A.P. said that a review of a videotape of General Kelley's
testimony before the Foreign Affairs Committee indicated that the caption was
''misleading.''

GRAPHIC: Secretary of State George P.  Shultz reacting as Gen. P. X. Kelley,
Marine Commandant, inadvertently described U.S. forces in Lebanon as ''the
marines who went into Vietnam.'' General Kelley quickly corrected himself, then
said the Marine mission remained one of peacekeeping. General Kelley and Mr.
Shultz testified before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on an 18-month
extension of the mission. Associated Press

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 22, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
Quagmire, Here We Come

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 860 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Sept. 21


As the Reagan Administration slips this country deeper and deeper into the
fighting in Lebanon, anyone who wonders whether there are dangers in that
process ought to have a look at an important new book. It is ''Vietnam: A
History,'' by Stanley Karnow.

Even those of us who think we know something about it will read with fascination
and horror Mr. Karnow's graphic account of how the United States involved itself
in that disaster. Successive Administrations took military steps to deal with
political problems in a society that they did not begin to understand. And they
took the steps gradually, surreptitiously, assuring us all the while that
nothing was really changing.

First there were military advisers, then U.S. air bases. On March 8, 1965,
President Johnson sent two Marine combat battalions ashore at Danang to protect
the bases. The Marines began active patrolling: combat. As late as June 9 of
that year the White House said there had been ''no change'' in their ''primary
mission'' of protecting bases - but they did have ''discretionary authority'' to
support Vietnamese forces. The next month Lyndon Johnson sent 44 more battalions
for what was now an American war.

Might we be heading for another Vietnam in Lebanon? Involvement on such a scale
seems unlikely. But there is every reason to fear self-inflicted wounds of a
lesser but still significant kind, military and political. For the American
military role in Lebanon is growing in that same incremental way, accompanied by
deceit and ignorance.

The Marines went into Lebanon on Sept. 29, 1982, as part of a multinational
force that was seen as playing a symbolic role. President Reagan said there was
''no intention or expectation that U.S. armed forces will become involved in
hostilities.''

Now there are hostilities, sectarian fighting so severe that Mr. Reagan has
called it a civil war. U.S. forces have intervened on one side, abandoning their
posture as detached peacekeepers. American ''advisers'' in uniform have been
seen with Government forces in the front-line village of Suk al Gharb. U.S. Navy
ships have shelled the Druse militia. Yet American spokesmen talk as if the
mission had not changed; they call the shelling ''defensive fire.''

What political end does the Administration hope to achieve by joining in the
fighting in Lebanon? That is the big mystery in what is going on - and the
danger. For if Ronald Reagan thinks he can straighten out the politics of
Lebanon by the application of American force, he is in fantasyland.

The politics of Lebanon may be the most complicated and the ugliest on earth.
Dozens of sects and parties and private armies work out their wrath upon each
other. Syria, with a historic interest in Lebanon, has always played a part.
Each population group gets outside help where it can, without compunctions of
ideology. Thus in modern times Syria has intervened both for and against the
Maronite Christians.

In Western logic, what Lebanon needs is for everyone to put aside his tribal
instincts and join a national polity. But Western logic has never worked, and
there is no national polity. The very issue today - the reason for the fierce
sectarian warfare - is President Gemayel's failure to carry out his promise to
create a government of all interests. The Druse, supported this time by Syria,
are fighting for what they see as survival: protection from a sectarian Maronite
Government.

The main influence in the Gemayel Government is the Phalange Party, whose
militiamen carried out the Sabra and Shatila massacres a year ago. For the U.S.
to appear as the protector of that Government holds obvious risks for American
interest.

The Marines cannot put together the politics of Lebanon. Indeed, they cannot be
expected to have a clue to those Byzantine fiefdoms and alliances. If the United
States is to play a leadership role, it must be in diplomacy: an attempt somehow
to get a real negotiation going among the warring factions - and to get Syria's
blessing for a precarious balance of some kind.

No doubt the Reagan Administration would like a diplomatic solution, but it has
shown no skill or determination to that end. Its chief negotiator, Robert
McFarlane, is a former Marine officer with no experience in diplomacy and no
knowledge whatever of Lebanon.

And so we find ourselves relying once again on force. It is so easy to send
American soldiers in - and so hard to get them out. Each unit deployed provides
reason for another: more protection, more support, more reserves. And then, with
all that commitment, we can pull them out with ''honor'' only if there is a
political cover. What is that to be? A gracious Syrian agreement to let us go?
In return for what? In the end there is no escape from politics.

Lebanon and Vietnam: is the comparison too fantastic? Consider this quotation:

''When America sends its forces to perform a legitimate mission, asked for by
the legitimate Government involved, and it does so and then the minute some
trouble occurs we turn tail and beat it, I think that sends a gigantic message
around the world.''

Lyndon Johnson in 1965? No, George Shultz on Sept. 21, 1983.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 22, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

News Analysis;
WAR POWERS COMPROMISE: A QUANDARY

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 832 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 21


Byrd Voices Reservations In reaching a compromise with President Reagan on
Lebanon, Congress appears on the verge of establishing an important legal
precedent. But some uneasiness has developed that Congress is being drawn into
authorizing greater American involvement in Lebanon than was originally
intended.  For just as Congress is about to win the constitutional point that
has been the prime objective of many legislators, many members say they are
faced with a quandary.

Democrats and Republicans alike feel compelled by events to back President
Reagan and to give him sufficient flexibility to defend the marines in Lebanon
from hostile fire.

But many, recalling Vietnam and President Johnson's use of the loosely worded
Gulf of Tonkin Resolution of 1964 to fight a long war, also worry about giving
Mr. Reagan authority that could somehow be turned into an open-ended commitment
to the current Government in Lebanon.

Limits on Marine Role Sought

The House Democratic leadership shaped a resolution that seeks to limit the
size, duration and scope of the Marines' role in Lebanon, by tying future
operations to the agreement of Sept. 25, 1982 that outlined their original
peacekeeping function in Beirut.

But already, some Congressmen assert, the Administration's use of guns on
warships offshore to support Lebanese Army positions has gone beyond the
restrictions in that resolution. Others contend that such actions exceed
peacekeeping and that Congress is being asked to endorse the expanded function.

''I think the U.S. started out on a peacekeeping mission and we may get involved
in a civil war,'' complained Representative William E. Dannemeyer, a California
Republican.

Today, Secretary of State George P. Shultz told the House Foreign Affairs
Committee that the Administration's strategy was to ''help produce a kind of
equilibrium,'' or military stalemate, to promote a political settlement among
warring Lebanese factions. Members questioned him on where this would lead and
whether ''protective measures'' to insure the safety of the multinational force
in Lebanon would become ''a loophole'' for still deeper American involvement.


''That's a hole that we can run Amtrak through,'' Robert C. Byrd, the Senate
minority leader, said to reporters. Most Senate Democrats are wary of allowing
the Marines to stay 18 more months in Lebanon, he said, adding: ''I think in
terms of six months or a year.'' Senator John Glenn of Ohio, a Democratic
Presidential aspirant, cautioned that ''we are on a very slippery slope in
Lebanon.'' He asked whether the Administration had any alternative ''by which we
avoid unlimited escalation of our involvement on the one hand and a disastrous
withdrawal under fire on the other.''

Some of the sharpest doubts are being raised by conservatives who have often
backed President Reagan, rather than by liberals who are typically his most
outspoken critics.

''It's a quagmire and we're just getting bogged down,'' warned Representative G.
V. Montgomery, a conservative Mississippi Democrat. ''We're now in a no-win
situation,'' complained Representative Charles W. Stenholm of Texas, leader of
the southern conservative Democrats who helped enact the Reagan economic
program.

''We should never have gotten in and we need to get out,'' Mr. Stenholm
declared. ''I don't go for keeping the Marines there 18 months. I think Jan. 1,
1984, would be way plenty long enough.

Pressure on Lebanese Urged

''We need to make this known to the Lebanese Government and press them to solve
their differences within Lebanon,'' he went on. ''I make my statement with full
realization that with the Soviets backing the Syrians we could see another
Soviet takeover.''

Nonetheless, leaders like the House Speaker, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the Senate
majority leader, Howard H. Baker Jr., and the House Republican whip, Trent Lott,
have coalesced around the President's policy and predict that majorities in both
houses will vote the Marines another 18 months in Lebanon.

Yet they acknowledge that a week's delay in political bickering and the increase
in combat has made the task harder. Some anticipate attempts, first by Senate
Democrats, to cut the 18- month authorization to six months. But a debate over
the time period, one aide to the Democratic leadership aide observed, would
really cloak ''a debate over the American commitment to the Lebanese
Government.''

The Administration's backers on Capitol Hill concede that, as Representative Jim
Leach, an Iowa Republican, put it, ''both Congress and the Administration are
fudging the issue'' of American objectives in Lebanon.

No Alternatives Seen

Whatever misgivings that causes, few members see any better alternative to
Administration policy for the present American predicament in Lebanon. ''What
else can you do unless you want to write off the Middle East and chances for a
peace settlement there?'' asked Representative William S. Broomfield of
Michigan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

8 FRENCH JETS HIT MILITIA POSITIONS IN LEBANON CLASH

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 965 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, Sept. 22


French jet fighters attacked anti-Government gun batteries behind Syrian lines
in mountains east of Beirut today, shortly after a barrage of rockets rained
down on French and Italian troops in the capital.

The air attack, flown by eight Super Etendard planes from the carrier Foch,
marked the first time the French have become directly embroiled in fighting with
the Syrian-backed Druse militiamen, Palestinian guerrillas and Lebanese
leftists.

It was also the first time that any of the American, French, Italian or British
contingents of the international force here have introduced fighter planes into
the conflict.

6 French Troops Wounded

A French Embassy spokesman said the fighters ''retaliated against sources of
fire that had inflicted damage on French forces in Beirut in the past few
days.'' Today's rocket barrage landed in southeastern suburbs of the capital.

Four French soldiers were wounded as the French Army headquarters was hit in the
bombardment, a military spokesman said. He said two other French soldiers were
wounded when gunmen tossed a grenade at their truck as it was crossing between
East and West Beirut. The casualties brought to 50 the number of French soldiers
wounded since the 2,000-member contingent arrived more than a year ago; 16 have
been killed.



Ammunition Depot Hit

Eight or nine rockets scored direct hits on the Italian contingent's ammunition
depot in the Hazmiye quarter, blowing up almost all munitions in it, an Italian
spokesman said. He said there were no casualties.

(In Washington, the House Foreign Affairs Committee approved a compromise
formula that would permit the continued deployment of American troops in Lebanon
for an additional 18 months. Page A16.)

Western military sources said the French planes flew in two waves of four each
around 5:15 P.M. With two fighters flying cover, the sources said, the others
attacked a battery of six Soviet- made 130-millimeter guns just south of the
Syrian-controlled village of Sofar, 12 miles southeast of the southern areas of
the capital.

According to the Christian Phalangist radio, the planes also hit artillery
batteries behind Syrian lines near the village of Dur Shuweir.

Not Clear Who Manned Guns

The Western military sources said it was not clear whether the anti-Government
artillery positions attacked by the French were being manned by Syrian, Druse,
Palestinian or Lebanese leftist troops. Nor was it clear, the sources said,
whether the positions were destroyed in the raids.

Shortly after the French air strike, the makeshift Lebanese Air Force base at
Jubail, 24 miles miles north of Beirut, was attacked by a barrage of rockets, as
was the Lebanese Army position in Khalde, on the coastal road just south of the
capital.

In other military action today, Lebanese troops holding the town of Suk al
Gharb, on a ridge overlooking Beirut, came under repeated attacks by the Druse
and their allies through the day. The attacks were repulsed.

U.S. Reconnaissance Flights

Two hours before the French air raids, American F-14 Tomcats from the aircraft
carrier Eisenhower flew reconnaissance missions over the capital. American jets
have been confined to such flights so far, although American warships shelled
Druse and Palestinian troops on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday of this week.

On Monday, the French Foreign Minister, Claude Cheysson, criticized the United
States for opening fire from naval vessels in support of Lebanese Army units
defending Suk al Gharb. The shelling was undertaken under a policy authorized by
President Reagan allowing the United States contingent to call in air or naval
strikes in support of the Lebanese Army if the army is attacked in a way that
endangers the Americans.

Today, the French Defense Minister, Charles Hernu, announced in Paris that his
Government had given French troops in Beirut permission to make use of their
''right to legitimate self-defense and to reply against the batteries that have
taken as targets French objectives in Beirut.''

A French Decision

The French decision to retaliate was made by them alone, just as the Americans
alone decided when they wanted to use their naval guns. The French, Italian,
British and American contingents of the international each have liaison officers
stationed with the other three units to coordinate any military decisions they
have made and to insure that they do not run into each other.

But there is no overall commander making military decisions on behalf of the
international force as a whole. General policy for the force is set once a week
at a meeting, under Lebanese Government chairmanship, of the four Ambassadors
and four commanders from the contributing countries.

Meanwhile, some 600 to 700 Druse civilians took to the streets of West Beirut
today in a campaign to win over American public opinion.

Chanting ''Yankee go home!'' and marching behind a banner reading ''Lebanon -
another Vietnam?'' they walked to the temporary United States Embassy offices
next to the British Embassy and presented a letter of protest to Robert Phugh,
the American deputy chief of mission.

Almost all the banners and signs being carried by the marchers were in English,
for the benefit of American television networks and photographers covering the
march. It was one of the largest marches in Beirut since before the 1975-76
civil war.

'Pushing the Other Parties'

The demonstrators complained in their letter, delivered by four leaders of their
social welfare organization, the Permanent Bureau for the Druse Institutions,
that the United States was siding with the Lebanese Christian Phalangists,
''thus pushing the other parties to seek closer alliances with external forces
in order to insure their legitimate self-defense.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Lebanon (Page A16)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Shultz Photo Carried A Misleading Caption

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 228 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 22


An Associated Press photograph of Secretary of State George P. Shultz
distributed Wednesday night and published Thursday by The New York Times carried
a misleading caption.

The photograph showed Mr. Shultz sitting next to the Marine Corps Commandant,
Gen. P. X. Kelley, at a hearing Wednesday of the House Foreign Affairs Committee
on the presence of United States marines in Lebanon. In the picture, Mr.
Shultz's hands are pressed to his face.

The Associated Press caption said: ''Secretary of State George Shultz covers his
face as Marine Corps Commandant Gen. Paul X. Kelley refers to the troops 'who
were sent to Vietnam a year ago,' and corrected himself to say 'into Lebanon'
while testifying before a House Foreign Affairs Committee on the presence of
U.S. Marines in Lebanon. Kelley's misstatement caused a few gasps in the room.
He called the remark 'a Freudian slip.' ''

A review of videotape showed a lapse of about seven seconds between General
Kelley's misstatement and Mr. Shultz's action. The tape showed Mr. Shultz
rubbing his face in what might have been a gesture of weariness rather than in
reaction to General Kelley, as suggested in the caption.

Efforts on Thursday to get from Mr. Shultz his own account were unsuccessful.
The State Department spokesman, John Hughes, said Mr. Shultz had seen the
photograph and had said nothing about it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE ROSENBERGS: NEW EVIDENCE, OLD PASSIONS

BYLINE: By SAM ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 3134 words


A new book's conclusions that Julius Rosenberg was indeed a Soviet spy whose
execution served the purposes of the American Government and the Communist Party
has revived an emotional debate about his guilt and the role of his wife, Ethel.

The conclusions of the book, ''The Rosenberg File,'' are by no means new. But in
a controversy that has thrived for more than three decades, the book's
credibility has been enhanced on two counts.

Its authors said they began their research believing Mr. Rosenberg and his wife
were not guilty, and the authors combine personal interviews with corroborating
evidence from Government files, much of which had previously been released but
never assembled.

But not everyone is convinced. Those who insist the Rosenbergs were not guilty -
not guilty, at least, of the formal espionage conspiracy charges and of stealing
a key secret to the atomic bomb - still question the credibility of the
witnesses for the prosecution.

They are also seeking to undermine the book's conclusions by exposing its flaws,
a few of which the authors acknowledge but said were not fatal to their
research.

What the authors, Ronald Radosh and Joyce Milton, said they found and what has
emerged since their book was released this summer are the following:


- Two engineers, who Federal agents suspected were members of an espionage ring
led by Mr. Rosenberg, eventually found refuge in the Soviet Union, according to
an interview this month with a Russian emigre. The two disappeared around the
time that the Rosenbergs were arrested, in 1950.


- The case against Mrs. Rosenberg was described by the chief prosecutor as ''not
too strong.'' On the day Mr. Rosenberg was arrested, Federal agents were urged
to ''consider every possible means to make him talk, including'' ''a careful
study of the involvement of Ethel Rosenberg in order that charges be placed
against her, if possible,'' according to a Federal Bureau of Investigation
official quoted in the book.


- A general counsel of the American Civil Liberties Union was said to have
offered several times to join the defense team as an infiltrator for the F.B.I.,
according to bureau documents cited in the book. Lawyers connected with the case
and the A.C.L.U. have said they could not corroborate the F.B.I. account.

The debate over the case began in an era when many Americans were convinced the
Russians could never have invented an atomic bomb on their own. The discussions
raised the question of whether the defendants were fairly tried, convicted and
sentenced on the basis of the testimony and evidence.

With the benefit of hindsight, the debate has been broadened to include
questions about the fairness of the judge and prosecution and the adequacy of
the evidence and even of the defense.

As a result of suits filed by the Rosenbergs' sons, the F.B.I. has released
161,000 pages from its files since the 70's, documents that defenders of the
Rosenbergs had hoped would prove conclusively that they were framed. Some
additional documents have been destroyed, and the F.B.I. says at least another
30,000 pages remain classified to protect privacy or national security.

What has emerged is a maze of circumstantial evidence, some of which, when
placed in context by the authors, corroborates the accounts of prosecution
eyewitnesses. It was just such a link that led Mr. Radosh to revise his verdict
about Julius Rosenberg.

Coincided With Informant

Mr. Radosh was struck by the fact that during an interview, the recollections of
James Weinstein, a friend of several targets of the original investigation,
coincided with information from F.B.I. files and with details, apparently passed
on to Federal agents from Jerome Eugene Tartakow, a jailhouse informer who had
befriended Mr. Rosenberg.

''I've always thought they were engaged in some sort of, to put it politely,
information-gathering or espionage,'' Mr. Weinstein said last month. ''The book
states it so definitively, you couldn't conclude otherwise if you have an open
mind.''

What, exactly, did Mr. Weinstein corroborate, according to ''The Rosenberg
File''? He recalled that a fellow student at Cornell University had quit the
Communist Party to do ''secret work,'' that the friend borrowed Mr. Weinstein's
car many times and that he had once asked Mr. Weinstein to chauffeur someone
named ''Julius'' from Ithaca, N.Y., to New York City.

After learning that Julius had subsequently paid a surprise visit to the
apartment shared by Mr. Weinstein and his friend from Cornell, the friend was
said to have exclaimed nervously to Mr. Weinstein, ''He knows he's not supposed
to come here.''

''My experience was even more circumstantial or tangential,'' Mr. Weinstein said
last month, than the disappearance of the two engineers, ''the thing that was
most convincing to me.''

Buried in such seemingly esoteric evidence is the crux of the controversy. The
case has periodically inspired literary and dramatic spinoffs - the movie
''Daniel'' is the latest - and debates among the curious and the participants,
some of whom still suffer from wounds that even time has been unable to heal.

What Happened Tothe2Engineers?

One of the intriguing unanswered issues is why the two engineers vanished and
where did they go? At least half the mystery may have been solved after the book
was written.

In June 1950, one of the two, Joel Barr, disappeared from his rented apartment
in a Paris suburb. The next month, the other man, Alfred Sarant, his best
friend, a colleague at an Army Signal Corps laboratory and, according to a
source quoted in the book, a fellow member of the same Communist Party cell as
Mr. Rosenberg during World War II, left Ithaca for New York City. In New York,
Mr. Sarant rendezvoused with Carol Dayton, the wife of his next- door neighbor.
Leaving young children behind, they drove across the country and were last seen
entering Mexico, according to Federal agents.

''Whether they simply made new lives in Mexico or elsewhere, or were victims of
accident or foul play, would be interesting to know,'' Walter and Miriam Schneir
wrote in the latest edition of their book ''Invitation to an Inquest,'' which
says the Rosenbergs were victims of a ''frameup.''

Mr. Radosh, believing he now knows what happened, said:

''It confirms to us that the prosecution was right, that there was a pattern of
flight. This is a case of people involved in technical, military work who ended
up giving the ability they learned here to the Russians, which in my mind, in
the broad sense, is espionage.''

Emigre's Curiosity Piqued Publicity about the books aroused the curiosity of
Eric Firdman, a Soviet dissident who emigrated to the United States in 1981. He
now believes that the engineer with whom he worked for two decades in the Soviet
Union, the mustachioed man who called himself Filipp Georgievich Staros, was, in
fact, Mr. Sarant, and that Iozef Veniaminovich Berg, who is said to be still
living in Leningrad, was Mr. Barr.

According to Mr. Firdman in an interview last month, Mr. Sarant headed a
prominent microelectronics laboratory, later devoted his research to artificial
intelligence and died in Moscow in 1979. He lived with Mrs. Dayton and a new
family of four children in a three- room apartment and owned a car.

Jeremy Sarant, a lawyer in Oregon who was 3 years old when his father vanished
in 1950, said in an interview that he had never heard from him again, but that
he visited Mrs. Dayton two years ago in Czechoslovakia.

Alfred Sarant's sister, Electra Jason, a horse breeder on Long Island, said that
after her brother died, Mrs. Dayton wrote ''that she would love to see us.''
Mrs. Jason recalled that on his last night in New York, in 1950, Mr. Sarant
''said he had become involved unwittingly in something that might become a
problem.''

Apartment in Greenwich Village

The problem was that several of the people linked to Mr. Rosenberg's purported
espionage ring had frequented Mr. Sarant's apartment in Greenwich Village,
according to the Government. Mrs. Jason said she remembered that their mother
''would be a little bit annoyed when he would show up with his laundry and say
someone had to use his apartment.''

No charges were ever lodged against Mr. Sarant or Mr. Barr, and friends suggest
Mr. Sarant's marital problems, combined with the party membership, which cost
him several jobs, were themselves convincing reasons to flee.

Both sides in the debate now acknowledge the engineers' ultimate destination.
But they differ about whether the account represents valuable new evidence or
merely a historical footnote.


The Position Of the A.C.L.U. Previously released Federal files had described a
close relationship during the 50's between the F.B.I. and some officials of the
American Civil Liberties Union. But ''The Rosenberg File'' cites additional
memos dating from 1952-53 that describe what Federal agents believed was an
attempt by Morris Ernst, a general counsel for the A.C.L.U., to insinuate
himself in the Rosenberg defense.

F.B.I. officials wrote that Mr. Ernst had offered to become involved in the case
''solely for the purpose of being able to talk to the Rosenbergs and possibly
getting them to talk.''

''It would have been unethical, and if it ever came out, it would have destroyed
the Government's case,'' Herbert M. Levy said last month. Mr. Levy, who was
staff counsel for the A.C.L.U. at the time of the Rosenberg case, suggested that
perhaps Mr. Ernst had just been joking.

Mr. Levy, himself the subject of what he described as ''distorted'' F.B.I.
memos, said:

''What was he going to do? Say, 'I'm your lawyer, but I'm also working for the
F.B.I., so why don't you confess and save Ethel?'

''It doesn't make sense. I find it almost impossible to believe, and,
unfortunately, both people who were party to the conversations are now dead.''
Mr. Ernst died in 1976.

''I can understand what might have happened to give rise to this totally
erroneous story,'' Harriet Pilpel, Mr. Ernst's law partner at the time, said.
''Morris always thought that if you got the opposing contestants around a table
and talked it through, you could reach an agreement.''

Another recent disclosure dramatizes a split in the A.C.L.U. Morton Sobell,
convicted with the Rosenbergs and sentenced to 30 years in prison, disclosed
this month that Osmond K. Fraenkel, a member of the A.C.L.U. board, had secretly
helped draft appellate briefs on his behalf. But ''in view of the A.C.L.U.
position on the case and the political climate of the period, he asked that his
name be omitted from the briefs,'' Mr. Sobell now says. The A.C.L.U.'s position
was that the Rosenbergs' death sentence did not involve a civil liberties
issue,.

It was unclear whether the allegations involving Mr. Ernst were related to a
Central Intelligence Agency memo cited in ''The Rosenberg File'' that suggested
''highly intelligent rabbis, representing reformed Judaism, with a radical
background or sympathetic understanding of radicalism and with psychiatric
knowledge'' be recruited to convince the Rosenbergs that ''they are about to die
for a system that has betrayed and is destroying their own people, that they
have the moral obligation of influencing other Jews against Communism.''

The C.I.A. memo recommended that if the Rosenbergs ''desire to explore these
matters, an execution stay of one to two months seems indicated.''

The Role Played By Mrs. Rosenberg

Was Mrs. Rosenberg the leader? ''The Rosenberg File'' goes beyond an article
co-authored by Mr. Radosh in The New Republic in 1979 and concludes that
although hard evidence is difficult to document, what is known of her attitudes
and character ''suggests that she would have supported and actively participated
in Julius's activities.''

Perhaps the most persuasive testimony was provided by her brother, David
Greenglass, an Army machinist at the Los Alamos National Laboratory in New
Mexico, where the bomb was developed. Mr. Greenglass implicated his wife;
brother-in-law, Mr. Rosenberg, and, finally, Mrs. Rosenberg.

Mr. Radosh and Miss Milton said the Greenglasses were committed Communists, not
naive recruits, and ''their evidence alone had led to Ethel's arrest.'' Their
allegiances were found in personal letters quoted in the book.

The authors said that without transcripts of an interrogation of the
Greenglasses 10 days before the Rosenbergs were to go on trial - an
interrogation during which the Greenglasses said for the first time that Mrs.
Rosenberg had typed the notes her brother provided about the atomic bomb - the
''evidence of Ethel's active participation is less than totally convincing.''

One of the prosecutors, James Kilsheimer, insists, however, that a death- house
questionnaire prepared in case Mr. Rosenberg decided to confess included one
query about Mrs. Rosenberg only to test her husband's credibility. The question
was, ''Was your wife cognizant of your activities?''

30-Year Debate Is Continuing

The latest chapter in the controversy is a battle of the books.

''The book has been embraced so injudiciously by people saying this is the last
word without taking any time to check it,'' said Walter Schneir who, with
Marshall Perlin, the lawyer for the Rosenbergs' sons, has been compiling a
rebuttal.

The two sets of authors are scheduled to meet face to face Oct. 20 in Town Hall,
on 43d Street east of Times Square, at a debate sponsored by The New Republic
and The Nation.

A key conflict is the Government's credibility during the case and since.  The
Schneirs contend Mr. Tartakow, the informer, ''was so disreputable that even the
F.B.I. didn't trust him.''

But Mr. Radosh and Miss Milton said the Schneirs ''propose that top F.B.I.
agents spent hundreds of hours feeding this unreliable, disreputable and
untrustworthy inmate information that he then spilled right back to the bureau,
which, in turn, stuffed this material into its own secret internal files. What
would have been the purpose of such an exercise?''

What provided ''incredible confirmation'' of Mr. Tartakow's credibility, Mr.
Radosh and Miss Milton said, was his description of Mr. Rosenberg's console
table, which David and Ruth Greenglass had said was a gift from the Russians and
had been specially outfitted for microfilming. The table according to the book
did have ''three holes'' in it, as Mr. Tartakow had told the F.B.I., although
the authors acknowledge that ''just how these 'three holes' might have
constituted an adaptation for microfilming is unclear.''

The book's critics also contend some of the people whose cooperation is
acknowledged at the end of ''The Rosenberg File'' had never been interviewed or
had been misquoted.

Mr. Radosh said this is ''an old technique - getting those who have contributed
interviews, but feel embarrassed by what they said now that it is in print, to
repudiate their statements.''

John Gates, then editor of The Daily Worker and now a researcher for the
International Ladies Garment Workers Union, remembered in ''The Rosenberg File''
that Mr. Rosenberg had disappeared at one point and that ''it could have been
for only one reason.'' The authors added, ''And that reason, Gates made clear,
was espionage.''

Stacks of Papers

In an interview last month, Mr. Gates illustrated how each side in a debate
could be half right. He recalled that he had been speaking generally and that
until the case broke, he had never heard of Julius Rosenberg. However, he adds
that although ''it was hard to finally have to admit, I don't have the slighest
doubt in my mind that they were guilty.''

The stacks of documents provide plenty of ammunition for both factions to quote
selectively and continue to wage their war of words, but they have so far failed
to find a smoking gun.

''The smoking gun,'' Roy Cohn, an assistant prosecutor in the case, said this
month, is the testimony of Mr. Greenglass; of Max Elitcher, who said Julius
Rosenberg had recruited him to espionage; of Ben Schneider, a photographer who
said the Rosenbergs had dropped by for passport pictures shortly before their
arrest, ''the pattern of escapes, the jury verdict and the appellate reviews.''

''To ask for any more,'' Mr. Cohn said, ''is to ask for the impossible.''

Defenders of the Rosenbergs are still seeking to reverse the verdict in the
court of public opinion, to be acquitted by history.  But historians will have
to judge the case without new clues from many of the principals. Julius and
Ethel Rosenberg were executed in 1953, ''hapless scapegoats of a propaganda
war,'' ''The Rosenberg File'' says, ''a war in which their deaths would be
counted as a victory for both sides.''

The trial judge, Irving R. Kaufman, has maintained an official silence, and none
of the witnesses have recanted. The Greenglasses are living under a new name in
New York.  Mr. Tartakow, who also changed his name, moved to the West Coast. He
described the new book as ''speculative,'' but added:

''Are you asking me whether Julius Rosenberg was guilty? Absolutely.''

Sobell Comments on Judge

Mr. Cohn said that as a result of the book, the verdict on the Rosenbergs ''now
becomes unanimous, except for those who are highly self-motivated.''

Among those is Mr. Sobell, 66, who was released from prison in 1969 and is
helping to train hospital engineers in Cuba and Vietnam. Mr. Sobell, comparing
his position with that of Judge Kaufman, said:

''He resents 30 years later having to account for what he did. I know I would.''

''Even though Julius was my friend,'' Mr. Sobell said, ''all I can tell you is
that I don't know if there was anything else. I would not take the position that
they were absolutely innocent.''

''I know that they were members of the Communist Party - my father committed
perjury,'' said Michael Meeropol, 40, who teaches economics at Western New
England College in Springfield, Mass., and who was 10 when his parents, the
Rosenbergs, were executed. ''But basically that's all I think they did.''

''I can't claim to say definitely that nobody was doing anything illegal,'' his
brother Robert, 36, said. ''Whether they were involved somehow in something, to
the extent that I'm not 100 percent sure, you might say that I have some vague
doubts. It's much harder to prove someone innocent than to prove them guilty.
But when I look at the Radosh-Milton book, they don't prove what they set out to
prove.''

The book is subtitled ''A Search for the Truth, '' but Robert Meeropol said he
was still searching.

''It's something I have to live with every day,'' he said. ''A number of people
said, 'You might uncover something you might not want to find out.' I would
rather know the truth. I wish I could get into a time machine and know it all.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Michael and Robert Rosenberg (Page B4); photo of Morris Ernst;
photo of Julius and Ethel rosenberg; photo of Alfred Sarant

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EDITORS' NOTE

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 167 words


Under this heading, The Times amplifies articles or rectifies what the editors
consider significant lapses of fairness, balance or perspective. Corrections,
also on this page, continue to deal with factual errors.


On page A1 of yesterday's paper, The Times published a photograph distributed by
The Associated Press that purported to show Secretary of State George P. Shultz
holding his hands to his face in response to a misstatement by Gen. P. X.
Kelley, the Marine Commandant.

The general, speaking during a House hearing Wednesday, had inadvertently
described American forces in Lebanon as ''the marines who went into Vietnam.''

The Times caption, which was based on material provided by the A.P., left the
impression that Mr. Shultz's gesture had been a direct and immediate reaction to
the general's misstatement.

Last night, the A.P. said that a review of a videotape of General Kelley's
testimony before the Foreign Affairs Committee indicated that the caption was
''misleading.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editors Note

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Required Reading 'Vietnam, a History'

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 458 words


McNamara had been a brilliant corporation executive who could scan a balance
sheet with unerring speed and skill. When he made the first of his many trips to
Vietnam in May 1962, he looked at the figures and concluded optimistically after
only 48 hours in the country that ''every quantitative measurement . . . shows
that we are winning the war.''

No conflict in history was studied in such detail as it was being waged.
Military and civilian officials from nearly every Washington agency would sooner
or later conduct surveys in Vietnam, along with specialists from dozens of
private think tanks, like the Rand Corporation and the Stanford Research
Institute. They included weapons technicians, economists, sociologists,
political scientists, anthropologists, agronomists, biologists, chemists and
public opinion pollsters. They investigated the effects of defoliants, the
impact of bombs, the efficiency of cannons. They scoured villages and
interviewed peasants. They interrogated enemy defectors and prisoners. They
pored over captured Communist documents and scrutinized Hanoi statements - and
they produced voluminous graphs, charts, pamphlets, brochures and books. But the
statistics somehow failed to convey an accurate picture of the problem, much
less offer solutions.

For the missing element in the ''quantitative measurement'' that guided McNamara
and other U.S. policymakers was the qualitative dimension that could not easily
be recorded. There was no way to calibrate the motivation of Vietcong
guerrillas. Nor could computers be programmed to describe the hopes and fears of
Vietnamese peasants. The arcane maneuvers of Diem and his family also baffled
U.S. diplomats, who were even less equipped to influence their decisions.

As the war intensified, American civilian officials and soldiers were spurred on
by a myopic sense of ''can- doism'' - the conviction that, as Americans, they
could achieve anything anywhere. Their belief in their own omnipotence was
stimulated, too, by pressures from their superiors in Saigon and Washington. To
adopt a negative attitude was defeatism, and there were no promotions for
defeatists. In contrast, positive reports were rewarded, even if they bore
little resemblance to the truth.

Yet another impulse that generated Americans in Vietnam was a brand of
missionary zeal, not unlike the credo that had inspired early French
imperialists. But Americans gave it a different guise. They were not imposing
colonialism but, rather, helping the Vietnamese to perfect their institutions.
They called it ''nation-building,'' and they would have been arrogant had they
not been utterly sincere in their naive belief that they could really
reconstruct Vietnamese society along Western lines.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SCREEN: 'THE BIG CHILL,' REUNION OF 60'S ACTIVISTS

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1248 words


IN the opening sequence of ''The Big Chill,'' Lawrence Kasdan's sweet, sharp,
melancholy new comedy, seven friends, who went through the University of
Michigan together and are veterans of the activist 1960's, meet at the funeral
of one of their comrades, who has inexplicably committed suicide. The setting is
a small Baptist church somewhere in the South.

The first speaker, the church pastor, rather helplessly concedes that he didn't
know the man he must bury. He attempts to be fair to a memory he does not share,
but everything he says comes out slightly wrong, as when he talks of the
deceased's ''seemingly random series of occupations,'' without then going on to
disprove the ''seemingly.''

The mourning friends are constantly teetering between laughter and tears, which
is the mood of this very accomplished, serious comedy, which will be shown
tonight at Lincoln Center to start the 21st New York Film Festival. The 7:30
P.M. showing will be at Alice Tully Hall and the 9 P.M. showing at Avery Fisher
Hall.

''The Big Chill,'' which begins its regular commercial engagement at the
Paramount and other theaters next Thursday, is an unusually good choice to open
this year's festival in that it represents the best of mainstream American film
making. Among other things, it's a reminder that the same people who turn out
our megabuck fantasies are often capable of working even more effectively on the
small, intimate scale of ''The Big Chill.''

It's a particular achievement for Mr. Kasdan, who made a stunning directorial
debut with ''Body Heat,'' which he also wrote, after writing the screenplays for
''Continental Divide'' and, with George Lucas, for ''Raiders of the Lost Ark''
and ''The Empire Strikes Back.'' Barbara Benedek shares ''The Big Chill''
writing credit with him.

''The Big Chill'' is a somewhat fancy variation on John Sayles's ''Return of the
Secaucus Seven,'' in that these 60's survivors all seem to have climbed higher
in the 70's, so that their sense of dreams lost and ideals betrayed is sharper
and, possibly, more romantically dramatic.

Meg (Mary Kay Place), having once been a dedicated public defender, has
abandoned her poor and - she ruefully concedes - often guilty clients to become
a successful corporation lawyer. Sam (Tom Berenger), a very nice guy and
probably a second-rate actor, is the star of a popular television series that
embarrasses him. Recalling the earnest fellow he used to be, he says solemnly,
''At least once each show I try to put in something of value.'' Michael (Jeff
Goldblum) wanted to become a novelist and has settled for the jazzy career of a
writer for People magazine.

Harold (Kevin Kline) and Sarah (Glenn Close), who have fared better than any of
their friends, live an enlightened suburban existence. He is the owner of a
successful shoe-retailing company, and she is a physician. Karen (JoBeth
Williams) says she is happy but is really bored to tears by the devotion of her
husband, Richard (Don Galloway), a stranger to this group, and by the housewife
she has become.


The most complicated member of the group is Nick (William Hurt), a Vietnam
veteran who once enjoyed some fame as a psychologist on a West Coast radio
call-in show but who now lives an aimless, rootless life supported by drugs.
Completing the group at this postfuneral weekend is Chloe (Meg Tilly), the
pretty, much younger woman, who was living with Alex, the dead man, at the time
of the suicide and who is completely unconcerned by the specter of time's
passing that haunts the rest.

As much as any one character can be the focus in a film of this sort, the
enchantingly funny and direct Chloe is the center of the narrative. While the
others are being mopey as they drive from the church to the cemetery, Chloe
expresses her disappointment at having to ride in an ordinary car and not in the
limousine with Alex's mother. Everything is still new to Chloe, including, she
concedes, limousines. Later, as if to root out the genteel self-consciousness
that has overtaken the mourning friends, she announces: ''Alex and I made love
the night before he died. It was fantastic!''

In the course of their weekend together in an extremely photogenic, antebellum
mansion outside Beaufort, S.C., the friends move from depression to high
spirits, to boozy, druggy confessions, accusations and revelations of
long-hidden disappointments. By the end, several members of the group have made
important decisions, which may or may not change their lives, while the others
resume the routines they left the preceding Friday.


Mr. Kasdan is one of the finest of Hollywood's new young writers but ''The Big
Chill,'' like ''Body Heat,'' demonstrates that he is a writer who works as much
through images as through words. ''The Big Chill' is packed with frequently
witty visual information that sometimes contradicts and sometimes supports what
the characters say about themselves. There's a wonderfully funny montage early
in the movie in which we see each character as defined in the contents of his or
her overnight bag. The soundtrack is loaded with 60's music that recalls,
without sentimentality, everything the friends have grown away from.

The performances represent ensemble playing of an order Hollywood films seldom
have time for, with the screenplay providing each character with at least one
big scene. If the actors were less consistent and the writing less fine the
scheme would be tiresome. In ''The Big Chill'' it's part of the fun.

Two reservations should be noted. The character of the dead Alex never comes
through as vividly as it should. What does come through - a portrait of an
exceptionally gifted, charming, dedicated man, whose life effectively stopped
with the excitement and promise of the 60's - blends so thoroughly with that of
Mr. Hurt's Nick that one can't be sure if this is the point or if it's a
weakness in the conception.

Further, there is the matter of what happened to Nick in Vietnam. We are told on
several occasions that his sexual life is over, but why is left for us to
speculate about. It's never clear whether he has been physically or emotionally
impaired, or both.

This might well be a reference to poor old Jake Barnes of Hemingway's ''Sun Also
Rises,'' a book that college students have been poring over for 50 years now in
their fruitless search for clues to the exact nature of Jake's problem.
Considering the frankness with which the characters in ''The Big Chill'' discuss
everything else, this discretion is ridiculous.


Changing Lives

THE BIG CHILL, directed by Lawrence Kasdan; written by Mr. Kasdan and Barbara
Benedek; director of photography, John Bailey; edited by Carol Littleton; music
by various composers; produced by Michael Shamberg; released by Columbia
Pictures. At Alice Tully Hall, 7:30 P.M., and Avery Fisher Hall, 9 P.M., as part
of the 21st New York Film Festival; presented by the Film Society of Lincoln
Center Inc. in cooperation with the Motion Picture Association of America.
Running time: 104 minutes. This film is rated R.
Sam, Tom Berenger
Sarah, Glenn Close
Michael, Jeff Goldblum
Nick, William Hurt
Harold, Kevin Kline
Meg, Mary Kay Place
Chloe, Meg Tilly
KarenJo, Beth Williams
Richard, Don Galloway
Minister, James Gillis
Peter the Cop, Ken Place
Harold and Sarah's Son, Jon Kasdan
Running Dog Driver, Ira Stiltner
Autograph Seeker, Jacob Kasdan
Alex's Mother, Muriel Moore
Airline Hostess, Meg Kasdan
Annie, Patricia Gaul

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Meg Tilly

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'DREAMGIRLS,' CAST AND TEXT CHANGES

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1309 words


''DREAMGIRLS'' is a big, lavish, long-running Broadway musical that is exciting
precisely because it doesn't coddle the audience in the way that such Broadway
musicals often do. Seeing the show again - with some new performers in principal
roles and some recently inserted revisions in the second act - I was struck once
more by the many risks that the director Michael Bennett and his collaborators
take with what might have been another backstage show-biz saga.

This is a work about black people that has as little use for liberal platitudes
as Charles Fuller's ''A Soldier's Play.'' It's a spectacle in which the sets are
so abstract and austere that they recall the heyday of Russian constructivism,
not Florenz Ziegfeld. It's a heavily choreographed musical that uses dance to
create the elliptical montage techniques of film and avant-garde theater rather
than the show-stoppers of Broadway convention. (In fact, the show never stops,
period.)


No wonder that ''Dreamgirls'' has aroused passionate emotions both pro and con
ever since it opened. Strolling through the lobby at the Imperial this week, I
was not surprised to overhear some fans diligently compare the performance of
''Dreamgirls'' at hand to the five others they'd seen; nor was I surprised to
hear other theatergoers express their estrangement from the entire enterprise.
There's little middle ground on ''Dreamgirls,'' and the work's ability to arouse
such heated debate is one of its virtues.

For those who respond to this show, the tangible, onstage virtues remain as
forceful as ever - and more innovative than those of any musical in town. As Mr.
Bennett demonstrated with ''A Chorus Line,'' he's not one to let his productions
become either sloppy or freeze-dried. In its current form, ''Dreamgirls'' plays
somewhat differently than before and is all the fresher for it. Only the sound
system, which swallows words in the recitative-laden opening sequence, needs
fine tuning.

The biggest change, of course, has been the departure of Jennifer Holliday from
the role of Effie White. Effie is the most soulful member of the Dreams, a
Supremes-like singing trio that rises to fame in the 1960's - and she is the
first casualty of the group's success. When the Dreams adopt ''a smoother
sound'' to ''cross over'' from the rhythm-and-blues ghetto to the white pop
charts, their Faustian manager (Ben Harney) both fires Effie from the group and
throws her out of his bed. The ensuing first act finale - an unflagging cry of
pain titled ''And I Am Telling You I'm Not Going'' - was an occasion for Miss
Holliday to whip an audience into hysteria.

Miss Holliday's successor, Vanessa Townsell, can't duplicate that feat - who
could? But Miss Townsell's simpler yet piercing rendition of the song still
hurts. At the same time, she scales down Effie in a way that serves the show.
Both more reserved and less hefty than her predecessor, this actress is more in
balance with the other Dreams - and more credibly their victim.

As a result, the glamorous lead Dream, Deena Jones, has gained in prominence
and, as acted by the lovely Linda Leilani Brown, seems an even more pathetic
sellout to the blandishments of stardom. Perhaps to underline this character's
new stature, Mr. Bennett has given her a new number to open Act II - an
elaborate parody of the Las Vegas extravaganzas that Diana Ross favored after
leaving the Supremes behind. The other revisions - the addition of an effect to
the finale, some minor condensing - are not earthshaking. I do miss a cut
sequence in which Deena, ever eager to pander to her public, sidesteps a
reporter's question about the Vietnam War.

With the occasional exception of Mr. Harney, who has become lax about
projection, the cast's holdovers remain vibrant: Loretta Devine as the comical
Dream who resembles Miss Adelaide in ''Guys and Dolls''; Obba Babatunde's
ambitious songwriter; Vondie Curtis-Hall's honest agent. In the crucial role of
James Thunder Early, a James Brown-like singer who won't bend his soul to pop
fashion, Clinton Derricks-Carroll has succeeded his twin brother, Cleavant
Derricks, and is eerily similar in his delineation of a high-spirited innocent
soon crushed by show-biz ruthlessness.


It's the nature of that ruthlessness that gives ''Dreamgirls'' its bite. Instead
of just providing the usual white villains, Tom Eyen's libretto also suggests
that the black characters betray themselves as they pursue an empty white
American dream. The Dreams reach the top by turning their heartfelt music into
top-40 shlock, by posing as plastic sex objects and by compromising their
offstage integrity. The more assimilated and wealthy they become, the more they
talk about ''freedom'' - and the more they become slaves. ''We're going to make
this country change!,'' sing the Dreams proudly, as they tour to plug their
first hit song, the ironically double-edged ''Cadillac Car.'' But ultimately
it's the country that changes them.

This rending story is also told in Henry Krieger's pop-operatic score - a
mini-history of Motown that gradually moves from the insistence of Apollo soul
to the homogenized ''lighter'' sound of the Dreams' crossover hits. And, as the
Dreams rise, Mr. Bennett's galvanic staging grows darker. Forever defying the
notion that a proscenium arch is to be used as a symmetrical picture frame, Mr.
Bennett eventually turns Robin Wagner's set of mobile chrome towers and bridges
into a labyrinthine prison, with hellish Tharon Musser lighting to match.

Is this the safe formula for a Broadway hit? Not even close. As ''Dreamgirls''
nears its second anniversary, the fact of this daring musical's continued
popularity is nearly as exhilarating as the show itself


Daring Musical

DREAMGIRLS, book and lyrics by Tom Eyen; music by Henry Krieger; directed and
choreographed by Michael Bennett; co-choreographer, Michael Peters; scenic
design, Robin Wagner; costume design, Theoni V. Aldredge; lighting design,
Tharon Musser; sound design, Otts Munderloh; musical supervision and
orchestrations, Harold Wheeler; musical director, Yolanda Segovia; vocal
arrangements, Cleavant Derricks; production stage manager, Jeff Hamlin.
Presented by Michael Bennett, Bob Avian, David Geffen and the Shubert
Organization. At the Imperial Theater, 249 West 45th Street.
The Stepp Sisters, Terry Burrell, Brenda Pressley, Graciela Simpson and Gina
Taylor
Charlene, Adriane Lenox
Joanne, Ethel Beatty
Marty, Vondie Curtis-Hall
Curtis Taylor Jr., Ben Harney
Deena Jones, Linda Leilani Brown
The M. C., Ronald ''Smokey'' Stevens
Tiny Joe Dixon and Jerry, Joe Lynn
Lorrell Robinson, Loretta Devine
C. C. White, Obba Babatunde
Effie Melody White, Vanessa Townsell
Little Albert and the Tru-Tones, Wellington Perkins, Charles Bernard, Barry
Bruce, Jamie Patterson and Eric Riley
James Thunder Early, Clinton Derricks-Carroll
Edna Burke, Roz Ryan
The James Early Band, Charles Bernard, Barry Bruce, Jamie Patterson, Wellington
Perkins, Frank Mastrocola and Eric Riley
Wayne, Tony Franklin
Dave and the Sweethearts, Hal Miller, Candy Darling and Nina Hennessey
Frank, Buddy Vest
Michelle Morris, Terry Burrell
The Five Tuxedos, Charles Bernard, Barry Bruce, Jamie Patterson, Eric Riley and
Ronald ''Smokey'' Stevens
Les Style, Ethel Beatty, Mary Denise Bentley, Adriane Lenox and Brenda Pressley
Film Executives, Hal Miller, Tim Millett and Eric Riley
Mr. Morgan, Ronald ''Smokey'' Stevens
Announcers, Fans, Reporters,Stagehands, Party Guests and Photographers, Ethel
Beatty, Mary Denise Bentley, Charles Bernard, Barry Bruce, Candy Darling, Ronald
Dunham, Nina Hennessey, Adriane Lenox, Joe Lynn, Frank Mastrocola, Hal Miller,
Tim Millett, Jamie Patterson, Wellington Perkins, Brenda Pressley, Eric Riley,
Graciela Simpson, Ronald ''Smokey'' Stevens, Gina Taylor and Buddy Vest.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Clinton Derricks-Carroll in ''Dreamgirls''

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV WEEKEND;
PEACETIME ARMY ACTION IN 'FOR LOVE AND HONOR'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 27, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 585 words


''FOR LOVE AND HONOR,'' a new series making its debut as a two-hour movie on
Channel 4 tonight at 9, is being presented as ''a realistic depiction of the
peacetime Army.'' If so, the country is in worse condition than chronic worriers
imagine. The show's 88th Airborne Division has been transformed into something
like a college dormitory, resulting in something between ''Animal House'' and
''An Officer and a Gentleman.''

The division is supposed to be training paratroopers for combat, but the bulk of
the training seems to consist of occasional jogging sessions. The man in charge,
Captain Wiecek (Gary Grubbs,) is decidedly sadistic. The good guy is First
Sergeant Allard (Cliff Potts), who is fair and tough. Also on the good side is
Master Sergeant Bell (Yaphet Kotto), a hardened Vietnam veteran, who bears
similarities to the mean-but-lovable character played by Louis Gossett Jr. in
''An Officer and a Gentleman.''

This man's Army has women in its ranks. Sergeant Allard is having an affair with
Captain Engel (Shelley Smith), the division's chic top medic. Then there is
Corporal Pavlik (Rachel Ticotin), who has to live in a barracks inhabited solely
by male paratroopers. This separates the nice guys from the nasty male
chauvinists, leaving the poor corporal insisting she will stick it out.

The trainees are all pretty, both the boys and the girls. Scammer (Pete Kowanko)
is a relentless womanizer. Duke (Keenan Ivory Wayans) wants to be a boxer. Utah
(Tony Becker) is a nice rube from a Midwestern farm. Lucas (Eddie Velez) is a
hot-blooded Hispanic-American soldier enamored of a young woman who turns out to
be the commanding general's daughter.

During a night jump, one of the chutes doesn't open, and a trainee, Scammer's
best friend, is killed. As it turns out, the chute was ''packed'' by Corporal
Pavlik. Scammer is inconsolable. Corporal Pavlik is inconsolable. The crisis
ends in a barroom brawl, followed by Corporal Pavlik's playing a soulful piece
of music on her guitar while the rest of the gang listens pensively. Mr. Potts
gets through all this with some skill, and the rest of the cast shows signs of
talent. It's the vehicle itself that refuses to justify even minimum belief.

Teen-Age Pregnancies On 'That's the Spirit'

Sunday morning at 10:30 on Channel 9, the syndicated series ''That's the
Spirit'' begins a new season with a half-hour exploration of teen-age
pregnancies. Mark Cordray, the host- narrator, talks about the subject with
teen-age parents and teen-age students. This program is produced under Roman
Catholic auspices, and abortion is hardly mentioned, never mind considered.

The program is noteworthy because it confronts a real problem, which is reaching
epidemic proportions, and the young people are sensitive and articulate. Asked
if love conquers all, a young man feeding his infant daughter says, ''It doesn't
happen like in the movies - no, it's not 'Love Story Part II.' ''

A young woman with a child explains that she was responsible for making the
child, and therefore, she is responsible for caring for it. The distinction is
made between lasting love and romance or short-lived infatuations. There is no
preaching.


In a review yesterday of a new television series called ''Trauma Center,'' a
critical reference was made to the speaking voice of Lou Ferrigno, an actor. It
was subsequently learned that Mr. Ferrigno's speech difficulties were not the
result of his characterization, but of hearing problems that affect his speech.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SCREEN LIGHTS UP ON 21ST FILM FESTIVAL AT LINCOLN CENTER

BYLINE: By PETER B. FLINT

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1919 words


THE 21st New York Film Festival, which opens this evening, has a rich mix of 32
features in 26 programs from 16 countries and departs from its predecessors in
three major areas. The 17-day gala brings to Lincoln Center more directors than
any previous festival, 16, more American films than ever, 11, and a movie that
generated the sharpest critical split in the selection panel in memory.

The five-member panel of experts began using a 1-to-5 rating system about six
years ago, according to Richard Roud, the festival's exuberant director and one
of its founders.

A 1 vote, he said in his basement office at Lincoln Center the other day,
connotes, ''I hate this dreadful film, and I'll hate the rest of you if you
accept it.'' A 2 vote, he continued, indicates ''I don't like it, but if the
rest of you like it, I won't be angry.'' A 3 signifies ''Yes.'' A 4 concludes
''It must be in the festival.'' And a 5? ''It's a masterpiece!''

Mr. Roud, who heads the panel, said decisions were weighted toward enthusiasm to
weed out the mediocre, ''the sort of film that nobody hates and nobody loves.''
The system, he said, eliminates a recurring problem in festivals, where some
movies are chosen because no judge feels strongly about them. These
middle-of-the-road films, he said, tend to be boring.  Pressed to identify the
movie that no two experts agreed on, Mr. Roud paused, ruminated and replied: ''I
can't. The panel is a jury.''

To open the festival, the experts chose an American movie for the first time,
Lawrence Kasdan's ''The Big Chill'' (reviewed on page C14), which the
writer-director describes as ''a comedy of values.'' It features such stars as
William Hurt, Glenn Close, Kevin Kline, Meg Tilly and Jobeth Williams, and is
about college chums of the 1960's who gather 15 years later for the funeral of
one of their number, who has committed suicide. The movie deals with friendship,
how it endures and how it changes, the loss of innocence and the tension between
ideals and ambition. Mr. Kasdan's writing credits include ''Raiders of the Lost
Ark'' and ''The Empire Strikes Back.'' He also wrote and directed ''Body Heat,''
the much-praised 1981 film noir.

''The Big Chill'' will be screened twice this evening, at 7:30 in the 1,096-seat
Alice Tully Hall and at 9 in the 2,500-seat Avery Fisher Hall. All other weekend
films will be shown at Tully Hull. Tickets for both opening night performances
(and the Oct. 9 closing) are $10 and $14. Tickets for all other screenings are
$5 and $7.

''The Big Chill'' was sold out soon after the Tully Hall box office opened Sept.
11, according to Joanne Koch, executive director of the Film Society of Lincoln
Center and administrator of the festival. But she said that there was often a
chance to pick up a few tickets because some are returned even for the most
popular screenings.

Story of a Counterfeit Bill

The second offering is ''L'Argent'' by Robert Bresson, which shared the grand
prize for creation at the Cannes Film Festival. The drama focuses on a
counterfeit bill that passes among many hands and damages many lives. It can be
seen tomorrow at 12:30 P.M. and Sunday at 7 P.M.

Mr. Bresson is an introspective and spiritualistic film maker, whose movies are
regarded by many critics as uncommercial and by others as works of genius.
Officially, Sunday is the reclusive French writer-director's 76th birthday,
though there are suspicions he may really be 83. Among Mr. Bresson's major works
are ''Les Dames du Bois de Boulogne,'' ''Pickpocket'' and ''Au Hazard
Balthasar.''

Marco Ferreri's ''Story of Piera,'' starring Isabelle Huppert, Marcello
Mastroianni and Hanna Schygulla, centers on an ambitious young woman trying to
cope with a glamorous, restless and overbearing mother.

Mr. Ferreri is a 55-year-old Italian, whose films are considered anarchic and
antibourgeois. Such movies as ''La Grande Bouffe,'' ''The Last Woman'' and
''Bye, Bye Monkey'' shocked many Americans. ''The Story of Piera,'' according to
Mr. Roud, is less shocking. Screenings are tomorrow at 3 and 9 P.M.

First Entry From Mali

''The Wind'' by Souleymane Cisse will be the first film from Mali shown at a New
York festival. The movie, which the director calls a social satire, deals with
the clash of tribal values and modern rulers in West Africa, with overtones of
''Romeo and Juliet.''

In 1980, Mr. Cisse's ''Baara'' was shown in the ''New Directors-New Films''
series, which the Film Society of Lincoln Center sponsors each year with the
Museum of Modern Art.

On the same bill with the Mali film is ''Reassemblage,'' about life in Senegal
as interpreted by Trinh T. Minh-ha, a Vietnamese woman living in California.
Times are tomorrow at 6 P.M. and Sunday at 2.

The weekend's retrospective entry, Sunday at 5 P.M., is ''La Signora di Tutti,''
a 1934 romantic drama made by Max Ophuls, who was celebrated for a fluid camera
style and dizzying array of tracking and crane shots and pans. The made-in-Italy
film stars Isa Miranda as a beautiful and magnetic actress, for whom men will do
anything. Ophuls's films include ''Letter From an Unknown Woman,'' ''La Ronde''
and ''Lola Mont es.'' Ophuls died of a rheumatic heart ailment in 1957 at the
age of 54. His son is Marcel Ophuls, who made ''The Sorrow and the Pity.''

Hungarian Film on Incest

Rounding out the weekend fare is ''Forbidden Relations,'' a romantic drama about
a young couple who meet innocently, fall in love, have sexual relations and then
learn they are half-brother and half-sister. Despite ostracism by society and
imprisonment by the state, they continue their relationship. Screenings are
Sunday at 9:30 P.M. and Monday at 6:15.

The film was written and directed by Zsolt Kezdi-Kovacs, a 48-year-old
Hungarian, who has made seven features. When ''Forbidden Relations'' was shown
at Cannes in May, reporters pressed the Budapest director to comment on its
political message. After persistently refusing to say he was doing anything
political, he blurted out, ''If you force me, I say I am on the side of the
individual.''

It is during a two-week session in Cannes that the New York festival's selection
committee makes its first choices. After further exhaustive prospecting by Mr.
Roud, the panel chooses the final entries in a punishing two-week summer session
in New York.

Hundreds of Films Viewed

Mr. Roud, who makes nearly all the recommendations, previews 400 features and
about 300 shorts a year (about half a dozen dot the festival). The other panel
members, Richard Corliss, Jack Kroll, Jim Hoberman and David Thomson, previewed
200 to 300 films.

Does the choice of three American big-studio movies - more than in any previous
year - indicate that the judges were playing it safe? ''Not at all!'' Mr. Roud
said. ''Usually, the films we want from the studios we can't get, and the ones
we don't want we can get. This year, the ones we were offered were the ones we
wanted. It wasn't planned. It's luck!''

''There is much more consensus than you think,'' according to Mr. Roud, a former
film critic for The Guardian in Britain. Noting that the panel members ''are all
professionals,'' he said that disagreements are never angry. Once in a while, he
said, ''we do a little horse trading.''

Does he like all the festival's films? ''No, I do not.'' He declined to identify
those he disliked as he had refused to name the only film that drew five
different verdicts ranging from love to hate. However, two people close to the
selection process disclosed the hit - or miss. It is Francis Coppola's ''Rumble
Fish,'' which can be seen Oct. 7 and 8.

The New York Film Festival opens tonight at Lincoln Center and runs through Oct.
9. All films, unless otherwise indicated, are at Alice Tully Hall. Prices are
$10 and $14 for opening and closing night; $10 and $15 at Radio City, and $5 and
$7 for all other performances. Tully Hall box office: 362-1911. The schedule
follows:


Today ''The Big Chill'' (United States). At 7:30 P.M. (also 9 P.M. at Avery
Fisher Hall).

Tomorrow ''L'Argent'' (France-Switzerland). At 12:30 P.M. (also Sunday at 7
P.M.). ''The Story of Piera'' (Italy-France). At 3 and 9 P.M. ''The Wind'' and
''Reassemblage.'' At 6 P.M. (also Sunday at 2 P.M.).  Sunday ''La Signora di
Tutti'' (Italy). At 5 P.M. ''Forbidden Relations'' (Hungary). At 9:30 P.M. (also
Monday at 6:15 P.M.).

Monday ''In the White City'' (Portugal-Switzerland). Swiss engineer jumps ship
in Lisbon, directed by Alain Tanner. At 9:30 P.M. (also Tuesday at 6:15 P.M.).

Tuesday ''Boat People'' (China). Da Nang, Vietnam, three years after the fall of
the Thieu Government, directed by Ann Hui. At 9:30 P.M. (also Wednesday at 6:15
P.M.).

Wednesday ''Danton'' (France-Poland). The 18th-century French statesman and
leader of the Revolution, directed by Andrzej Wajda. At 9:30 P.M. (also Thursday
at 6:15 P.M.).

Thursday ''Life Is a Bed of Roses'' (''La Vie Est un Roman,'' France), directed
by Alain Resnais, with Geraldine Chaplin and Vittorio Gassman. At 9:30 P.M.
(also Sept. 30 at 6:15 P.M.).

Sept. 30 ''Rear Window'' (United States). Hitchcock's 1954 view of voyeurism and
murder, starring Jimmy Stewart and Grace Kelly. At 9:30 P.M. (also Oct. 1 at
12:30

P.M.).

Oct. 1 ''Erendira'' (Mexico-France-West Germany). Gabriel Garcia Marquez's
surrealistic tale of a teen-age prostitute, directed by Ruy Guerra. At 3 P.M.
(also Oct. 2 at 9:30 P.M.). ''Lost Illusions'' (Hungary). Comic operetta from
Balzac novel, directed by Gyula Gazdag, with music by the Who. At 6 P.M. (also
Oct. 2 at 2 P.M.). ''Last Night at the Alamo'' (Canada). Doomed Texas bar,
directed by Eagle Pennell; and ''Sifted Evidence'' (Canada), a young woman's
misadventures. At 9 P.M. (also Oct. 2 at 4:30 P.M.). ''The Golden Eighties''
(Belgium). Musical set in a shopping mall, directed by Chantal Akerman.
Midnight.

Oct. 2 ''Seeing Red'' (United States). Stories of American Communists, directed
by Julia Reichert and James Klein. At 7 P.M.

Oct. 3 ''Red Love'' (West Germany). Sex and politics, directed by Rosa von
Praunheim. At 6:15 P.M. ''The New Babylon'' (Soviet Union). Silent feature from
1929 by Grigory Kozintsev and Leonid Trauberg; Shostakovich score played by live
orchestra. At 9 P.M. at Radio City Music Hall.

Oct. 4 ''Dhrupad'' (India). India with music played by the Dagar brothers,
directed by Mani Kaul. At 6:15 P.M. ''Passion'' (France-Switzerland). Jean-Luc
Godard's film within a film; and ''You the Better'' (United States), directed by
Ericka Beckman. At 9:30 P.M. (also Oct. 5 at 6:15 P.M.).

Oct. 5 ''Nostalghia'' (Soviet Union-Italy). A Russian's melancholy stay in
Italy, directed by Andrei Tarkovsky. At 9:30 P.M. (also Oct. 6 at 6:15 P.M.).

Oct. 6 ''Heart Like a Wheel'' (United States). Story of Shirley Muldowney,
hot-rod driver, directed by Jonathan Kaplan. At 9:30 P.M. (also Oct. 7 at 6:15
P.M.).

Oct. 7 ''Rumble Fish'' (United States). A father and his two sons, directed by
Francis Ford Coppola. At 9:30 P.M. (also Oct. 8 at 3 P.M.).

Oct. 8 ''Entre Nous'' (''Coup de Foudre,'' France). A young woman comes of age,
directed by Diane Kurys. At 12:30 and 9 P.M. ''Burroughs'' (United States).
Portrait of the author William Burroughs, filmed by Howard Brookner; and ''The
Secret Agent'' (United States), documentary about dioxin. At 6 P.M.

Oct. 9 ''Streamers'' (United States). David Rabe's adaptation of his play about
soldiers waiting to go to Vietnam, directed by Robert Altman. At Avery Fisher
Hall, 8:30 P.M.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Isa Miranda in ''La Signorea di Tutti''

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

A.P. SAYS ITS SHULTZ CAPTION WAS MISLEADING

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 413 words


The Associated Press said yesterday that it supplied a misleading caption
Wednesday with a picture of Secretary of State George P. Shultz.

The picture, which showed the Secretary with his hands over his face while Gen.
Paul X. Kelley, the Commandant of the Marine Corps, gave testimony, was
distributed Wednesday and published Thursday by a large number of the news
agency's 900 member newspapers across the country, including The New York Times.

The A.P. caption, on which The Times's caption was based, said:

''Secretary of State George Shultz covers his face as Marine Corps Commandant
Gen. Paul X. Kelley refers to the troops 'who were sent to Vietnam a year ago,'
and corrected himself to say 'into Lebanon' while testifying before a House
Foreign Affairs Committee on the presence of U.S. Marines in Lebanon. Kelley's
misstatement caused a few gasps in the room. He called the remark 'a Freudian
slip.' ''

A CBS News videotape of the incident, broadcast Thursday, showed a lapse of
about seven seconds between General Kelley's misstatement and Mr. Shultz's
gesture, which might have been one of weariness rather than, as the caption
implied, a reaction to the general's words.

Hal Buell, The A.P.'s executive news photo editor in New York, said yesterday
that the caption had erred in saying Mr. Shultz had covered his face ''as'' the
general made the misstatement. He also said ''something was lost'' when the
photographer who took the picture spoke to the Washington bureau staff member
who wrote the caption.

''An attempt was made to make it as accurate as possible, but the precision just
slipped a little bit,'' Mr. Buell said. ''The picture is a good one and the
caption just kills it. The fault is that the caption lacks precision.''

The New York Times asked The A.P.'s Washington bureau about the caption at 3
P.M. Wednesday and was given assurances of its accuracy.

Mr. Buell said ''a couple of dozen'' other news organizations made inquiries
about the accuracy of the caption Thursday, after CBS News broadcast the
videotape, and that The A.P. then distributed a corrective article and a
substitute caption.

John Hughes, a State Department spokesman, said at a news briefing yesterday
that Mr. Shultz had expressed no reaction to the photograph and was ''taking it
all rather lightly.'' He said he did not think Mr. Shultz had put his hands to
his face out of surprise, and noted that the gesture had come after ''rather a
long day of testifying.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Ann H. Boling and Carl Solberg Marry

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 69, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 246 words


Ann Hartinger Boling, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Lawrence Howe Boling of Wisconsin
Rapids, Wis., was married yesterday to Carl Tobias Solberg, son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl Solberg of Port Chester, N.Y. The Rev. Richard W. Solberg, the bridegroom's
uncle, performed the ceremony at St. Peter's Lutheran Church in New York,
assisted by the Rev. John S. Damm.

Mrs. John Vandervort was matron of honor for her cousin. Richard S. Solberg
served as best man for his brother.

The bride, director of client services at Triad International Corporate
Communications, a New York advertising concern, was presented at the Boston
Debutante Assembly. She graduated from the Concord Academy, Pine Manor Junior
College and Tufts University and did graduate work in art history at the
University of Wisconsin. Her father is president of Consolidated Papers in
Wisconsin Rapids.

Mr. Solberg, an assistant United States attorney for the Southern District of
New York, graduated from the Brunswick School, Harvard College and the New York
University School of Law. He served with the Army in Vietnam. His father, a
former staff writer at Time, is president of the Roothbert Fund, an educational
foundation in New York; he is also the author of ''Riding High: America in the
Cold War,'' published by Mason & Lipscomb, and a biography of Hubert H. Humphrey
to be published by W. W. Norton & Company. The bridegroom's mother, Barbara
Selmer Solberg, teaches piano at the Manhattan School of Music.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Israeli Asserts Marines Are a Prop for Gemayel

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 215 words

DATELINE: TEL AVIV, Sept. 24


Former Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said today that Israel must make clear to
the American public that United States forces in Lebanon are not there at
Israel's request.

In an interview with the Israeli radio, Mr. Rabin, a leader in the opposition
Labor Party, predicted that if something serious happened to the United States
marines who are part of the multinational force in Beirut, the United States
would blame Israel.

''We must therefore explain to the American people that the U.S. presence in
Lebanon serves American interests, that is to save the regime of President Amin
Gemayel,'' Mr. Rabin said. ''We didn't ask them to go toLebanon. They are not
serving Israeli interests.''

(United Press International quoted Mr. Rabin as saying in the same interview
that he foresaw a ''Vietnam-type'' solution in Lebanon, amounting to an eventual
American withdrawal and a Syrian-Soviet political victory over the United
States.

(''The Americans understand today they are stuck there, even if they do not say
so publicly,'' Mr.  Rabin is reported to have said.)

Mr. Rabin predicted that within six months Yasir Arafat, the leader of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, would be back in Beirut and Syria and the
Soviet Union would be able to claim a significant political success.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE VICTORY OF LOSERS, INC.

BYLINE: William SafireWASHI NGTON, Sept. 24 - The fear that I fear is winning is
the fear of winning.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 798 words


A new confidence can be found in the legion of self-doubt. Isolationist
legislators and dovish pundits sense that their brand of defeatism is gaining
the upper hand in the formation of public opinion. In debates and polls on our
involvement in Lebanon and El Salvador, we have been witnessing the triumph of
Losers, Inc.

Defeat is its flight plan, dialogue its panacea, the quagmire its symbol.

In Central America, Losers, Inc., assured us, the dispatch of 55 military
advisers to El Salvador would be the beginning of a new Vietnam; that the
socially progressive guerrillas were certain to win the hearts and minds of the
peasants, and resistance by our thuggish allies, with their right-wing death
squads (there are never any left-wing death squads), was futile. Therefore, our
goal must be negotiations for peace, not (ugh!) military victory by the elected
government.

However, even the limited military supplies sent to El Salvador seem to be
helping to stop the Communists from overthrowing the Government. Military
pressure on Nicaragua through overt-covert aid to insurgents in that country has
discouraged Sandinista assistance to El Salvador's Communists. In the face of
this, Losers, Inc., has been trying to cut off the overt-covert C.I.A. help and
has been holding down military and economic aid to the Salvadoran Government to
a level that prevents clear- cut success.

Spokesmen for Losers were furious at the ploy adopted by the Reagan
Administration to conceal its support for the thugs chosen by the people in
elections replete with Western observers. Our roaming Ambassador, Richard Stone,
invited the Communists to a ''dialogue,'' which Losers thinks of as the ultimate
goal. Most reluctantly, the guerrillas came, only to make it clear that a free
election was not their cup of coffee. They wanted ''power- sharing,'' imposed by
the U.S. over their people's heads, which was an embarrassment to
negotiationiks.  However, Losers' strategists were delighted at the speech made
by Undersecretary of Defense Fred Ikle, who actually said ''we seek victory for
the forces of democracy,'' which included ''defeating militarily those organized
forces of violence that refuse to accept the democratic will of the people.''
That gladdened dovish hearts because it proved that the Administration goal was
to win. Not to negotiate endlessly, not to have a dialogue as an end in itself,
not to not lose and to bug out after a decent interval, but to (ugh!) win. To
the growing army led by Losers, Inc., ''victory'' is not only a quaintly
Goldwateresque word, but is (a) impossible; (b) immoral for us to seek, and thus
(c) must be ripped out root and cause. To Losers, Inc., winning is losing.
Apply that same approach to our involvement in Lebanon. A year ago, when Israel
struck at the decadelong Syrian-P.L.O. takeover of Lebanon, Losers, Inc.,
suddenly discovered the ''territorial integrity'' of that Syrian- occupied land.
In its war with the P.L.O., Israel was out to win: to Losers, that was
unacceptable.

Accordingly, a firestorm of protest was loosed against the Israelis, who did not
understand that in a world dominated by Losers, victory is villainy. Mr. Reagan
and his national security adviser were swept away in that tide; in a blunder
comparable only to Eisenhower's Suez mistake in 1956, the U.S. President ordered
the Israelis to stop winning. In a colossal misjudgment, he accepted Losers,
Inc.'s, assumption - abetted by the State Department's Philip Habib - that the
problem would be to get the Israelis, not the Syrians, out of Lebanon.

Today, some of the same anti-victorians who urged Mr. Reagan to intervene in
Lebanon when the Israelis had the Syrians and P.L.O. reeling are now demanding
that he pull out our Marine contingent because we are in a no-win situation.

Their litany is familiar: It's none of our business; the locals are all corrupt;
the Syrians, with Soviet backing, cannot be beaten; as in Central America, the
U.S. public won't stand for an escalation of our involvement. And now some
defeatists are adding a new, ironic twist: Why can't the Israelis take care of
this and let our marines come home?

The answer to all the predictions of failure, and the sure cure for the
prevailing defeatism in American public opinion, is one success. To achieve that
success, the Administration and its supporters in Congress must go against the
tide of public opinion led by Losers, Inc., today. Some evidence is needed to
show that perseverance pays, that winning - yes, even local military victory if
necessary - is possible.

We do not have to win everywhere. Nor do we have to take the military route
everywhere. But we do need to win somewhere for the possibility of our victory
to change the nature of negotiations everywhere.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ZABLOCKI TAKES THE CREDIT AND THE HEAT

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 763 words


WASHINGTON REPRESENTATIVE Clement J. Zablocki, chairman of the House Foreign
Affairs Committee, was leaning back in his big chair, beneath a massive portrait
of himself staring down from the wall. The Wisconsin Democrat had just piloted
through a resolution that would invoke the War Powers Act but allow American
marines to remain in Lebanon for 18 months, and rebellious Democrats were
denouncing the measure as a sellout to the Administration. ''They must be
sticking pins in Zablocki dolls,'' the lawmaker said.

By his own account, Mr. Zablocki has spent most of his 33 years in Congress
''plodding along,'' cultivating his constituents in the Polish neighborhoods on
the South Side of Milwaukee and slowly working his way up the seniority ladder.
Today, at age 70, he finds himself in the center of some of the stormiest issues
on Capitol Hill, and he is clearly enjoying himself.

Yet Mr. Zablocki sometimes seems out of step with the younger and more
aggressive members of his committee, who are eager to widen the Congressional
role in foreign policy. ''Clem has had a difficult time,'' said Representative
William S. Broomfield of Michigan, ranking Republican on the Foreign Affairs
panel. ''There are people on this committee, the young liberals, who want to
embarrass the Administration whenever they can. But Clem has always prided
himself on his belief that there is only one President at a time, and he's got
to work with him.'' When he describes his own approach to the Congressional role
in foreign policy, Mr. Zablocki uses words like cautious, balanced, bipartisan,
consensus. Some of his younger colleagues see a value in that approach. ''When
he takes a position on an issue like nerve gas or the nuclear freeze,'' said one
liberal on his committee, ''he helps enormously to establish credibility with
more moderate members.'' But when he strays from his cautious instincts, the
Wisconsin Democrat can get into trouble. He agreed to lead the floor fight for a
resolution endorsing a nuclear freeze. But he admits that he was uncomfortable
with the concept, and when Republicans bombarded him with questions he could not
answer, the younger troops had to come to his rescue.

Mr. Zablocki's approach is best summed up by his record on the War Powers Act.
Most sponsors of that legislation drew the lesson from Vietnam that no President
should ever be allowed to take the country into an undeclared war. But Mr.
Zablocki remained a supporter of the Vietnam War to the end, and today says:
''Do you know why we lost Vietnam ? We weren't resolute. Our boys were fighting
with one hand tied behind their backs.'' During the debate over the War Powers
measure 10 years ago, Mr. Zablocki helped water down a Senate version that would
have placed even tougher restrictions on Presidential initiative. But his
moderating influence may have helped build the consensus that was able to
override President Nixon's veto.

In recent weeks, as Congress has tried to apply the War Powers Act for the first
time, Mr. Zablocki has led the negotiations for House Democrats with the White
House. He admits that to some liberals, he has appeared ''too easy'' on the
Administration. But his aim, he said, was to find a realistic compromise. ''We
certainly want to avoid a constitutional confrontation, and we have avoided
that,'' he said.

A Cooperative InstinctClem's instinct is to be cooperative,'' said
Representative Lee Hamilton of Indiana, a senior Democrat on the Foreign Affairs
panel. ''He came out of the World War II generation, out of a bipartisan foreign
policy tradition.'' Moreover, Mr. Zablocki shares the experience and outlook of
many of his constituents, children of immigrants who struggled for an education,
and lived by the sort of maxim the lawmaker learned from his father: ''You don't
get something for nothing.'' He worked his way through college playing the organ
at church, and he has a deep pride in his neighborhood.

''I think my constituents are more conservative than some of my Democratic
colleagues,'' he said. ''They're supportive of a strong national defense and are
fiercely anti-Communist, and in that respect I reflect their views to a tee.''
Yet many of his people are telling Mr. Zablocki that they do not want any troops
in Lebanon, and when he leads the floor fight this week for the War Powers
compromise, he will be trying to convince his constituents as well as his
colleagues that there is no alternative. ''Sometimes you've got to lead,'' Mr.
Zablocki said. ''Sometimes you've got to listen to your conscience.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rep. Clement J. Zablcki with other representatives

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE HOUSE TIES REAGAN'S HANDS WITH A SLIPKNOT

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1059 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


FOR Congress as well as the Administration, the involvement of American marines
in Lebanon has been an exercise in political frustration. Capitol Hill began the
week in euphoria over the prospects of establishing an important constitutional
precedent by getting White House agreement, for the first time since the Vietnam
War, to a Congressional resolution on using American forces abroad. By Friday,
it seemed that the legislators might be reaching for a victory of form without
substance.

The strategy of House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. was to offer President
Reagan Congressional backing for his Lebanon policy and 18 more months for the
marine force there if the President would sign a joint resolution. According to
the Speaker, Mr. Reagan's signature would mean the President was tacitly
accepting the validity of the 1973 War Powers Resolution that made Congress a
necessary partner in the decision to put American forces into hostilities.

The resolution would hold the marine force to 1,200 men, restrict it to the
Beirut area, confine it to peacekeeping and self-defense without engaging in
combat, and sets the outside limit of its stay at 18 months. Initially, the
White House had resisted any limitations, while on the matter of timing, some
members of Congress wanted six months or less.

Even with such provisions spelled out, it turned out that making limits stick
was harder than Mr. O'Neill had anticipated. Gen. P. X. Kelley, the Marine Corps
commandant, disclosed last week that the force on shore had already grown to
1,600. And Senate Democrats, who had broken earlier with their House colleagues
over how to deal with the Administration, protested that the restrictions had
been rendered ''meaningless'' by Secretary of State George P. Shultz's
testimony. Mr. Shultz tried to reassure Congress about Administration intentions
for using the marines. But in a telling, 23-minute exchange with Senator Paul
Sarbanes, a Maryland Democrat, Mr. Shultz made it apparent that the
Administration did not feel legally bound.

Senator Sarbanes: ''You would not agree to the authorization being for 18 months
and then it being clear that to stay there the President would have to come back
to Congress. Is that correct?''

Secretary Shultz: ''That's correct.''

Senator Sarbanes: ''Now is it the Administration's position that what they need
to do is consult with Congress or what they need to do is obtain an
authorization from Congress, that they could not expand the number or role (of
the marines) without a specific Congressional authorization.''

Secretary Shultz: ''I think the President, or perhaps any of you if you were
President thinking about your constitutional role as Commander in Chief, would
be very reluctant to tie your hands and say that you could only order United
States forces to do something or other after the Congress had authorized it.''

Senator Sarbanes: ''What this questioning is bringing out is that while the
Administration is seeking an authorization from the Congress, it is reserving
its authority and right to increase the numbers, increase the scope and increase
the time period, in each instance without a Congressional authorization.''

Constitutional Responsibilities

Secretary Shultz: ''Well, I can only go back to the generality of it and say
that the President has no intention of turning over to the Congress his
constitutional responsibilities as Commander in Chief. Now that doesn't mean
that you ignore the Congress's wishes and of course the Congress has to provide
the funds and so on. And it is only sensible to consult and try to move forward
in tandem on these matters. But the President must maintain his constitutional
responsibility as Commander in Chief and cannot let go of it.''

Democrats in the House Foreign Affairs Committee had voted overwhelmingly for
the Lebanon resolution. The Shultz testimony sent Democrats on the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee into solid opposition. It left one senior House
Democrat leader worrying privately that ''instead of being a cautioning or
restraining hand, this resolution becomes a legitimizing instrument for the
President, freeing him from political pressures to move cautiously.'' Mr.
Shultz's comments yesterday are only likely to increase Congressional agitation.
American and other Western troops in Lebanon, he said in a television interview,
should remain until Israel, Syria and the Palestine Liberation Organization
withdraw.

Basically, the House and Senate Democratic leaders broke over this issue as they
did last year on the $98 billion tax increase. Mr. O'Neill, House Majority
Leader Jim Wright and other senior House Democrats have spoken with hope of the
impact of their measure. They feel that despite ambiguities in the legislation
and the Administration's disclaimers, the President's signature would
acknowledge the authority of Congress. They also contend that the main restraint
on President Reagan now is practical and political rather than legal and
technical.

With Congress's will on record, Representative Stephen J. Solarz, a Brooklyn
Democrat, said, ''The President could not begin a long march toward Damascus or
send the marines into the Shuf mountains.'' Others, like Jim Leach, an Iowa
Republican, added, ''Better the rule of law with some risk of open-ended
commitment than uncontrolled action by the executive.''

Beyond that, one senior House Democrat suggested, House and Senate Democrats
during the Reagan Administration have sometimes operated differently because the
House leadership feels motivated by a responsibility as a majority to help the
Administration govern, while Senate Democrats, in the minority, have the license
and habit of acting as an opposition. The Senate Democratic leadership has also
taken offense at the White House recognizing the power of the majority and
negotiating more seriously with House leaders.

Then, too, the political mood among House leaders differs from that in the
Senate. ''Tip O'Neill may be the President's chief critic on domestic policy,''
said one close colleague. ''But when it comes to the water's edge, he's got a
real stand-by-the-flag and stand-by-the-President side to him. Once he had the
White House agreement to go along with a resolution, he characterized this issue
as a choice between backing the flag or cutting and running.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sec. of State Schultz and Gen. P.X. Kelly

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN RIDES THE CREST OF AN ANTI-SOVIET WAVE

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1328 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON THE anti


-Communist core of President Reagan's foreign policy has never been so boldly on
display as since the downing of Korean Air Lines Flight 7 by the Russians on
Sept. 1. In the Middle East, Central America and the negotiations on nuclear
weapons, Mr. Reagan seems determined to resurrect his basic contention that the
Soviet Union is indeed the ''evil empire.'' To the surprise of his aides, the
strategy is proving effective, at least in building domestic support for his
foreign policies.

The Korean airliner episode may have shocked many Americans, but not Mr. Reagan.
Thus, the White House says, he didn't have to prove himself by retaliating in
more than a ''measured'' way. That brought him credit among European allies and
some of his severest critics in Congress, despite sharp jabs by conservatives.

The President's approach also seems to have defused, if only temporarily, the
opposition to Administration policies in Central America. When Secretary of
State George P. Shultz and William J. Casey, the Director of Central
Intelligence, offered Congress a broadened rationale last week for American
assistance to insurgents in Nicaragua, scarcely a squeak of protest was heard.
The Senate Intelligence Committee, apparently reluctant to challenge the notion
that aid to the rebels was dampening Nicaraguan and Cuban intervention in El
Salvador, gave the Administration a down payment on its request for funds.

As for the Middle East, Mr. Reagan began the week by suggesting Congress was
giving ''aid and comfort'' to the Syrians, and by extension the Soviets, by
dickering over deadlines on the stay of marines in Lebanon. The President won
what aides claimed as one of his most important foreign policy victories - an
agreement with some, if not all, Congressional leaders of both parties on a
compromise authorizing deployment of marines in Lebanon for 18 months under the
War Powers Resolution of 1973.

The antecedents of sectarian strife in Lebanon lie in religious conflicts that
date from the fall of the Roman Empire and the Crusades. Yet Mr. Reagan and
Secretary Shultz maintained last week that the real problem was the Russians.
Speaking to a group of broadcasters, the President assailed ''Soviet-sponsored
aggression against Lebanon.'' Officials, reporting the Russians had rejected a
secret State Department appeal for help in restraining the Syrians, connected
the rebuff to the furor over the Korean plane incident.

Presidential advisers were confident Mr. Reagan had gained the upper hand from
what he repeatedly called ''the Korean airline massacre.'' One could see it in
his almost cocky reaction after Andrei A. Gromyko, the Soviet Foreign Minister,
canceled plans to attend the United Nations General Assembly. Mr. Gromyko acted
when he was barred from landing at commercial airports.

At first, when Charles M. Lichenstein, an American delegate to the United
Nations, suggested his colleagues ''seriously consider removing themselves and
this organization from the soil of the United States,'' White House and State
Department aides demurred that he spoke only for himself. Then, two days later,
Mr. Reagan endorsed the suggestion and added mockingly that the United Nations
ought to convene in Moscow for half the year.  Leeway to Use Force

Administration officials argue that the airline episode has rid the President of
the tag he had among many voters as one inclined to involve the United States in
war. The change, they contend, has given him more leeway to use force, even in
Lebanon. ''When we came into office, one of our primary missions was to get
Americans out of the 'Vietnam syndrome' and get them accustomed again to the
idea that projecting power overseas can help the cause of peace,'' said an
Administration official. ''Well, it's worked. There's a consensus on Capitol
Hill in favor of keeping American troops in a battle zone. There's been a
significant atmospheric change in general, and the President has more running
room as a result.'' But a senior White House official, noting the air of
''vindication'' pervading the Administration, added: ''The KAL incident touched
a very deep nerve here. It recharged some long held and deeply held beliefs.
Where we go from here is less clear.'' Indeed, the Reagan Administration is
taking perhaps more risks than ever in foreign policy. Mr. Reagan remains unable
to point to a major achievement in the international arena. His insistence that
nuclear arms accords not simply contain the arms race, but alter the Soviet-
American balance, has led to an apparent stalemate in Geneva. Many experts say
the Korean plane incident has exacerbated fears in Europe about the deployment
of American medium- range missiles, beginning in December. The situation in
Central America could deteriorate any time, again forcing Mr. Reagan to consider
increasing American involvement.

The Administration's biggest foreign policy headache is in the Middle East, with
no end in sight to the fighting in Lebanon or the stationing of 1,300 marines
outside Beirut. Administration officials have begun to speak of Lebanon in
fateful terms. ''It's a Greek tragedy,'' one said. ''We went into Lebanon for
good and right reasons. It's hard to fault the policy, but we're in a terrible,
terrible situation.''

War Powers Struggle

The American involvement has passed many milestones. But surely one of the most
significant occurred when the Navy began bombarding Syrian-backed Druse
militiamen and Palestinian guerrillas. This was done not simply to defend the
marines but to help the Lebanese Army hold its positions in the mountains near
Beirut. The Administration passed a milestone at home, meanwhile, by apparently
averting a constitutional collision with Congress over the authority to keep the
marines in Lebanon. Congress seemed overwhelmingly in favor of keeping them
there. Yet most legislators also insisted the War Powers Resolution, a vestige
of the Vietnam War, required Mr. Reagan to obtain Congressional permission to
keep troops in Lebanon for longer than 60 days in hostilities. The compromise
accepted by Mr. Reagan said ''the Congress determines'' and ''the Congress
intends'' that War Powers Resolution strictures apply. The face-saver was that
Mr. Reagan got the right to reject the assertion even while signing the
resolution. Another feature crucial to Mr. Reagan permits American air and sea
forces to take ''protective measures'' to ''insure the safety'' of the marines.
For the Administration, this meant continuing efforts to prop up the Lebanese
Army, on the assumption that defeat would spell disaster for the Americans.

But for many in Congress, it was a loophole ''we can run Amtrak through,'' as
Senator Robert C. Byrd, the Senate minority leader put it. He joined other
Senate Democrats and some Republicans in questioning whether deterioration in
the military situation could drag the marines into combat, rendering the
resolution obsolete.

Reflecting these fears, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee approved the
resolution, 9 to 7, in a strictly party-line vote. It was expected to be
considered on the floor of the Republican- led Senate tomorrow; both sides think
the vote will be close. Oddly, the prospects look brighter in the Democratic-led
House, where Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. and other leaders are for the
measure.

While Mr. Reagan is said to be weeks away from disclosing his re-election plans,
hints he would run can be found in his often-repeated claim his policies have
made America ''more secure'' than before he took office.

Yet Reagan aides fear that the campaign may unfold amid rising American military
involvement in Central America and the Middle East and the worst Soviet-American
relations since the 1950's. If that is the campaign backdrop, the appeal of Mr.
Reagan's anti-Communist approach could be short-lived. Voters might conclude
that, on the contrary, the world has been growing more dangerous.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan; photo of French soldiers carrying coffin of
comrade ; photo of smoke rising from Italian peacekeeping force's amm.

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1983, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 718 words


MASS MARKET

Mass market paperbacks are soft-cover books sold at newsstands, variety stores
and supermarkets, as well as in bookstores. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from bookstores and representative wholesalers with
more than 40,000 outlets across the United States.

1

THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) A fictional saga of
human survival at the dawn of civilization.

2

MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $3.95.) The secret behind a
woman business tycoon's rise to power: fiction.

3

ACCEPTABLE LOSSES, by Irwin Shaw. (Avon, $3.95.) A New York literary agent's
life is threatened by a mysterious stranger: fiction.

4

DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.

5

TOUCH THE DEVIL, by Jack Higgins. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Tracking down a K.G.B.
agent who has stolen NATO secrets: fiction.

6

MAX, by Howard Fast. (Dell, $3.95.) The birth of the film industry in New York
at the turn of the century: fiction.

7

SPELLBINDER, by Harold Robbins. (Pocket, $3.95.) From soldier in Vietnam to
television evangelist: fiction.

8

CLOAK OF DARKNESS, by Helen MacInnes. (Fawcett, $3.95.) A counter-terrorist
agent finds himself on an assassination list: fiction.

9

JADE, by Pat Barr. (Warner, $3.95.) An English girl, kidnapped to China, makes
her way in Oriental society: fiction.

10

19 PURCHASE STREET, by Gerald A. Browne. (Berkley, $3.95.) A Mafia operation
that has become ''respectable'': fiction.

11

THE CASE OF LUCY BENDING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $3.95.) The aberrant
society of Florida's Gold Coast: fiction.

12

THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $3.95.) The beginning of
the saga continued in ''The Valley of Horses.''

13

LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Pocket, $3.95.) Life in the international glitter set:
fiction.

14

FRIDAY, by Robert A. Heinlein. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) The adventures on
Earth of an Artificial Person: science fiction.  15

TRULY TASTELESS JOKES TWO, by Blanche Knott. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Humor.

TRADE

Trade paperbacks are soft-cover books usually sold in bookstores and at an
average price higher than mass market paperbacks. This listing is based on
computer-processed reports from about 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States .

1

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $5.95.)
Black men and women in the South: fiction.

2

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $7.95.) Three generations of a wealthy
San Francisco family: fiction.

3

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson. (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.

4

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F. Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Inspirational
talks by a California professor.

5

LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $10.95.) How to add
years to your life and life to your years.

6

BLOOM COUNTY, by Berke Breathed. (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoon strips
featuring some very odd characters.

7

LINDA EVANS BEAUTY AND EXERCISE BOOK, by Linda Evans. (Simon & Schuster/Wallaby,
$9.95.) How-to by the television personality.

8

WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE?  by Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed Press,
$7.95.) Guide for job hunters and career changers.

9

ROYAL SEDUCTION, by Jennifer Blake. (Fawcett/Columbine, $5.95.) A New Orleans
belle, a European prince, international intrigue: fiction.

10

MISS MANNERS' GUIDE TO EXCRUCIATINGLY CORRECT BEHAVIOR, by Judith Martin.
(Warner, $10.95.) Etiquette prescribed by an amusingly bossy lady.

11

WRAP ME IN SPLENDOR, by Ellen Tanner Marsh. (Berkley, $5.95.) A proud heiress
and an arrogant sea captain: romance in 19th-century England, India and America.

12

THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $4.95.) Philosophical humor.

13

THIN THIGHS IN 30 DAYS, by Wendy Stehling. (Bantam, $2.95.) How-to.

14

GARFIELD EATS HIS HEART OUT, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine, $4.95.) Cartoon humor.

15

THE RAPTURE, by Hal Lindsey. (Bantam, $6.95.) Predictions about an approaching
global event based on an interpretation of the Bible.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: HOW THE U.N. BOWS TO PRESIDENTS AND PRECEDENCE

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 839 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Sept. 25


When President Reagan appears here Monday, he will be the first person to
address the full 38th General Assembly, whose working sessions will begin that
day.

That Mr. Reagan will speak first stems from tradition and reveals something of
the importance attached in the family of nations to symbol and precedence.

The United States normally does not speak first at the General Assembly, the
annual three-month meeting of the entire United Nations membership. That honor
belongs to Brazil, which has held the No. 1 position since an early General
Assembly when a Brazilian, Oswaldo Aranha, was Assembly president.

The United States, under another tradition whose origins are vague, speaks
second in the general debate. But according to United Nations rules, a head of
state has the privilege of speaking ahead of regular delegations. Theoretically,
Mr. Reagan will not be taking part in the general debate; he will simply be
addressing the Assembly. As a head of state, however, he gets to go first.

In theory, the list of speakers is drawn up on a first come first served basis.
But by common consent, no other country asks for the positions considered to
belong already to Brazil and the United States. The position of the Soviet Union
- second on the second day of the general debate - is another position fixed by
custom.

The other delegations compete. ''In the early years,'' a senior official in the
United Nations Secretariat said, ''we never had a problem with the speakers'
list, but now, with 158 members, there's really a scramble.''

The scramble can be seen on the day in June when the list opens. Representatives
of the various delegations commonly start lining up before midnight to be in
good position when the Secretariat opens for business.


The General Assembly formally opened last Monday, and much of its business since
then has involved the drawing up of an agenda.

This year's agenda is remarkably like last year's. There are 141 items for
discussion. What are called the ''hardy perennials'' by many diplomats here are
all on the list. They include such things as the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and discussions of the Middle East, the
Palestinian question, apartheid in South Africa, Cyprus and Cambodia.

Four items are new: the war between Iran and Iraq, a review of the treaty to
limit the spread of nuclear arms, the question of Antarctica, and a treaty
proposed by the Soviet Union that would prohibit the use of force in outer space
and from space against the earth.

While there are some exceptions, an item is usually included if a country wants
to discuss it.

''The practice has been that people don't fight an inscription,'' a United
Nations official said, ''but they make their reservations known.'' That was the
case with one item this year, on Antarctica. In a rare display of agreement,
both the United States and the Soviet Union opposed its inclusion, the United
States on the ground that existing treaties are adequate.


All week, the conversation in the corridors here has concerned the statement of
various United States officials, including President Reagan, that if the members
of the United Nations are dissatisfied with the United States as host country,
there will be no objection in this country to moving the organization elsewhere
- to, say, Moscow.

No scientific polls have been taken among delegates here on that subject and
there have been no votes. Some delegates are mentioning San Francisco as an
alternative city, but few seem to want the United Nations to move out of the
United States altogether.

''Most ambassadors,'' an influential Latin American delegate said, ''think that
to take the U.N. out of the U.S. would encourage American isolationism.''

Few are expressing doubts about the value of the United Nations' very existence,
though a question as to the organization's usefulness came from a surprising
source this week, Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam.

Mr. Thach will address the General Assembly next month. His major subject will
Cambodia, where the Government of President Heng Samrin, supported by Vietnam
and the Soviet Union, has not in the past been recognized by the General
Assembly. The United Nations seat belongs to the ousted Government of Prime
Minister Pol Pot, whose Government is widely believed to have massacred millions
of Cambodians during its years in power, 1975-78.

''I personally am sorry that we are in the United Nations,'' Mr. Thach said in a
meeting with reporters.  ''We pay $400,000 to the organization each year and it
cannot solve any problems.''

What seemed ironic was not Mr. Thach's criticism of the United Nations, but that
it appears to be shared by many conservative critics of the world body in this
country.  The critics often say that the United Nations is controlled by the
Communist nations and by the third world. Like Mr. Thach, they contend that the
organization has failed in its major original purpose, which was to keep the
peace among nations.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW ERA FOR HISTORIC ST. MARK'S IN BOWERY

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 813 words


Carting away the rubble from the fire took a year. There was so much of it: bits
of charred shingles and brick, embers from the balcony, shards of the nine
century-old stained-glass windows that firefighters had shattered to get at the
flames.

Then the restoration began. Youths from the neighborhood did most of the work.
With hands caked by soot, they rebuilt the roof and the balcony and the walls.
And yesterday, five years after a blaze that left a gutted shell of St. Mark's
in the Bowery, the 184-year-old Episcopal church was officially rededicated.

Parishoners saw the celebration as more than a new start for one of the city's
oldest houses of worship. They talked about the reawakening of a spirit that, a
generation ago and before, had made St. Mark's a maverick church, the home of
the counterculture.

'Where Artists Gather'

''We'd like to again make it the place where artists and activists gather,''
said the Rev. David Garcia, the church's pastor. ''The fire slowed us down. But
the restoration has given us the space to reach that goal, to continue our
activism.''

Dozens of people, most of them residents of the East Village, some of them
artists and actors, wandered around the remodeled church sanctuary before the
rededication. The church is at Second Avenue and 10th Street.

Where there had once been ashen debris, they marveled at the hardwood floors,
the renovated Greek Revival steeple and the fluted wooden columns that stretched
to the balcony. With brightly colored designs so abstract they sometimes seemed
more Picasso than pastoral, the new stained-glass windows drew long,
appreciative stares.

''It's a terrific thing to have this church back in operation,'' said Bishop
Paul Moore of the Episcopal Diocese of New York.

Auden Attended Services

Many in the crowd were nostalgic for the church's past, when Allen Ginsburg and
Robert Lowell read their poetry there, when Martha Graham danced for the parish,
when underground filmmakers would set up secondhand projectors and show films
that the police threatened to seize if shown elsewhere in the city.

''Anything that was important politically or artistically passed through here,''
said Eloise Graham-Boothe, a social worker and a member of the church for 25
years.

''I remember I used to go to the early service on Sundays, and W. H. Auden, the
poet, would walk in quietly and sit in one of the back pews on the right,'' she
said. ''I'd go and sit next to him.''

Mrs. Graham-Boothe said the fire left her ''destroyed as the church was
destroyed.''

''On the day of the fire I walked past and I saw the smoke,'' she said. ''It was
awful, just awful.''

The fire began shortly before 1:30 on the afternoon of July 27, 1978. Within a
few hours, the peaked roof crashed 50 feet to the floor of the main sanctuary.
Smoke billowed from the steeple. Most of the balcony was demolished.

Fire Traced to Work

The church bell, installed in 1836, was cracked beyond repair by the fire's
heat. Firemen scrambled among the outside burial vaults where Peter Stuyvesant
and other leaders of the city's Dutch colonial period are buried. The church is
on the site where Stuyvesant built the family chapel on his farm, or
''bouwerie'' as the Dutch called it.

The fire was traced to a rehabilitation project that had begun three years
earlier to restore the church after years of neglect. A welding iron being used
to repair copper piping set off the flames.

That restoration work was done by members of the Preservation Youth Project, a
work-training program set up by the church for the neighborhood's low-income
teen-agers. They earned small salaries while learning construction skills.

With the smell of smoke still heavy, the youths set to work again, this time to
rebuild St. Mark's.

Bill Russell, a parishioner and an actor who lives in the East Village, helped
supervise the repairs. ''After the fire, there was a tremendous feeling of loss
and depression,'' he said. ''There was some talk of abandoning the church.  That
talk didn't last long, though. Luckily the youth project was already in place.
So we reorganized and got going.''

Over the next five years, with $2.1 million donated by church members,
neighborhood groups and government agencies, St. Mark's was made over. That
first summer, services were held outdoors in the cemetery on the west side of
the church.

As Bishop Moore blessed the new wooden altar at yesterday's ceremony, Mr. Garcia
said he hoped the restoration would signal an activism at the church like that
of the 1960's - when groups protesting segregation and the Vietnam War would
meet at St. Mark's.

''I'm heartened by the peace movement that we see building up around us,'' he
said.

''I think these are signs that there is a new effort at social justice among
us,'' he added. ''I hope that St. Mark's will be a part of all of it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of St. Marks church

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY GEN. HAROLD K. JOHNSON, CHIEF OF STAFF FROM 1964 TO '68

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 474 words


Gen. Harold K. Johnson, Army Chief of Staff from 1964 until his retirement from
active duty in July 1968, died of cancer Saturday at Walter Reed Army Medical
Center in Washington. He was 71 years old and a longtime resident of Fort Myers,
Va.

President Johnson promoted General Johnson to the Army's ranking uniformed post
in 1964 over 43 more senior generals. He had a reputation as an officer who
could get along with soldiers and civilians of other nations.

Shortly after assuming command, he warned that a United States victory in South
Vietnam would require the long- term commitment of thousands of troops. He
thought an American military victory was possible, provided South Vietnam
received ''the requisite help.''

By August 1967 he said, ''We are winning the war.'' The 45,000 troops that had
just been committed to the conflict would suffice, he said, provided that the
United States continued bombing North Vietnam.

National Guard a Concern

General Johnson was also noted for working to improve the readiness of the
National Guard. In order that every unit could be ready for duty within eight
weeks of mobilization, he advocated keeping the Guard at 90 percent of full
strength, instead of 50 percent.

Harold Keith Johnson was born in Bowesmont, N.D., on Feb. 22, 1912. He worked
his way through high school as a gas station attendant and was appointed to the
United States Military Academy at West Point, N.Y., from his native state. He
graduated in 1933.

When the Japenese raided Pearl Harbor, he was a major, assigned to operations
with the 57th Infantry, the largest and best-trained unit of Philippine Scouts.
All the regiment's 118 officers were Americans; the 2,350 enlisted men were
Filipinos.

Taken prisoner in April 1942 after volunteering for several dangerous missions,
he survived the Bataan death march. Released in 1945, he returned to school,
completing the Command and General Staff School at Leavenworth in 1947 and the
Armed Forces College in 1950.

Combat in Korea

Although a staff officer for most of his career, Colonel Johnson saw combat in
Korea with the Third Battalion of the now dismounted Eighth Cavalry. He led the
unit in heavy fighting to break out of the Pusan Perimeter and watched
helplessly as the battalion, which he no longer commanded, was decimated at
Unsan.

He was promoted to chief of staff of the Central Army Group of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization's ground forces in Europe in 1958 with the rank of
brigadier general. In 1960, he was appointed head of the Command and General
Staff College at Leavenworth.

General Johnson's decorations include the Distinguished Service Cross, the
second highest combat award, and the Legion of Merit with three Oak Leaf
clusters.

He was also active with the Boy Scouts of America for many years and was a
Mason.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Harold Johnson

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1983, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

NATIONAL LAMPOON HOPEFUL ON MOVIES

BYLINE: By MICHAEL BLUMSTEIN

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1042 words


Is The National Lampoon still funny?

The company's earnings and stock price certainly have not brought smiles to
investors' faces recently. And some wonder whether the magazine has lost its
flair for humor.

''It's very predictable - the same features every month,'' said Joey Adams, an
advertising copy writer who sometimes writes for the magazine. ''Before, it was
a lot more experimental, a lot more political, a lot more willing to take risks.
Now you can open it up, and you basically know what's there.''

Investors, however, have recently taken a chance that the company will regain
its financial footing. Last month National Lampoon Inc., which publishes the
humor magazine and a fantasy magazine called Heavy Metal and is also a producer
of movies, sold 495,000 new shares. The offering, which increased the
outstanding number of shares nearly 50 percent, included warrants for the
purchase of 495,000 additional shares and warrants.

Held Mainly by Individuals

''It's a good speculative play for the small investor,'' said J. Morton Davis,
president of D. H. Blair & Company, underwriter for the stock issue. ''It
certainly doesn't have an institutional following.''

The company, originally known as 21st Century Publishing Inc., has been publicly
owned since 1972, when it offered its first 100,000 shares. Its association with
The National Lampoon magazine began earlier than that.

Under Matty Simmons, its chairman, the company joined forces with three former
editors of The Harvard Lampoon, licensing the name from what many people
consider the nation's premier college humor magazine, and began The National
Lampoon in 1970. The Harvard Lampoon gets royalties of up to 2 percent of all
sales of publications that use the Lampoon name and 2 percent of pretax profits
from nonpublishing activities that use the name.

With Richard M. Nixon in the White House and with the Vietnam War still going
on, The National Lampoon quickly caught on as a zany, irreverent, somewhat
sophomoric, shoot- from-the-hip monthly grabbag of satire. The October 1974
issue on ''pubescence'' sold a record 900,000 copies.

Ebbing of Political Frenzy

But in recent years the nation's political climate has cooled, and the
magazine's circulation has declined. Average monthly sales slipped to 439,000
last year, from 635,000 in 1979, when circulation was helped by a highly
successful movie, ''National Lampoon's Animal House.'' The company's financial
results have become erratic.

Last year revenues dropped to $12.6 million, the lowest level since 1977, and
the company had a $551,600 loss, in contrast to a 1981 profit of $591,200. The
loss in this year's first half amounted to $135,800, narrowed from a $418,800
loss a year earlier.  The company's stock has also taken wide swings. Between
1972 and 1981, the stock climbed as high as 17 3/4 (during the ''Animal House''
craze) and dropped as low as 3/4 point, according to the Standard & Poor's
Corporation. This year the stock's high was 10 3/8, with the flood of new shares
tending to depress the price.

The stock issue allowed the company to pay off virtually all its $1.2 million in
long-term debt - some of it taken on in 1975 to buy out the three Harvard
graduates for $7.5 million. In last Friday's over-the-counter trading, the
shares closed at 6 1/4.

Outlook for Movie-Making

Although management says the magazine will remain the centerpiece of the
company, its financial future seems to be centered on movies - not only in
theaters but also for network and cable television. ''Animal House,'' which
featured John Belushi and dealt with a wilder side of college fraternity life,
earned $9.5 million for the company, according to Mr. Simmons.

Now ''National Lampoon's Vacation,'' starring Chevy Chase, is well on its way to
showing a profit. In the week ended Sept. 14, it was the seventh-highest
grossing film in the country, according to Variety. The next movie will be
''National Lampoon's Joy of Sex,'' due for release in April.

''I think in the long run we will be making more money in movies, cable and TV
because there's more money in those areas,'' Mr. Simmons said.

In making a movie, the company does not have to put up much money. It lends the
Lampoon name and helps find the writers and develop the script, but the studios
finance the production.

Editorial Policy Discussed

''The movies seem to be their most exciting area,'' said Mr. Davis of D. H.
Blair. ''They're also optimistic that, as a consequence of the success of the
movies, it will help them sell the magazine and products such as T-shirts.''

The magazine's editorial course is not entirely clear. Some past and present
writers and editors of The National Lampoon have recently questioned in public
whether the magazine is taking a discernible and sensible direction, wondering
in particular whether it relies too much on sex.

The current issue, which sells for $2 at newsstands, has a cover drawing of
Brooke Shields, the actress, scantily clad and pondering what to say in a letter
home from Princeton University, where she is a freshman. Inside, the features
include a mock alumni magazine of ''Skidmark College'' and an array of nude
women.

Editors of The National Lampoon say politics no longer stirs much interest among
the people they consider the magazine's average audience - college-educated men
who are 26 years old.

A Wider Range of Material

As one solution, the Lampoon has started including a potpourri of material in
each issue, rather than focusing on a single topic. It also tried presenting
more serious prose as well as pictures of women ''on someone's assumption this
would cover both bases,'' according to Sean Kelly, a senior editor of the
magazine.

But the approach did not win more readers, he noted. ''The decline, the very
slow erosion, continued regardless,'' he said.

The top management of the company says the economic recovery will improve the
magazine's fortunes and dismisses criticism from the writers.

''I love our staff,'' said Julian L. Weber, president of the company. ''But, as
you might imagine, they're not the most responsible people in the world. We all
know exactly what we're doing: puncturing pomposity wherever we see it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 27, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article in Business Day yesterday incorrectly identified an advertising copy
writer who occasionally contributes to The National Lampoon. He is Joey Green.
An accompanying chart misstated National Lampoon's Inc.'s net income in 1981.
The company earned $591,200.


GRAPHIC: photo of Matty Simmons; graph of National Lampoon's prospectus

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN SOLUTION

BYLINE: By Elizabeth Becker; Elizabeth Becker is completing a book about postwar
Indochina.

SECTION: Section A; Page 33, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 825 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


This year, the United Nations General Assembly will discuss the question of
Cambodia for the fifth year in a row. As before, it will debate whether to seat
the deposed government of Pol Pot, which ruled from 1975 to 1979, or that of
Heng Samrin, who was installed by the Vietnamese in 1979. But it is time to look
at the whole problem again - to search for a broader solution that would end the
fighting between the Vietnamese occupiers and the Cambodian resistance forces.
In fact, there is a simple solution: Ask both sides to drop all fighters and
officials who belonged to the Khmer Rouge under Pol Pot's government.

This formula would have far-reaching implications because the Khmer Rouge remain
the key Cambodian actors on both sides of the war. When Pol Pot was overthrown
in 1979, some Khmer Rouge went into resistance with Pol Pot, while others stayed
to work for the Vietnamese in the regime in Phnom Penh. They account for perhaps
one-third of the officials in the Heng Samrin regime (Mr. Heng Samrin himself
was a division commander in Pol Pot's army.) They also make up the core of the
resistance army.

The two sides have hardened considerably in the last two years. Communist Pol
Pot has formed a coalition of sorts with the non-Communist Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, who ruled from the mid-1940's until 1970, and Son Sann, the Prince's
former Prime Minister. On the other side, the Heng Samrin Government joined a
Vietnamese-dominated alliance cemented this year at the the first Indochina
summit meeting of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. Meanwhile, this year, as before,
thousands of Cambodians and Vietnamese died in the annual dry season offensive.

There is, however, one point of general agreement - at least among the United
States, Vietnam, China, the Soviet Union and Association of South East Asian
Nations - namely, that the Khmer Rouge regime headed by Pol Pot was so murderous
it could be considered genocidal. This is where negotiations should begin - and
all steps should be taken to prevent the responsible Khmer Rouge from
threatening the people again.  All Khmer Rouge figures should be removed from
positions of political and military power on both sides, and all who held
responsible positions in Pol Pot's regime should be forbidden from governing.
The death caused by the Khmer Rouge has been well documented. Just this summer,
the Heng Samrin regime released a study that said that almost one-half of the
population - 2.7 million people - died of ''hunger and exhaustion'' or were
executed. The report was issued to indict Pol Pot and thereby give greater
legitimacy to the Heng Samrin regime. But, in fact, it indicts all responsible
Khmer Rouge in Pol Pot's government, including Mr. Heng Samrin himself.  Under
the formula to eliminate the Khmer Rouge, the resistance coalition would lose
much of its army: Pol Pot and most of his 30,000 soldiers would have to go,
leaving the resistance with only some 10,000 non-Communist soliders, hardly a
match for 150,000 Vietnamese. But Heng Samrin would also lose the core of his
Government - and the Vietnamese Army would be left protecting a more
nationalistic regime.

Most of the issues that divide the two sides would also disappear. If Pol Pot's
Khmer Rouge army were dismantled, the Vietnamese would no longer have to fear
that China might use Cambodia as a base to threaten Vietnam's security. The
Cambodian people would no longer have to fear Pol Pot's army. And the Vietnamese
would soon feel secure enough to begin withdrawing their forces.

Who would run the country? There are plenty of educated Cambodians outside the
Khmer Rouge who could take over - people now working for Heng Samrin and for the
non-Communists in the resistance. The thousands of Cambodians now overseas would
also be allowed to come home.

What about outside, interested countries? The Chinese have to agree, for only
they can take care of the Khmer Rouge, presumably by offering the top figures
asylum in their country. But China could accept this solution because it
resembles Peking's latest call for an independent, neutral Cambodia.

The Vietnamese would agree if they were promised significant economic aid - and
if Vietnam went along, the Soviet Union would, too.

In this, the United States could help by lifting the embargo against Hanoi,
normalizing relations and promising to support significant international aid.
Moreover, the Vietnamese would not have to admit wrongdoing. And they should be
assured that the formula would allow Marxists in Heng Samrin's regime -
including his prime minister and defense minister - to join a new government.
The Vietnamese could also maintain a special economic and cultural relationship
with Cambodia.

It should not be hard for the world to agree that the murderous Khmer Rouge
should no longer have a voice in Cambodia's destiny. Anyone who refuses to
discuss the idea clearly does not deplore what happened under the Pol Pot
regime.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

LEADERS IN SENATE CRITICIZING SHULTZ

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 798 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 26


Republican and Democratic leaders in Congress today sharply criticized
statements by Secretary of State George P. Shultz that the Reagan Administration
would not feel bound by proposed legislation to invoke the War Powers Resolution
and to authorize the presence of American Marines in Lebanon for 18 months.

Mr. Shultz's statements have become a major issue on Capitol Hill, where the
Senate began considering a bill today to use the War Powers Resolution for the
first time since its enactment 10 years ago. Many lawmakers said the
Administration's position showed contempt for the law and the constitutional
responsibility of Congress to share in decisions on war and peace.

''The Administration wants our stamp of approval,'' Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr.,
a Delaware Democrat, told the Senate, ''but it is unwilling to commit itself to
our laws.''

Senator Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the Republican leader, said he
disagreed with Mr. Shultz's interpretation of the resolution now before
Congress. ''It certainly does impose the full force and weight of the War Powers
Act,'' Mr. Baker said. ''I have no doubt about that.''

Effect of the Cease-Fire

At the same time, Congressional leaders said that prospects for passage of the
legislation had probably been improved by the cease-fire in Lebanon. Senator
Baker called the cease-fire ''a major first step in restoring stability to the
region.''

The Republican leader also said that two Congressional committees' endorsement
last week of keeping marines in Lebanon might have helped the negotiations that
led to the cease-fire.

Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the Democratic leader, said the
war-powers legislation probably had enough votes to pass the Senate on
Wednesday, but he told reporters that the cease-fire had not quieted criticism
of the bill by many lawmakers.

''Senators on both side of the aisle,'' he said, ''still have problems with the
resolution entirely aside from the cease-fire. We don't want to give any
President again - in light of Vietnam - a blank check on sending American forces
abroad.''

Senator Byrd was one of many lawmakers to invoke memories of the Vietnam War,
which led to passage of the War Powers Resolution over the veto of President
Nixon. Senator Biden said the debate sounded like ''a purging of souls'' as
Senators tried to draw lessons from Southeast Asia and apply them to the Middle
East.

A Parallel to Tonkin

Critics of the current resolution, which was hammered out in long sessions
between White House and Congressional negotiators, say it bears a ''disturbing
similarity'' to the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, the legislation that President
Johnson used to expand the Vietnam War. But supporters said the lesson of
Vietnam was that the United States needed to remain resolute in the face of
conflict and support the President and his policy.

Under the War Powers Resolution, the President must notify Congress when
American troops face a combat situation and he must remove them from the war
zone within 60 days, 90 days in some circumstances, unless Congress authorizes
him to keep them where they are. The measure that was debated on the Senate
floor today would declare that the War Powers Resolution is pertinent and would
authorize the marines now in Lebanon to remain another 18 months.

As interpreted by its Congressional sponsors, the bill also would limit the
number of marines to about 1,200 and would require that they stay in the Beirut
area and fight only in self-defense. But in Congressional testimony and
interviews, Secretary Shultz has said that no law can tie the hands of the
President or restrict his responsibility as Commander in Chief.

Role of the Marines

Senator Baker has been concerned enough about Mr. Shultz's testimony to ask the
Administration for further clarification of its views, and a letter from the
Secretary is expected on Capitol Hill Tuesday.

Another major issue that emerged today was whether the Administration was
expanding the mission of the Marines. Senator Paul S. Sarbanes, a Maryland
Democrat, pointed out that the original purpose of the Marine contingent was to
buttress the authority of the central Government in the Beirut area and oversee
the withdrawal of Palestinian fighters from the country.

Now, he said, the Administration seems to be implying that the troops should
remain until all foreign troops leave the country and the Lebanese Government
can exert authority over its entire territory.

Senator Biden maintained that these goals could not be achieved and added, ''I
think the mission in Beirut is changing in the same incremental way it changed
in Southeast Asia.''

He said the Administration had yet to answer a central question: ''What are we
signing on for ?''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOR SOME, THE VIETNAM WAR GOES ON

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 592 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 26


It remains one of the final reminders that the Vietnam War is not completely
over.

Once a month, in a State Department conference room, half a dozen Government
officials and one outsider meet behind a closed door to discuss whatever new
information and rumor has emerged about the fate of the 2,491 Americans missing
in Indochina. The solemn bureacratic chatter is tinged with elements of anger,
pain and heartbreak.

''There is still, simply, a great deal of emotional drain for families,'' said
Ann Mills Griffiths, executive director of the National League of Families of
American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia. ''A lot of kids want to know
what happened to their fathers. The drain continues, after all these years.''

Miss Griffiths, whose brother, Lieut. Comdr. Jim Mills, was shot down off the
coast of Vietnam on Sept. 21, 1966, is the only non-Government participant at
the monthly meetings, which are attended by representatives of the Pentagon,
White House, Defense Intelligence Agency, Joint Chiefs of Staff and other
agencies.

Although the meetings are listed as confidential, Miss Griffiths is allowed to
attend because of the ''strong interest'' of the families involved. The chairman
of the meetings is John Monjo, an Assistant Secretary of State.

Vietnamese 'Not Cooperative'

In the meantime, American and Vietnamese officials meet four times a year in
Hanoi to exchange specific information about missing Americans, mostly Air Force
and Navy pilots and crew members who were shot down over Vietnam and Laos.

''The Vietnamese have not been cooperative to any appreciable extent,'' said one
State Department official. ''They seem to dribble out remains as it suits their
purpose. There's pretty good reason to believe they may have 400 remains,
stacked up, ready to turn over at will, somewhere in Hanoi.''

Although the Vietnamese have denied this, the State Department official said
that the information was based on ''credible information.''

Why would the Vietnamese hold such remains?

''Everything they do, as far as we're concerned, is bound to reflect a political
advantage they want to gain,'' said the official. ''We assume they would want to
trade the remains for something in return.''

On the murky issue of whether surviving Americans are being held against their
will, the State Department speaks in qualified tones.

Unconfirmed Sightings

''It's conceivable,'' said one official. ''Our position is we have received a
variety of reports of live sightings. We take action to investigate these. We
have not been able to confirm that there are any Americans being held against
their will in Indochina.''

In recent years there have been unconfirmed refugee reports of sightings of
missing Americans in the jungles of Southeast Asia, as well as repeated
accusations that the Hanoi Government was withholding remains. Hanoi has said
that the dense jungles in which many Americans were lost during the war made it
impossible for them to find further remains. Since the end of the war the
Vietnamese have returned 87 bodies.

Officials believe there may be a certain number of American deserters and
others, some married to local women, who have remained behind in Ho Chi Minh
City, formerly Saigon, at their own choice.

Miss Griffiths said that the revived interest in the fate of Americans in
Indochina was the direct result of President Reagan's personal involvement in
the issue.

''It was different under Nixon, Ford and Carter,'' she said. ''That's changed
now. This President cares.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENTIAL VIEW ON WHITE HOUSE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 413 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 26


President Reagan says he has discovered, as all Presidents do, that the White
House is a wonderful place to live, but concedes, ''You get a little stir-crazy
during the week.''

The President and Mrs. Reagan talked about the personal side of the Presidency
in an interview with the talk show host Merv Griffin last Friday in the White
House living quarters. The show is to be broadcast Tuesday over 125 television
stations.

Camp David, the Presidential retreat in the nearby Catoctin Mountains of
Maryland, Mr. Reagan says, is his way of coping with the week's confinement. He
continues:

''There, you are in a normal house. You can walk out in the drive. You can take
a walk. You can go horseback riding. That is the escape valve. That's the
wonderful thing. And once in a while you get to the ranch in California. That's
sheer heaven.''

Mr. Griffin, trying a backdoor route to learning whether Mr. Reagan will run
again, asked whether he could interview the Reagans in the White House again in
two years.

''Nice try,'' said Mrs. Reagan. ''Don't call us. We'll call you.''

On substantive issues, the President told Mr. Griffin that ''I'm not about to
get us into another Vietnam'' in Lebanon; that most Americans approve of the way
he handled the Russian shooting down of a Korean airliner and that the idea he
wanted to keep in focus was ''this was not us versus the Soviet Union, this was
the Soviet Union against the world.''

The President said he thought of nuclear arms only as a deterrent because ''it
says to them, 'Look, if you ever get the idea of pushing that button, look what
can happen to you.' '' And, he said, an arms ban must be verifiable because
''you have to assume with the Soviet Union that unless you can verify that they
have done what they agreed to do, they won't do it.''

Mr. Reagan spoke of the inhibiting effect of living in the White House. Opening
a door on the balcony, he said, can start Secret Service people stirring.

Mrs. Reagan, he said, ''has made me such a happy man and has been so much of a
teammate.''

Referring to reports that she is the driving force behind him, Mr. Reagan said
of the Presidency: ''People who don't know what they're talking about have
written that this was somehow her idea. I know that she went along bravely, but
there was reluctance, too. She swallowed hard and went along and I'm grateful to
her for doing that and I think I owe her quite a debt.''

Being First Lady, said Mrs. Reagan, is a job.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Charlotte Curtis Politics, Women and Money

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words


THE invitation on Democratic National Committee stationery was for a women's
luncheon with Isabelle Leeds and Marife Hernandez as the hosts, and it mentioned
''access to the decision- making process'' and hinted at ''benefits'' accruing
to those who contributed between $1,000 and $10,000. Fourteen women, including
Faith Stewart-Gordon of the Russian Tea Room, Betty Friedan and Mrs. Joseph E.
Levine, the movie mogul's wife, were sufficiently intrigued, and they showed up
at the ''21'' Club to see what was going on.

Mrs. Leeds and Miss Hernandez, in Adolfo suits with ties, greeted guests. Over
cocktails, Hamptons regulars compared notes with those who'd contemplated
democracy in the meadows of Aspen, Colo. Lynn Cutler, Iowa's first woman county
supervisor, who lost two Congressional bids before becoming the Democratic
National Committee's vice chairman, began to put faces with names she was
hearing, mostly for the first time. And after 45 minutes or so, Miss Hernandez
urged everyone to her assigned table.

Waiters were dishing up the gumbo when Mrs. Leeds welcomed everyone to ''21,''
which she called ''a home away from home for most of you.'' She made no bones
about why they'd met. ''We always hear about the input men have in the party,''
she said.  ''The question is how they got it. Well, they get it by paying to get
into the game. What we're going to talk about is how we can get it and what the
prices are.''

Miss Hernandez reminded everyone how busy they were. ''We're going to eat, think
and talk at the same time,'' she said, introducing Mrs. Cutler. ''When we moved
into the D.N.C.,'' Mrs. Cutler began, ''there was broken furniture lying on its
sides. It looked like the fall of Saigon.'' What she meant was the chaos that
party headquarters become after it loses a Presidential election, as in 1980.
Instead of explaining, she said the Democratic National Committee was dedicated
to women running for office.

She was about to go on about women when three dressings (French, cheese and
watercress) for the chicken salad appeared. While she paused to make her choice
(watercress), Alice Heyman, who described herself as ''a fallen-away
Republican,'' wanted an assessment of labor's support for women in 1984.

''The unions will support women,'' Mrs. Cutler said, sprinkling her salad with
bacon bits. ''But we must deal with the big issues: the economy, war and
peace.''

Mrs. Friedan looked distressed. ''If women are to be taken seriously,'' she
said, ''we wouldn't be called here to give money but to give our ideas. I worry
that the Democratic leadership doesn't take us as seriously as they take labor
and minorities. If women work together, ours is a greater power than labor's.''

Mrs. Cutler gave up eating. ''But I'm here as the vice chair, not head of the
women's division,'' she said. ''We're counting on you to help with the issues
and the dollars. We want you in visible, viable places, in convention
delegations. Or you can get there through contributions.''

She said she wanted the D.N.C.'s finance and business councils to be 50 percent
women. The council literature was in folders at each place, but nobody'd gotten
to it. If they had, they'd have found that it costs $1,000 to join the women's
group, $5,000 for the finance council, and $10,000 for the business council.

Besides a chance for commitment, the councils offer a quid pro quo called
''benefits.'' Finance members are promised ''quarterly meetings of a substantive
and social nature'' where ''members are briefed by prominent Democrats,''
''issue dinners and breakfasts'' with party bigwigs, and ''the opportunity'' to
attend the national convention as ''honored guests'' with ''convention access.''
That means you're invited, allowed so many seats and invitations, and pay all
your own expenses.

Business council membership, including ''senior officials of major corporations,
associations, and allied professional groups,'' promises the same quarterly
meetings, but ''with nationally known speakers leading panels and discussion
groups.'' That $10,000 guarantees ''contact not only with other leaders of the
American business community,'' but with ''the political and intellectual leaders
of America.'' The council also provides ''the opportunity'' to attend the
convention.

None of this came up at lunch. Mrs. Cutler's pitch was for women's equal
participation and therefore equally expensive contributions to the national
committee. Guests who spoke up wanted the national committee's support on
women's issues first. ''I thought we were going to hear about an emergency
registration campaign for women,'' Mrs. Friedan said.  Robin Duke of the
Abortion Rights Action League said women should be concerned with a wide range
of national issues and not limit themselves to those specific to women. Bess
Myerson seemed to agree. Barbaralee Diamondstein, an arts writer, wondered what
the national committee had in mind for women who didn't have big money to
contribute. Mrs. Cutler, who had been standing so long that she had taken a shoe
off, assured her the party had work for them, Before leaving, Ellen Straus of
radio station WMCA thanked the hosts.

''You've done well,'' she said. ''Before doing the next step, come back and
listen to us.'' Mrs. Straus had reservations about a registration campaign. ''Do
we really want to register all women or women who are with us?'' she asked.

On that note, the lunch adjourned. Within days, Miss Hernandez, a former
protocol chief for New York, paid up, becoming the first New York woman on the
finance council. Mrs. Cutler wrote everyone, talking more quid pro quo for
contributions, including $1,000 tickets for the Democratic Gala in Washington
tomorrow and invitations to ''private dinner parties at the homes of prominent
Democrats,'' where ''meaningful'' conversations might be held.

Clearly, the Democratic National Committee was getting itself back in business
again, shoring up what may or may not be ''meaningful'' relationships with
women.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 808 words


METZGER'S DOG. By Thomas Perry. 314 pages. Scribner's. $14.95.
THE ADDRESS BOOK. By Anne Bernays. 255 pages. Little, Brown. $14.95.

IN Thomas Perry's second novel, ''Metzger's Dog,'' we take another loop on the
roller coaster of contemporary thrillers and arrive at a point at which the
Central Intelligence Agency is staffed by Keystone Kops and third-world
disasters are an occasion for comedy. Here is the cynicism of the age of the
Vietnam War come to maturity with a vengeance.

Yet surprisingly enough, Mr. Perry - whose first novel, ''The Butcher's Boy,''
was the entertaining odyssey of a hired gun out on a difficult mission - once
again pulls it off. ''Metzger's Dog,'' named, for elliptically complex reasons,
after a huge watchdog in thrall to a pet cat named Doctor Henry Metzger, is
funny enough when it wants to be to make you laugh out loud, although I can't
think of an illustration that wouldn't get lost in translation. You have to have
been there, so to speak.


The situation is this: A gang of highly sophisticated and charming Los Angeles
mercenaries - with names such as Chinese Gordon, Immelman and Kepler -
inadvertently steal a C.I.A.-sponsored plan for creating vast social
dislocations in various third-world countries. The plans are so compromising to
a network of agents-in-place that Chinese Gordon, with the help of his friend
Margaret, soon figures out that he can ransom them back to the Company for
enough money to retire for life. So he and friends set in motion an extremely
clever scheme to approach the C.I.A. and effect an exchange.

But the directorship at Langley Field won't buy. It's convinced by its own
pigheadedness that a Russian terrorist band is behind the blackmail, and
besides, why pay $5 million in ransom when you can waste $35 million defending
the Company's honor? So Chinese Gordon and his friends are forced to keep
raising the ante until they have to shut down Los Angeles for a day to make
their point without threatening any agents abroad. This is where the story takes
its greatest risks, because it's hard to believe that on a blazingly hot summer
day the gang could tie up Los Angeles traffic and shut down the city's phone
system without serious loss of life.

But Mr. Perry somehow maintains the story's moral balance. The C.I.A. is just
monstrous enough to keep us rooting for Gordon and his gang, who are, after all,
merely driven by charming greed. Whatever moral qualms remain are offset by our
lingering cynicism. Whatever the terms are, the equation works, and we come away
from ''Metzger's Dog'' having had a thoroughly enjoyable time.


Anne Bernays gets off to a powerful start in her seventh novel, ''The Address
Book,'' a psychological thriller about an editor in a Boston publishing house
who is trying to make her mind up whether to accept a tempting job offer in New
York. At the start of the novel, Alicia Baer leaves her address book in a
restaurant, and when she retrieves it, there are five new names recorded that
she has never heard of before. When she starts calling up and meeting these
people, she discovers a complicated past that she can't remember or recognize.

It's a powerful hook, but in the end, I think, Miss Bernays asks it to carry too
much weight. While we wait and wait for some light to be shed on the mystery,
the demands pile up on Alicia from a number of other sources, including a
novelist with a taste for destructive men who needs Alicia's friendship, and the
younger female members of the publisher's staff who want her to join their
union. By the time all the other problems of the story have worked themselves
out and Alicia makes her mind up about the New York job offer, we have grown
impatient with the lack of any resolution to the mystery of the address book.

In the end, there isn't a resolution to the mystery, and I for one found myself
perplexed and a little annoyed. Maybe I had missed some clue, and all along
Alicia was the butt of a prank or the victim of some mental delusion. Or perhaps
the names in her address book were an aspect of her extraordinary sensitivity
and her resulting tendency to project her imagination too far into other
people's lives. Or, most likely of all, perhaps her ''ghosts'' were meant to be
a metaphor for roads not taken - those possibilities that must haunt anyone
making a momentous decision.

The point is that Miss Bernays does not work out the game of her novel according
to any rules that I had understood her to be playing. Maybe her protagonist is
dreaming; but the narrator never tells us as much. Maybe she's really crazy; but
how are we to know (unless we seize upon the clue of her obsession with her
daughter's possible anorexia, which simply isn't substantial enough to take
seriously)? Or maybe the author had a different story in mind. If so, I missed
it completely.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Thomas Perry

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1983, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FILM FESTIVAL;
VIETNAM'S 'BOAT PEOPLE'

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 694 words


THE subject of Ann Hui's ''Boat People'' would not seem to lend itself to
ordinary movie-making tactics, since the film depicts the horrendous living
conditions to be found in the northern part of Vietnam in 1978, three years
after the war ended. However, Miss Hui brings a conventional - and for the most
part highly effective - storytelling talent to bear upon this material. She's
able to create both sensationalism and drama, even if her film never generates
an air of realism, or frees itself from coincidence and cliche.

Miss Hui's film, which is being shown tonight and tomorrow night at the New York
Film Festival, is certainly powerful. But it could hardly be confused with
either a political tract or a documentary. The central character of ''Boat
People'' is a Japanese photojournalist named Akutagawa (Lam), who is on a
lengthy return visit to Vietnam under the watchful eye of a woman guide from the
Cultural Bureau.


Initially, she escorts him to a New Economic Zone near DaNang, where he is shown
a group of happy schoolchildren. They perform a song for him: Last night I
dreamed of Chairman

Ho.  I longed to hug him, to shower kisses on him.  May Chairman Ho live 10,000
years.

The journalist is delighted, saying ''I never thought I'd come back to find so
many healthy, happy children.''

The rest of the film gives the lie to this sunny image; before it's over, the
journalist has even returned furtively to the same zone and found the same
children sleeping naked in appallingly overcrowded barracks. Miss Hui, who is
from Hong Kong, made ''Boat People'' with the cooperation of the Chinese
Government and shot it on Hainan Island. The film's view of life in Communist
Vietnam is unremittingly and, given the Chinese Government's emnity to the
Vietnamese, not unexpectedly harsh. And yet ''Boat People'' isn't as
controversial as might be expected, since its criticism is very much in the
service of its clear and simple dramatic needs.

The photojournalist eventually involves himself with a single family, and
especially with a single young girl, Cam Nuong (Season Ma). Her mother is a
prostitute; her younger brother is a scavenger who has picked up American slang
and street savvy ; her baby brother is the child of a unknown father, and Cam
Nuong's own father was killed in the war. Through Cam Nuong, the journalist
learns secret after lurid secret about street life in DaNang. After she takes
him to a ''chicken farm,'' where children search the corpses of the recently
executed, looking for valuables, the journalist can't bear to eat his steak
dinner that evening.

There's more than a little melodrama to the efforts of this visitor to save Cam
Nuong from a life of despair and ruin. However, Miss Hui manipulates her
material astutely, and rarely lets it become heavy-handed. Even a subplot about
a glamorous Madam (Cora Miao) is handled with restraint, as are another woman's
sudden suicide and some glimpses of a labor camp, where the prisoners are forced
to dismantle mine fields. Vivid and disturbing as such moments are, they feel
like shrewdly calculating fiction rather than reportage.

Dreaming About Ho

BOAT PEOPLE, directed by Ann Hui; screenplay (Chinese with English subtitles) by
K. C. Chiu; story by Tien Kor; director of photography, Chung Chi-Man; edited by
Wong Yee-Sun; music by Law Wing-Fai; produced by Chui Po- Chu; production
company, Bluebird Movie Enterprises Ltd. At Alice Tully Hall, as part of the
21st New York Film Festival; presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center in
cooperation with the Motion Picture Association of America. Running time: 106
minutes. This film is not rated.
Akutagawa, Lam
The Madame, Cora Miao
Cam Nuong, Season Ma
To Minh, Andy Lau
Ah Thanh, Paul Chung
Inoue, Wong Shau-Him
Officer Nguyen, Qi Mengshi
Comrade Le, Jia Meiying
Comrade Vu, Lin Shujin
Cam Nuong's Mother, Hao Jialin
Ah Nhac, Wu Shujun
Second Brother, Guo Junyi
Commander of Zone 16, Lin Tao
First Officer in Zone 15, Guo Hengbao
Doctor in Zone 15, Zhang Dongsheng
Second Officer in Zone 15, Cai Jianzhou
To Min's Father, Wang Huangwen
Woman Neighbor, Meng Pingmei

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lam

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 28, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NICARAGUAN SCORNS U.S. FOR 'POLICY OF TERROR'

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 477 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 27


The head of Nicaragua's governing junta denounced the United States here today
for conducting what he described as a war against his people.

The Nicaraguan leader, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, who addressed the General
Assembly, received sustained applause at the end of a speech in which he
contended that many third world countries are ''subjected to colonial and
neo-colonial rule imposed by the so-called democracies.''

Mr. Ortega said United States support for guerrillas based in Costa Rica and
Honduras and opposed to his Government was ''the policy of the big stick, the
policy of gunboats, the policy of terror.''

His remarks came on the Assembly's second day of debate. There were also
speeches by King Hassan II of Morocco, the President of Cape Verde, the Prime
Minister of Mauritius and the Foreign Ministers of China, Greece, Belgium,
Canada and Denmark.

Mr. Ortega's address was the first major statement at the current session by a
pro-Soviet country. Unlike most other speakers, Mr. Ortega did not criticize the
Soviet Union for shooting down a Korean airliner early this month and for its
continued military occupation of Afghanistan.

Instead, he supported Argentina's claims to the Falkland Islands. He said the
''tragic and dangerous conflict in Lebanon'' was ''a direct result of the
Zionist invasion and expansionist and hegemonic ambitions in the area.'' He also
contended that other nations in the Caribbean area, specifically Grenada and
Suriname, were subject to a ''policy of destabilization'' by ''overt and covert
actions promoted by the Government of the United States.''

Commenting on the speech, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the chief United States
delegate, said: ''It's the same thing he said before. It's a bunch of outrageous
charges which more than anything makes clear the unequivocal alignment of
Nicaragua and its Government with the Soviet Union.''

King Hassan of Morocco said regional efforts to solve the crisis in the Middle
East had faltered after the 20-nation Arab conference in Fez, Morocco, last
year. He said the lack of progress toward carrying out the Fez plan, which
envisioned an independent Palestinian state, was caused by the
''procrastination'' of the Arab countries and by the outbreak of war in Lebanon.

The President of Cape Verde, Aristides Maria Pereira, who is chairman of an
international committee for drought prevention in the sub-Saharan region of
Africa, said greater attention should be paid to the problems of that area.

Wu Xueqian, the Foreign Minister of China, urged the superpowers to ''cut their
nuclear weapons and means of delivery by a wide margin.'' Mr. Wu criticized
Israel for its occupation of Lebanese territory, attacked Vietnam and the Soviet
Union for their ''armed aggression'' in Cambodia and Afghanistan and called for
a withdrawal of American troops from South Korea.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 28, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

House Panel Approves Medal Honoring Vietnam Veterans

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 133 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 27


A subcommittee of the House Banking Committee today approved what it called
''the first official Government recognition of Vietnam veterans,'' a bill to
mint a national medal honoring all Americans who served in the Vietnam War.

The Subcommittee on Consumers Affairs and Coinage unanimously approved the
Vietnam Veterans National Medal, authorizing creation of the medal and
encouraging Vietnam veterans to participate in a design competition.

Representative Frank Annunzio of Illinois, chairman of the subcommittee, said
the medal would express ''the nation's thanks and gratitude for those who
served,'' and termed it ''the first official Government recognition of Vietnam
veterans.''

The Vietnam memorial that was dedicated in Washington last year was built with
private contributions.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 28, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WILFRED BURCHETT DIES IN BULGARIA

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 785 words


Wilfred Burchett, an Australian journalist who for decades functioned as a
Western spokesman for Communist regimes in Asia and Europe, died yesterday in
Sofia, Bulgaria. He was 72 years old.

Beginning in the early 1950's, Mr. Burchett developed close relationships with
the Communist leaders in Vietnam, Cambodia and China and wrote scores of
articles that portrayed their governments in a favorable light.

He also screened requests for visits to some of the countries by Western
journalists and often conducted the journalists on tours after they arrived.

Former American and allied soldiers who were prisoners of war in Korea said they
had been interrogated by Mr. Burchett and that he was one of the first to report
the now widely disbelieved accusations that the United States waged germ warfare
in Korea.

Source of Information

While Mr. Burchett was regarded by some as a Communist and a traitor, some
officials of Western governments and some Western journalists also regarded him
as a good source of information on otherwise inaccessible Communist governments.

Mr. Burchett's autobiography, ''At the Barricades, Forty Years on the Cutting
Edge of History,'' was published by Times Books two years ago.

In the introduction to the book, Harrison E. Salisbury, a former editor and
reporter for The New York Times, wrote of Mr. Burchett:

'A Warm and Decent Friend'

''Burchett's conventional journalistic companions have found him a
well-informed, useful source and a warm and decent friend. They almost always
could check out a report or a rumor with Burchett regardless of whether it
fitted Communist ideology or party propaganda. On most occasions they got a
straightforward answer, one which was trustworthy and which stood the test of
time. In written reportage, it might be a different story. Burchett was an
advocate, and he wrote in support of the cause to which he adhered at a given
moment.''

When Western newspapers published articles by Mr. Burchett they sometimes
identified him as a ''leftist newsman,'' or a journalist ''with close
connections with Communists.'' But often there was no political identification.

Suffering From Liver Ailment

Mr. Burchett's son George said his father had been suffering from a liver
ailment since last June when he fell ill on a trip to Asia.

Mr. Burchett was putting the finishing touches on a book called, ''Hiroshima
Today,'' when he collapsed at home in Sofia on Aug. 5 and was hospitalized. He
never returned home.

Mr. Burchett was born in Melbourne, Australia, Sept. 16, 1911, the son of a
Methodist lay preacher whose politics were described by a friend as ''far to the
left.''

Worked for Soviet Tourist Agency

In 1936 Mr. Burchett went to London. Through his interest in languages and
left-wing politics he met the Soviet Ambassador and was invited to open an
office of Intourist, the Soviet tourist agency. The office soon closed and he
worked for an agency set up to rescue Jews from Nazi Germany.

Before World War II started, Mr. Burchett returned to Australia to join the
Government news and information agency. Then, in 1940, he set off as a
free-lance journalist to New Caledonia, a French colony in the Pacific where
pro-Free French forces had overthrown the local pro-Vichy authorities.

Coverage of this incident helped establish him as a journalist. He went to
China, where he became a correspondent for The Daily Express of London.

He reported from throughout the Pacific for The Daily Express during the war.
After Japan's surrender, while other journalists were sticking close to General
Douglas MacArthur's occupation headquarters as it was established in Japan in
August 1945, Mr. Burchett boarded a crowded train for Hiroshima and filed the
first account of the devastation left by the atomic bomb.

Covered Mindszenty Trial

After the war, Mr. Burchett worked for The Daily Express in Europe. In 1949 he
covered the trial of Cardinal Mindszenty in Hungary. ''He handled the report of
the trial skillfully,'' wrote Denis Warner, another Australian journalist, ''By
casting doubt on the nature of Hungarian justice, he established his objectivity
in the minds of his readers and then proceeded to make the point that the
Cardinal was guilty.''

Mr. Burchett lived in North Vietnam, Cambodia and the Soviet Union in the 1950's
and 1960's. He made Paris his residence in 1968 and moved to Sofia last year.

Besides his son George, Mr. Burchett is survived by his wife, Erna, a former
member of the Communist Party of Bulgaria; another son, Peter, a daughter, Anna,
and another son, Rainer, from his first marriage.

A funeral is planned for Friday in the Central Cemetery in Sofia.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Wilfred Burchett

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 28, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE PAINFUL SHIFT TO COSTLY OIL

BYLINE: By LEONARD SILK

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2308 words


Economic Analysis

The world economy today, as it enters a second decade of coping with much more
costly energy, can expect an uneven recovery, with the United States moving
ahead more briskly than its industrial partners or the countries of the third
world. And the enormous debts that oil-importing nations have piled up
jeopardize the world's financial security.

But the world has indeed coped with the tumult of the 1970's, although it is
gripped with a residue of broad structural unemployment, and the world's leaders
have learned some important lessons.

The oil price explosion and the Arab oil embargo of 1973-74 dealt an
unprecedented and lasting shock to the world economy - a shock that,
paradoxically, brought both inflation and recession.

A worldwide economic slump ensued, in large measure a result of the efforts over
the decade to fight the oil-induced inflation. The slump, in turn, led to an oil
glut in the early 1980's, driving oil prices back down.

A Fivefold Increase

Nevertheless, the price of energy, adjusted for the inflation in other goods, is
five times higher than a decade ago, according to World Bank estimates.

From the perspective of a decade, the legacies of the global transformation to
the era of high energy costs are becoming clearer.

For one thing despite, or perhaps because of the pain, there has been a marked
improvement in the efficiency with which energy is used.

Economists at the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
calculate that from 1973 through 1982, United States industry improved its
energy efficiency by 32.8 percent. For the non-Communist industrial nations as a
group, the improvement was 31.1 percent. These gains will stretch the available
supplies of oil decades into the future.

A second legacy appears to be a lessened dependence on the oil supplied by OPEC
and priced by OPEC to reflect the dominance that the group once had in world oil
trade. This dominance has been severely eroded by the expansion of oil
production in Mexico, Alaska, the North Sea and other areas.



New View of Inflation

Another heritage seems to be a greater sensitivity of policy makers and
electorates to inflation, and a greater willingness to tolerate high
unemployment as the antidote. But George Perry of the Brookings Institution
considers this perverse, and warns that it could ''tip the world toward scares
of inflation'' and bias policies toward promoting only sluggish growth.

One of the most disturbing legacies is the enormous debt of the developing
countries, incurred to finance their import needs but now so large as to
endanger their financial stability and economic development. The danger persists
that either political shocks, such as war in the Middle East, or economic
shocks, such as a sharp run-up in interest rates, could break the world's
financial structure.

The oil-poor developing countries are particularly vulnerable. But even some
oil-producing countries, such as Mexico and Nigeria, are in financial trouble,
as their imports have climbed above what they could pay for with oil exports.

Burdens of Big Debts

The troubles of these nations could quickly become the economic and financial
agonies of the developed countries, doubtless with political upheavals as well.

Prof. Gustav F. Papanek of Boston University says of the plight facing the
poorest countries: ''For the rest of this century and into the early part of the
next, only a small fraction of the labor force can find productive jobs in
skilled export activities with low energy requirements.''

Another change is that throughout the world, industries that use less energy are
displacing those that use more: Electronic communications substitute for
transportation, services industries displace manufacturing.

Effects Roll Through Industry

In forcing individuals, businesses and governments to economize on energy, the
price explosion has led to what Mark Shepherd Jr., chairman of Texas Instruments
Inc., calls ''a permanent downsizing'' of traditional industries.

The idling of factories that make steel and autos has in turn increased
unemployment, bred trade protectionism and, in a pernicious cycle, cut deeply
into demand for third world exports of such commodities as copper, jute, tin and
iron ore.

In this rapidly changing industrial and post-industrial world, says Walter
Salant, senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, the premium will be on ''the
more aggressive'' people and businesses, those that are most nimble at adapting
to change.

The energy upheaval has also resulted in increased United States dominance of
the world financial stage. The United States is the biggest recipient of capital
flowing from oil-surplus countries and the biggest lender to the oil-poor
debtors. High interest rates, due partly to the enormous rise in world debt,
partly to the monetary policies adopted to check inflation, has strengthened the
dollar but has weakened the United States trade position.

The 'Watershed' of 1973

As James R. Schlesinger, a former Secretary of Energy and now a senior adviser
to Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb Inc., put it at an energy conference in Stockholm
last summer:

''From the standpoint of an economic historian, looking back to this era from
the 21st century, the year 1973 will stand out as marking a watershed.'' The oil
price explosion ''separated the postwar era of unparalleled economic expansion''
from the current one of ''unexpected economic difficulties.''

Thus the world has undergone a great transformation from the era of cheap energy
that, in the quarter-century following World War II, helped to foster the most
rapid industrialization and economic growth in history. This transformation has
been painful.

Putting Earlier Inflation Into a Rapid Climb

But the price explosion was not what economists call exogenous, coming from
outside the system. Global inflation had been set off in the mid-1960's by
United States involvement in Vietnam. The heavy outflow of dollars to the rest
of the world and the chronic deficit in the United States undermined the world
monetary system, which was founded on the strength of the dollar.

Simultaneous boom in all the major countries during the early 1970's had
nourished inflation. In early 1973, the Bretton Woods monetary system of fixed
exchange rates collapsed; the dollar floated downward and the Japanese and West
European currencies floated upward.

The disappearance of exchange- rate discipline gave another twist to the
inflationary spiral: During the first 10 months of 1973, before the war in the
Middle East, world commodity prices doubled.

But the oil price explosion set off by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries seriously worsened the situation.

Directly, it increased the costs of living by making it more expensive to drive
cars, heat homes, pay electric bills and buy a host of goods and services in
which hydrocarbons are used. It made it more costly for businesses to operate
their plants, and for governments to do everything from lighting offices to
delivering the mail.

Indirectly, the price increases induced a wage-price spiral as workers tried to
keep up or catch up with rising living costs and employers sought to pass on
their rising wage costs to consumers.

The Bankers Confront The Shift in Wealth

But the basic problems remained the higher relative cost of energy and the shift
of wealth and income to the oil-producing countries.

In 1973, OPEC had a surplus of $13 billion in its current-account balance. By
1980, that figure had reached $115 billion. In that year, the corresponding
deficits of the industrial countries reached $75 billion and the deficits of the
non-oil developing countries were $58 billion.

To keep the global economy afloat, a vast recycling operation took place. The
oil-producing countries invested their surplus funds in New York, London,
Frankfurt and other financial centers. This produced a capital surplus in the
industrial countries, which lent the petrodollars to the oil-importing
countries.

The total outstanding debt of non- oil developing countries, which had been $130
billion in 1973, climbed to $664 billion in 1983. With some oil exporters and
Eastern European nations piling on debts as well, the total debt of endangered
countries swelled to more than $800 billion.

The danger of a financial collapse gave private bankers and public officials
nightmares. Debt-service charges mounted, and the high interest rates choked off
investment and economic expansion.

Planning a Response In Consumer Nations

Thus, how to break this cycle of inflation and debt came to dominate policy
planning in the industrial nations.

Whether because of a conservative shift on the part of electorate, a shift that
resulted in large part from inflation itself, or because government officials
and economists had lost confidence in the efficacy of wage and price controls,
Western governments chose to combat inflation only by general fiscal and
monetary controls.

But the use of such general restraints caused growth to slow further and
unemployment to rise.

Even in the absence of deliberate government actions, climbing oil prices have
brought about an implicit change in fiscal and monetary policies, as economists
at the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development note in their
current Economic Outlook.

Effects of Changes in Policy

For instance, a given rate of growth in the money supply, sufficient to finance
real economic growth with a low rate of inflation, was no longer adequate.
Hence, real growth fell and, as markets for both goods and labor worsened, so
did inflation.

Similarly, a given fiscal policy, whose degree of stimulus could be measured by
the size of the deficit that would be incurred at high employment, would be less
stimulative at high rates of inflation.

Thus many governments, including the United States, oscillated between policies
to check inflation and, when these created recession, policies to combat
unemployment.

Real economic growth in the industrial world, which had averaged 6.1 percent in
1973, fell to seven-tenths of 1 percent in 1974 and became negative in 1975. But
that slump brought down inflation from 12.5 percent in 1974 to below 8 percent
in 1976, where it stayed until the second oil shock of 1979-80.

In propelling inflation back up to the double-digit level, the second shock
brought forth tougher monetary policies from the United States and most other
major industrial countries. Interest rates shot up again, and the industrial
countries as a group sank to their lowest levels of output - and highest levels
of unemployment - since the Depression.

The United States and the other industrial countries are once again recovering
from the harsh monetary measures taken to combat inflation. Consumption is
reviving but investment, hobbled by excess capacity and by still relatively high
interest rates, continues to lag.

Lingering Puzzles

The decade has also left economists with some puzzles.

One of the most difficult factors to explain has been the slow rate of growth in
productivity. In the United States, output per man-hour rose more than 3.3
percent a year from 1947 through 1973. But this slumped to 1 percent for 1973-78
and four-tenths of 1 percent for 1978-81.

Among the possible reasons for this are the substitution of relatively cheaper
labor for machinery that uses energy, or the stunting of real investment, or the
overall recession.

One of the biggest mysteries is the decline in the efficiency of capital
investment itself in the last decade. In a study, ''World Economic Development
and the Energy Factor,'' being published this autumn by the Royal Swedish
Academy of Sciences and ASEA, the Swedish electrical company, Mr. Shepherd, of
Texas Instruments, emphasizes that extra dollars of investment have been
producing less additional real G.N.P.

In the 1950's, he notes, an increase in the investment/G.N.P. ratio of one
percentage point increased the G.N.P. growth rate by half a point; by the early
1980's, this had fallen to a dismal 0.17 percentage point.

The adjustment process begun in 1973 is by no means over, and adjustment via
recession and high unemployment has been both painful and risky. But the
industrial world has considered the alternative - which is collapse - and has
decisively rejected it.

Next: Supply and demand outlook. The Effects of Oil Price Changes The Arab oil
embargo of 1973-74 and the doubling and redoubling of oil prices over the last
decade have brought profound changes in world economic conditions, political
relations and individual life styles. A series of 10 articles is examining these
effects.  WHAT HAPPENED: The first article, on Sunday, chronicled the political
and economic impact of the oil shortage and high prices - and the swing back to
surplus and price moderation.  LIFE STYLE: The second, on Monday, illustrated
how consumer attitudes have changed - from subcompact cars to family gardens to
wood-burning furnaces.  THE ECONOMY: This third article analyzes what expensive
energy has meant and will mean for global inflation, recession and third world
debt.  SUPPLY AND DEMAND: A pair of articles will describe new patterns in where
fuels come from and how they are used.  THE PRODUCERS: The sixth and seventh
articles will examine the enormous growth in the financial power of the oil
industry and the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, and what they
are doing with their money.  FROM THE MIDDLE EAST TO TEXAS: Two articles will
contrast the effects of the oil upheaval on the Middle East and on Houston,
America's premier oil city.  OIL AND POWER: The final article will assess the
new political and military strategies as they reflect the energy tumult that
marked the decade.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graphs of changing oil prices

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 29, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE, 270 TO 161, VOTES TO INVOKE WAR POWERS ACT

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1583 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 28


By a decisive margin, the House of Representatives approved legislation today
that would invoke the War Powers Act in Lebanon and authorize the deployment of
American Marines in the Beirut area for an additional 18 months.

The resolution, which had the backing of House leaders of both parties and
President Reagan, passed by a vote of 270 to 161. The voting pattern was a
''crisscrossed, mixed bag,'' in the words of Representative Robert H. Michel of
Illinois, the Republican leader, as 134 Democrats and 27 Republicans defied
their leaders to oppose the measure.

The vote marked the first time that a House of Congress has decided to invoke
the War Powers Act, which was approved 10 years ago as a Congressional move to
place constraints upon the war-making powers of a President. The Senate will
vote on the resolution Thursday and is expected to approve it.

President Thanks House President Reagan issued a short statement thanking the
House ''for its strong bipartisan vote'' and hailing the continuing ''process of
restoring the bipartisan spirit.''

He said ''a spirit of cooperation between members of the two parties and between
the executive and the legislative branches of our Government has been the
traditional hallmark of a successful foreign policy.''

In New York, Western diplomats and United Nations officials said President Hafez
al-Assad of Syria had informed the United Nations that he opposes the use of
United Nations observers to police the cease-fire in Lebanon. (Page A9.)

While the House vote demonstrated the determination of the lawmakers to play an
active role in decisions of war, the debate also reflected uneasiness on Capitol
Hill over the course of events in the Middle East and the fear that the Marines
could be drawn into a deepening conflict.

'A Very Unhappy Choice'

Representative Robert S. Walker, a Pennsylvania Republican, warned his
colleagues, ''We are, in a quasi-way, declaring war with this resolution.'' And
Representative Toby Roth, a Wisconsin Republican, said: ''If you keep the
Marines there for 18 months, there will be many Americans killed there. That's a
cinch.''

But these doubts were overcome by a widespread belief that Congress had no real
choice but to back the resolution. The somber and frustrated mood in the House
was summed up today by Representative Barber B. Conable Jr., an upstate New York
Republican, when he said: ''It's a choice between sure disaster if we pull out
and possible disaster if we stay. It's a very unhappy choice.'' Moreover, the
lawmakers responded to appeals to back the President in a time of crisis.
Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., who helped work out the compromise, took the
floor as the final speaker today and told his colleagues that he backed the
resolution because ''it was time to act in a bipartisan manner.''

'Not an Easy Decision'

The Democratic leader noted that he had quarreled often with Mr. Reagan in
recent years and that he recognized today's vote was ''not an easy decision.''
But he added, ''In this case I hope we will act to help the President to bring
peace and stability to Lebanon, a country worthy of our attention, assistance
and best efforts.''

President Reagan, in his statement, said the vote ''would not have been possible
without the strong leadership of Speaker O'Neill, Majority Leader Wright,
Minority Leader Michel, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee
Zablocki, and ranking Minority Leader Broomfield.''

The War Powers Act provides that when American troops face a combat situation,
the President must notify Congress and then withdraw the troops within 60 days -
or 90 days under special circumstances - unless Congress authorizes them to
remain in the war zone.

President Reagan refused to make the notification called for in the law when
American Marines started coming under hostile fire in Lebanon last month and
four were killed. In the compromise worked out between the White House and
Congressional leaders, Congress itself asserts the War Powers Act to be in
effect. But by promising to sign the measure, Mr. Reagan becomes the first
President to acknowledge the validity of the War Powers legislation.  Probably
the most disputed provision in the compromise is the 18-month limit on the
Marine mission. Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., the majority leader of the Senate,
told Speaker O'Neill today that an amendment to limit the period to one year
might have a chance in the Senate. Senator Baker asked the Speaker if he could
live with a one-year limit, but according to Mr. O'Neill the proposal was
rejected because Democratic leaders were already committed to 18 months and any
change now would make them ''look bad''.

Senate Debates Amendment

The Senate spent most of today debating an amendment offered by several dozen
Democrats that would require President Reagan to report to Congress under the
War Powers Act and explain in considerable detail what mission he envisions for
the Marines in Lebanon.

Senator Sam Nunn, a Georgia Democrat, argued that too much attention had focused
on the time limit for the Marines and not enough on the purpose of their
mission. In a briefing for reporters, Mr. Nunn said that the lesson of Vietnam
should be, ''let's know what we're doing'' before we commit troops to battle.

''I've asked the question of the Administration over and over again: What is
success for the Marines?'' Mr. Nunn said. ''I've yet to get an answer.''

The Senate ended its third day of debate today without voting on the amendment
and will return to it tomorrow.

In the House, the lawmakers voted down a similar amendment offered by
Representatives Clarence D. Long, Democrat of Maryland, and David R. Obey,
Democrat of Wisconsin. Their proposal, in effect, would have postponed a
definite decision on the Marines' future for 60 more days and required a report
from the President in the meantime.

'Short Leash' Is Urged

Mr. Long maintained that his amendment would retain Congressional supervision of
developments in Lebanon and keep the President and the Marine contingent on a
''short leash.'' Representative Matthew F. McHugh, Democrat of upstate New York,
said that given the fast-paced nature of events in Lebanon, ''We have no idea
what's going to happen in 18 months.''

But opponents retorted that a ''short leash'' for the President would encourage
opponents of the Lebanese Government and dishearten United States allies in the
region. ''Congress ought not to be sending signals of doubt and indecision to
Syrian and the Soviets,'' said Representative Lee H. Hamilton, Democrat of
Indiana. The amendment was defeated, 272 to 158.

The House debate today focused on two major issues: the proper role of Congress
in influencing foreign policy and the American role in Lebanon.

Supporters of the resolution argued that it struck a ''delicate balance''
between the rights of the executive and legislative branches. In addition, they
said, the compromise ''established an important precedent,'' in the words of
Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, by validating the War
Powers Act. Representative Clement J. Zablocki, Democrat of Wisconsin, said that
if Congress did not pass a bill implementing the act, it would become a ''dead
letter''.

For and Against Compromise

This argument was attacked by some members, who maintained that the resolution
gave far too much power to the President. Representative James L. Oberstar,
Democrat of Minnesota, said it amounted to ''an abdication of our constitutional
responsibility to declare war, at least for 18 months.''

Others assailed the compromise as too restrictive on the President and said it
should contain no limitations on his role. Representative Gerald B. H. Solomon,
Republican of New York, told his colleagues, ''We are setting ourselves up as
535 Secretaries of State, and that's the last thing we need for this country.''

On the question of the long-term role of the United States in Lebanon and the
rest of the Middle East, supporters of the resolution said it was important for
Washington to flex its power and, as Representative Howard L. Berman, Democrat
of California, put it, ''demonstrate that Vietnam did not paralyze the United
States for all time in attempts to promote peace.''

Representative Mark D. Siljander, Republiocan of Michigan, echoed a common theme
when he said that ''we cannot turn tail and run'' in the Middle East where the
Soviet Union would like to disrupt Western access to key oil supplies.

Leadership 'Imposes Burdens'

Representative Henry J. Hyde, Republican of Illinois, said, ''Like it or not, we
have leadership of the free world, and sometimes that imposes onerous burdens.''
Mr. Hyde acknowledged that many lawmakers compared Lebanon to Vietnam, but said
that the parallel was not apt.

''There is no petroleum in Vietnam,'' he said.

Opponents of the resolution replied that American goals in the Middle East could
not be served by the Marine deployment. ''If there is any spot on the globe that
doesn't lend itself to a military solution, it's Lebanon,'' said Representative
Thomas J. Downey, Democrat of New York,

Representative John McCain, an Arizona Republican and a former prisoner of war
in Vietnam, argued that his military training led him to oppose the continued
deployment of troops in Lebanon.

''I do not see any obtainable objectives in Lebanon,'' he said, ''and the longer
we stay there, the harder it will be to leave.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Clement Zablocki and William Broomfield (page A10)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 29, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. ROLE IN BIERUT REJECTED BY SYRIA

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 824 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 28


President Hafez al-Assad of Syria has informed the United Nations that he
opposes the use of United Nations observers to police the cease-fire in Lebanon,
Western diplomats and United Nations officials said today.

They said Mr. Assad's strong refusal raises questions about Syrian intentions.

''You have to assume the worst, given the history of cease-fires in Lebanon,'' a
United Nations official said, ''and I have to assume in this case that Assad is
looking to cause trouble. He probably looks upon the cease-fire as a pause in
trying to overthrow Gemayel.''

He was referring to President Amin Gemayel of Lebanon.

Western Forces Denounced

As if to underscore the Syrian position, Foreign Minister Abdel Halim Khaddam
flew to New York Tuesday night and addressed the General Assembly this morning.
He made only a fleeting reference to the cease-fire and devoted much of his
speech to a bitter denunciation of the United States and the other Western
countries with military forces in Lebanon.

Mr. Khaddam said this Western force must withdraw from Lebanon because it poses
''a grave threat to security and peace in the region.''

He said the American, British, French and Italian contingents ''remind us of the
colonialist expeditions through previous stages of the history of the region.''

He also said the United States was trying to bring about the ''Vietnamization''
process in Lebanon. ''We caution the American administration that the military
involvement in the Middle East will not be less worse for it than its
involvement in Vietnam,'' he said.

Mr. Khaddam's speech drew a rather mild response from American officials. John
Hughes, the State Department's spokesman, said the Western forces were in
Lebanon at the request of the Lebanese Government, and he denied any of the
aggressive aims suggested by Mr. Khaddam.

Secretary of State George P. Shultz is scheduled to meet with Mr. Khaddam on
Friday in an effort to persuade the Syrians to take a more forthcoming approach
toward the use of United Nations observers in Lebanon. Mr. Shultz met this
morning with Foreign Minister Giulio Andreotti of Italy and they agreed again
that they had to try to change the Syrian point of view.

Syrian approval is viewed as crucial by the Lebanese, United Nations and Western
diplomats because the Syrians are said to have virtual operational control over
the Druse and Shiite militias that were engaged in sharp conflict with the
Lebanese Army before the latest cease-fire took effect.

A Lebanese diplomat said today that his Government had ''evidence'' of the
Syrian control through intercepted radio messages from Damascus to the militias.


Lebanese Official Gloomy

Foreign Minister Elie Salem of Lebanon, who also flew to New York on Tuesday,
conferred with officials here today about the possibility of having a United
Nations observer group police the cease-fire. According to one diplomat, Mr.
Salem was gloomy about prospects for the cease-fire because of his concern that
the Syrians might be interested only in bringing about the downfall of the
Gemayel Government.

The agreement that was announced Monday morning calls for ''neutral observers''
to police the cease-fire. United Nations specialists said today that it was
difficult to put together such a force quickly and that only the United Nations
has a trained and objective group of experts already in the Middle East. The
world body has had truce observers in the region since the 1948 Arab-Israeli
conflict.

One official said that if the Syrians continued to reject a United Nations
observer force, they are probably not ''too keen'' on having an objective report
on how the cease-fire is being maintained.

In his meeting with a United Nations envoy on Monday, Mr. Assad reportedly said
that United Nations observers were not appropriate because their presence
suggested a country was being partitioned and he opposed the continued Israeli
presence in Lebanon.

The Syrians have refused to speak publicly about their own military occupation
of the eastern part of Lebanon.

Security Council Approval

United Nations officials said a team of truce observers would be ready to go
into action in Lebanon as soon as all sides agreed. But they said the approval
of the Security Council would be required first.

The Soviet Union was asked informally for its view about a month ago, an
official said, and gave a negative response. It has been asked again, but a new
reply has not been received.

The official Soviet reaction to the cease-fire has been mixed. Tass, the press
agency, said the Soviet Union had ''positively assessed'' the cease-fire in
Lebanon and concluded that the country's problems could be settled only if
Israel withdrew all its troops and the United States halted its ''crude
interference'' in Lebanon's affairs.

The Soviet statement said nothing about the withdrawal of Syrian and Palestinian
forces from Lebanon.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 29, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TEXT OF SOVIET STATEMENT ON RELATIONS WITH U.S.

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2356 words


Following is a statement yesterday by Yuri V. Andropov, the Soviet leader, as
translated and distributed by Tass, the Soviet press agency:

The Soviet leadership deems it necessary to make known to the Soviet people, to
other peoples and all those who are responsible for shaping the policy of states
its assessment of the course pursued in international affairs by the present
United States Administration.

Briefly, it is a militarist course that poses a grave threat to peace. Its
essence is to try and assure for the United States a dominant position in the
world without reckoning with the interests of other states and peoples.

Precisely these aims are served by the unprecedented buildup of the United
States' military potential, large-scale programs of manufacturing weapons of all
types - nuclear, chemical and conventional. Now it plans to spread the
unrestricted arms race into outer space as well.

Military Presence Expanded

The American military presence is being expanded under pretexts of all sorts for
thousands of kilometers from United States territory. Strongholds are being set
up for direct armed interference in the affairs of other states and for use of
American weapons against any country that rejects Washington's dictate. As a
result, tensions have grown worldwide - in Europe, Asia, Africa, the Middle East
and Central America.

Other NATO countries are becoming increasingly involved in the implementation of
these dangerous plans of Washington. Moreover, efforts are made to revive
Japanese militarism and attach it to the bloc's military-political machine. In
doing so, attempts are being made to have people forget the lessons of history.

People judge the policy of a government mainly by its actions. That is why, when
the President of the United States in his grandiloquent speech from the rostrum
of the United Nations talks about commitment to the cause of peace and to the
self-determination and sovereignty of peoples, these are mere declarations that
can convince no one.

Illusions Are Dispelled

Even if someone had illusions as to the possible evolution for the better in the
policy of the American Administration, the latest developments have dispelled
them. For the sake of its imperial ambitions, it is going so far that one begins
to doubt whether it has any brakes preventing it from crossing the mark before
which any sober-minded person would stop.

The sophisticated provocation masterminded by the United States special services
with the use of a South Korean plane is an example of extreme adventurism in
politics. We have elucidated the factual aspect of the action in a thorough and
authentic way. The guilt of its organizers, no matter how hard they may dodge
and what false versions they may put forward, has been proved.

The Soviet leadership expressed regret over the loss of human life resulting
from that unprecedented, criminal subversion. It is on the conscience of those
who would like to assume the right not to reckon with the sovereignty of states
and the inviolability of borders, who masterminded and carried out the
provocation, who literally on the following day hastily pushed through Congress
colossal military spending and are now rubbing their hands with pleasure.

Humanism' of Statesmen

Thus, the ''humanism'' of statesmen who are seeking to lay the blame for the
deaths of people whot were aboard the plane on others is turning into new heaps
of weapons of mass destruction - from MX missiles to nerve gas containers.

In their striving to justify in some way their dangerous, inhuman policies, the
same people pile heaps of slander on the Soviet Union, on socialism as a social
system, with the tone being set by the President of the United States himself.
One must say bluntly - it is an unattractive sight when, with a view to smearing
the Soviet people, leaders of such a country as the United States resort to what
almost amounts to obscenities alternating with hypocritical preaching about
morals and humanism.

The world knows well the worth of such moralizing. In Vietnam, morality, as
understood by the leaders in Washington, was brought home with napalm and toxic
agents; in Lebanon, it is being hammered in by salvos of naval guns; in El
Salvador, this morality is being imposed by genocide. And the list of crimes can
be continued. We thus have grounds for mentioning the moral aspects of United
States policy, both by recalling history and by talking about the present time.

Elementary Norms of Decency

Now the people in Washington, along with morality, have also been breaching
elementary norms of decency, showing disregard not only for statesmen and
states, but for the United Nations. A question arises: Can the international
organization, called upon to maintain peace and security, remain in the country
where an outrageous militarist psychosis is being imposed and the good name of
the organization is being insulted?

Under the cover of anti-Communism, contenders to the role of rulers of the
destinies of the world are seeking to impose their orders whenever they do not
encounter a rebuff.

The concepts that are being used to justify such actions would not attract
attention if not for the fact that they are being preached by leaders of a major
power, and not merely preached, but put to use.

The transference of ideological conflict to the sphere of relations among states
has never benefited the one who resorted to it in external affairs. This is
simply absurd and inadmissible at present, in this nuclear age. The
transformation of the battle of ideas into military confrontation would be
costly for all of mankind.

Scare of Soviet Military Threat

But those who are blinded by anti- Communism are probably not able to ponder
this. Starting with a scare about the ''Soviet military threat,'' they have now
proclaimed a ''crusade'' against socialism as a social system. Attempts are
being made to convince people that there is no room for socialism in the world.
They do not specify that they mean the world according to Washington.

Wishes and possibilities are far from being the same thing. No one will ever be
able to reverse the course of history. The U.S.S.R. and other socialist
countries will live and develop according to their laws, the laws of the most
advanced social system.

The Soviet state has successfully overcome many trials, including crucial ones,
during the six and a half decades of its existence. Those who encroached on the
integrity of our state, its independence and our system found themselves on the
garbage heap of history. It is high time that everyone to whom this applies
understood that we shall be able to insure the security of our country, the
security of our friends and allies under any circumstances.

The Soviet People Assured

The Soviet people can rest assured that our country's defense capability is
being maintained at such a level that it would not be advisable for anyone to
stage a trial of strength.

On our part, we do not seek a trial of strength. The very thought of it is alien
to us. We do not separate or, all the more, counterpose the well-being of our
people, the security of the Soviet state, to the well-being and security of
other peoples, other countries. One should not look at the world in the nuclear
age through the narrow prism of selfish egoistic interests. Responsible
statesmen have only one choice - to do everything possible to prevent a nuclear
catastrophe. Any other position is short-sighted; more so, it is suicidal.

The Soviet leadership is not hesitant about what line to follow in international
affairs in the acute present situation. Our course is aimed at preserving and
strengthening peace, lessening tension, curbing the arms race and expanding and
deepening cooperation among states.  This is the invariable will of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union, of all Soviet people. These are also, we
are convinced, the aspirations of all peoples.

Feeling of Indignation

Of course, malicious attacks on the Soviet Union produce a natural feeling of
indignation. But our nerves are strong, and we do not base our policy on
emotions. It rests on common sense, realism, profound responsibility for the
destinies of peace.

We proceed from the premise that mankind is not doomed to destruction. The arms
race can and must be terminated. Mankind deserves a better fate than living in a
conflict-torn world, suffocating under the burden of deadly weapons.

By advancing far-reaching proposals on limitations and reductions of nuclear
armaments, both strategic and medium-range in Europe, we have shown our concern
not only for the security of the U.S.S.R. and the other states of the socialist
community, but also for the security of all other countries.

As to the policy of the United States, its growing militarization is manifest,
among other things, in its unwillingness to conduct serious talks of any kind,
to come to agreement on questions of curbing the arms race.

Geneva Talks Two Years Old

The Soviet-American talks on the burning problem - the reduction of nuclear
armaments in Europe - have been going on for two years now. The position of the
Soviet side is directed at finding mutually acceptable solutions on a fair, just
basis, solutions that do not infringe on anyone's legitimate interests. At the
same time, these two years made it clear that our partners in the talks at
Geneva are not at all there to reach an accord. Their task is different - to
play for time and then start the deployment in Western Europe of Pershing 2
ballistic missiles and long-range cruise missiles. They do not even try to
conceal this.

All they do is prattle about some sort of flexibility of the United States at
the Geneva talks. Another aspect of this ''flexibility''has now materialized,
and the deception contained in it has become clear this time as well. Leaving
aside details, the essence of the so-called new move by the United States, which
is being advertised as munificent, again comes down to a proposal to have the
two sides agree on the number of Soviet medium- range missiles to be dismantled
and on the number of American missiles to be deployed in Europe in addition to
the nuclear potential already possessed by NATO.

Balance Would Be Upset

In brief, we are being asked to talk about helping the NATO bloc upset to its
advantage the balance of medium-range nuclear systems in the European zone, and
this move is being presented brazenly as something new.

The stationing of the American nuclear missiles in Europe is seen from
Washington's control room as simple in the extreme and maximally advantageous
for the United States - advantageous at the expense of Europe. The United
States' European allies are regarded as hostages. This is a frank, but cynical
policy. What is not entirely clear is whether this thought occurs to those
European political figures who, disregarding the interests of their peoples and
the interests of peace, help implement the ambitious militarist plans of the
United States Administration?

There should be no room here for reticence. If, contrary to the will of most of
the people in the Western European countries, American nuclear missiles appear
on the European continent, it will be a step against peace of a fundamental
nature on the part of the United States leaders and the leaders of the other
NATO countries who act as one with them.

Issue of Strategic Weapons

We do not see either that the American side is willing to handle in earnest the
problem of limiting and reducing strategic armaments. People in the American
capital are now busy starting the production of ever new systems of such arms as
well. They are to be followed shortly by types of weapons that may radically
alter the notions of strategic stability and the very possibility of effective
limitation and reduction of nuclear arms.

No one should mistake the Soviet Union's good will and desire to come to
agreement for a sign of weakness. The Soviet Union will be able to make an
appropriate response to any attempt to disrupt the existing military- strategic
balance, and its words and deeds will not be at variance.

However, we are basically opposed to competition in the production and
stockpiling of arms of mass annihilation. This is not our path. It cannot lead
to a solution of any problem facing mankind, i.e. economic development of
states, conservation of the environment, creation of at least elementary
conditions for life, nourishment, health and education.

Resources Wasted on Arms Race

The release of the resources now being recklessly wasted on the arms race and
the unfolding of the inexhaustible creative potentialities of man are the things
that might unite people; this is what should determine the policy of states on
the threshold of the 20th and 21st centuries. To implement this, the forces of
militarism would have to be checked and the world through concerted effort kept
from sliding into an abyss.

All peoples, every inhabitant of our planet, should realize the imminent danger
- realize it in order to pool efforts in the struggle for their survival.

Mankind has not yet lost, nor can it ever lose its reason. This is manifested
with great vigor by the scope of the antimissile, antiwar movement being mounted
in Europe and on other continents, a movement that draws people of different
social, political and religious affiliations.

All those who are raising their voices against the senseless arms race and in
defense of peace can be sure that the policy of the Soviet Union and of the
other socialist countries is directed at precisely these aims. The U.S.S.R.
wishes to live in peace with all countries, including the United States. It does
not nurture aggressive plans, does not impose the arms race on anyone, does not
impose its social system on anyone.

Our aspirations and strivings are being implemented in concrete proposals
directed at effecting a decisive turn for the better in the world situation. The
Soviet Union will continue to do everything possible to uphold peace on earth.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 29, 1983, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STATE PRISONS AROUND NATION SCRAMBLE FOR RELIEF AS OVERCROWDING MOUNTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1401 words


Bowing to relentless pressure, South Carolina, where prisons were operating at
about 115 percent of their official capacity, released the first of 330
prisoners Sept. 16 before their sentences expired.

In California, the State Legislature addressed the problem of overcrowding by
passing a bill allocating $172 million for prison construction and remodeling
before it adjourned Sept. 18.

For the sixth time in two years, overcrowding is forcing Michigan to release
inmates early. Four hundred to 600 prisoners are to be freed in the next three
months as an emergency measure.

These actions reflect the scrambling taking place across the country as
officials seek to ease the crowding that has plagued state prisons over recent
years.

In some states, the overcrowding problems began in the mid-1970's; other states
first felt the crunch after stricter penal codes were passed recently.

Recent Developments

Interviews with prison officials in 44 states disclosed these developments:


- Prisoners have been sleeping on floors in at least 18 states, including
Illinois, where floor space in the chapel and gymnasium was used earlier this
month.Prison systems in at least 40 states have exceeded the official housing
capacities for inmates and most of the rest are struggling to remain below their
limits.

- Prisoners have filed a number of suits against states protesting conditions
caused by overcrowding, such as the loss of recreation space, and 31 states are
operating under court orders, with judges saying that lack of sufficient space
violates the constitutional prohibitions against cruel and unusual punishment.


- In at least six states, committees of prison officials, civil liberties groups
and legislators have been formed to explore alternatives to incarceration, and
at least 21 states use early release, work release, community service or other
programs to limit their prison populations.


- Correction officials around the country have been seeking more funds for
prisons from legislators and trying to persuade communities to accept new
prisons. Almost every state is in the midst of some prison construction, with
space for nearly 40,000 more inmates in the works.

The Search for More Space

''We've been cramming beds into almost every space we can find,'' said Kenneth
Robinson, press secretary for the Pennsylvania Bureau of Corrections, ''and
we're still looking for creative ways to find more space.''

The nation's state prison population had a record increase to 382,717 in 1982
from 340,639 in 1981, and it climbed to 394,141 over the first three months of
1983.

''We expected rises in the population,'' said James Stabile, spokesman for the
New Jersey Department of Corrections, ''but not to the degree in which they've
come.''

Only a few incidents have been linked to recent overcrowding, the most notable
being the Aug. 29 riot at the Conner Correctional Center in Hominy, Okla., in
which one inmate died, 34 were injured and damage was estimated at $3.5 million.


Outlook on Problem

Many correction officials expect the problems to continue until the end of the
decade, when the post-World War II baby boom population will be beyond the
18-to-35 age bracket, generally considered the high risk sector of the
population, and also when most of the current prison construction will be
completed.

Prison officials attribute the rising inmate population to a variety of reasons,
with the postwar baby boom and stricter laws cited most often. Every state
except Utah and Vermont has some mandatory minimum sentencing law.

''There are a lot of theories on what caused the overcrowding,'' said Donald
Allen, commissioner of corrections in Maine, ''and I have a tendency to believe
every one of them.''

Metropolitan Situation

In New York State, where a prison population of about 30,500 exceeds the
official capacity by about 4,500, $500,000 has been allocated to provide 8,600
new bed spaces by 1986. New Jersey, with 11,100 inmates is operating at 115
percent of its capacity, with about 950 state prisoners squeezed into the county
jail system. Connecticut, almost 1,200 inmates above its capacity of 4,000, has
plans for over 1,700 new bed spaces.

Two weeks ago the Michigan Corrections Commission asked Gov. James J. Blanchard
to declare an emergency, which is mandated under the state's Prison Overcrowding
Emergency Powers Act whenever the state prison population exceeds 13,047 for
more than 30 straight days. The population has been over that level since Aug.
18, reaching 13,134 Sept. 16. Inmates whose terms specify a minimum and maximum
number of years have 90 days subtracted from their sentences .

''Releasing people early is not what we prefer, and it's not what the general
public prefers, but with our population increasing faster than our construction,
it's what we have to do,'' said Hugh Clements, deputy commissioner of the South
Carolina Department of Corrections.

Several other states, including Iowa, South Carolina and Arkansas, have laws
based on the Michigan model, and many others are considering emergency powers
acts or other alternatives to incarceration.

''We're doing everything we can to fit these square pegs into these round
holes,'' said W. L. Kautzky, the director of prisons in the State of Washington.


Aggressive Parole System

Georgia is setting up an aggressive parole system, almost doubling its staff and
budget. This year Florida enacted a law increasing the amount of days subtracted
from a sentence for good behavior. The law took effect retroactively, and 1,800
inmates were released over the first three months. North Carolina modified its
parole eligibility in March, and since then, 850 prisoners who would have been
still locked up were released.

''We have to look into alternatives,'' said Kevin Bruce, assistant commissioner
of the Adult Corrections Agency in Alaska. ''We don't want to get into the habit
of just building more bed space every year.''

But almost every state is in the midst of construction. Some officials fear the
buildings that are so desperately needed today will become little-used burdens
in the future when the overcrowding is expected to subside. In addition to the
thousands of permanent prison cells being planned, many states have turned to
temporary housing.

Double- and triple-celling are common. In Arizona, 250 huts, like those used by
the American military in the Vietnam War, are in use. Texas had to pitch tents.
Hawaii built wooden bungalows. New York took a different approach to providing
temporary cells. It obtained bond money through the Urban Development
Corporation, and the prison space being built with those funds is to be
converted to housing for the elderly and other uses once the crowding is over.

Construction Difficulties

But construction efforts are not always successful. Last November, Rhode Island
voters passed seven referendums and rejected one, which would have provided $8.5
million for prison construction. In Montana, work began in the mid-70's on a
540-bed prison and when it was completed in 1978, the inmate population already
exceeded the capacity.

A modification of the Massachusetts court system in 1978 cut the backlog of
cases by 50 percent in 1982, to 500, but it also added another burden to the
prisons, which house about 4,600 inmates with a capacity of 3,350. Pennsylvania,
which is operating at about 20 percent over its capacity, has yet to feel the
full effects of two laws passed in 1982. The first set a five-year mandatory
minimum sentence for violent crimes and the second established a set of tough
sentencing guidelines. In Pennsylvania, Gov. Dick Thornburgh announced a $13
million plan last Thursday to upgrade the state's prisons.

In Illinois, where local prosecuters said violent offenders released through an
early release program were committing new crimes, the State Supreme Court ruled
the department of corrections had misinterpreted the law that established the
program and limited the use of early release.

Sometimes even the good news is tainted. Virginia accommodated its increasing
prison population from the mid-70's to the present, but the state's projections
show that in 1990 there will be 15,000 inmates and only 12,000 to 13,700 beds.

''That's why the apparent surplus of beds here is mythic,'' said Wayne Farar,
assistant director of corrections.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graph of population of state prisons in U.S.; photo of Gov. Dick
Thornburgh

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS AGREES TO ALLOW MARINES TO STAY IN BEIRUT

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1170 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 29


Congress completed action tonight on landmark legislation that would authorize
the continued deployment of American marines in Lebanon for 18 more months.

The legislation also declares that the War Powers Act now applies to the
conflict in Lebanon. This is the first time the act has been invoked since
Congress adopted it 10 years ago, over the veto of President Nixon, as a way of
imposing Congressional restraints on the war-making powers of the Presidency.

This afternoon the Republican-led Senate adopted the resolution in a 54-to- 46
vote that was largely along party lines. In less than 10 minutes the
Democratic-controlled House of Representatives, which approved a nearly
identical version on Wednesday, agreed to accept the Senate bill by a vote of
253 to 156.

Reagan Has Agreed to Sign

The resolution now goes to the White House. President Reagan has agreed to sign
it but has expressed doubts about the right of Congress to use the War Powers
Act to limit his freedom as Commander in Chief.

The resolution was hailed by the Senate majority leader, Howard H. Baker Jr.,
Republican of Tennessee. Before the vote, he declared, ''It would be tragic if
we did not accept this beginning of a first step toward the reinvigoration of a
bipartisan foreign policy.''

His statement was disputed by an angry group of Democrats, who said the measure
was committing the marines to a ''mission impossible'' that ignored the lessons
of Vietnam and threatened to draw the United States into an endless conflict in
the Middle East.

Rebuttal by Kennedy

''Some say that Lebanon is not Vietnam,'' said Senator Edward M. Kennedy,
Democrat of Massachusetts. ''But I reply, we must not give the President the
power to turn it into one.''

The key to the outcome was a reluctant but widespread belief on Capitol Hill
that Congress had to give President Reagan some ''breathing room,'' as Senator
Dan Quayle, Republican of Indiana, put it, while the President pursues
diplomatic efforts to stabilize the fragile cease-fire in Lebanon. But Mr.
Quayle, who withheld his vote until the last second, warned Mr. Reagan not to
interpret today's vote as a long-term mandate for his Middle East policies.

''I would hope he knows that there's not a true, genuine support for his
policies in Congress,'' Mr. Quayle said. ''And if he doesn't have the support in
Congress, what about the country ?''

'Great Victory,' Reagan Says

Soon after the Senate vote, the White House issued a statement by President
Reagan that said:

''In the last two days, Republican and Democratic members of the Congress have
won a great victory for an honorable and all important American tradition - a
responsible, bipartisan foreign policy.

''Today's vote in the Senate, authorizing, as the House did yesterday, the
continued presence of the U.S. peacekeeping force in Lebanon, sends a strong
signal to the world: America stands united, we speak with one voice, and we
fulfill our responsibilities as a trustee of freedom, peace and self-
determination.

''By working together to promote peace in Lebanon, to give Lebanon back to the
Lebanese people and to help them rebuild their democracy, we are strengthening
the forces for peace throughout the Middle East. This is neither a Republican
nor a Democratic goal. Peace in that troubled region is the cause that unites us
all.''

3 Republicans Vote No

The 54-to-46 Senate vote came in a body where Republicans have a 55-to-45
majority. Three Republicans opposed the measure: Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon,
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut and William V. Roth Jr. of Delaware. Two
Democrats - Edward Zorinsky of Nebraska and George J. Mitchell of Maine -
supported it.

The House and Senate actions brought to an end a Constitutional struggle
betweeen the White House and Congress over the War Powers Act.

The act says the President must notify Congress when American troops face
hostilities and then bring them home within 90 days unless Congress permits them
to remain in the combat zone. The marines began taking hostile fire in Lebanon
on Aug. 29, but Mr. Reagan has refused to put the War Powers Act into effect.
Intensive negotiations between White House aides and Congressional leaders
produced a compromise bill that provided each side with a significant gain.

Mr. Reagan won Congressional approval for the troops to remain for 18 more
months, well past the next Presidential election. Congressional negotiators say
they have established the precedent that Presidents must live within the War
Powers Act.

Active Role for O'Neill

In the House, the Speaker, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Democrat of Massachusetts,
took an active role in drafting the compromise and carried 130 Democrats with
him in support of the bill. In the Senate, however, Robert C. Byrd of West
Virginia, the minority leader, refused to participate in the negotiations, and
Senate Democrats lined up behind their leader in opposition.

Today Senator Baker praised the virtues of a compromise he said had ''bridged
the gap of disagreement'' between the executive and legislative branches, when
both were intent on exerting their prerogatives. Senator Byrd retorted sharply:
''Politics is the art of compromise. War is not.''

There has been little enthusiasm for the resolution in the Senate all week, as
lawmakers debated the historic legislation and wrestled with a decision that
could eventually cost the lives of some of their constituents. Many supporters
of the legislation said they would prefer that the marines come home, but saw no
way of pulling them out, now that they are on station.

'Best We Could Hope For'

A typical comment came from Senator Jake Garn, Republican of Utah, who said:
''Looking at the reality of the situation, if we set a shorter period of time
and demand a pullout of our troops, all chance of stability will be lost. This
could guarantee that more marines would be killed and probably guarantee a
permanent division and partition of Lebanon. Under these circumstances, I think
the War Powers Resolution is the best we could hope for at this time.''

Senator Charles McC. Mathias Jr., Republican of Maryland, argued that because
the legislation asserts the relevance of the War Powers Act to Lebanon, Congress
was able to impose significant limits on the size and scope of the Marine
mission. As a result, he added, the President would not be able to pursue the
kind of increased involvement that occurred in the early days of the Vietnam
War.

''We now have the assurance,'' he said, ''that we will not have a kind of
mushroom growth of forces or a radical alteration of roles in Lebanon.''

Criticism by Democrats

Democrats took the position that President Reagan had flouted the War Powers Act
by refusing to notify Congress formally of the hostilities in Lebanon.

''The President,'' said Senator Dale Bumpers, Democrat of Arkansas, ''has done
everything in the world to thwart, not only the intent of the law, but the
letter of the law.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Senators Percy and Baker

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN POLICY COSTING REAGAN PUBLIC SUPPORT

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1392 words


For the first time since President Reagan took office, significantly more
Americans now disapprove of his conduct of foreign policy than approve of it,
according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.

The survey, taken more than three weeks after the Soviet Union shot down a
Korean Air Lines passenger jet and as the strife in Lebanon remained unresolved,
indicated that 47 percent of the American public disapproves, for diverse and
sometimes conflicting reasons, of how Mr. Reagan is handling foreign policy
matters. Thirty-eight percent approves.

By contrast, 36 percent disapproved of his conduct of foreign policy in a survey
in June and 40 percent in a poll earlier this month.

At the same time, Americans expressed distress with the situation in Lebanon.
Although the public believes by more than 2 to 1 that the outcome of the
struggle there is important to the defense interests of the United States, there
is fear of deepening American military involvement in the region and an
overwhelming belief that a cease- fire that took effect on Monday will not end
the hostilities.

Also by 2 to 1, the public is fearful that the involvement in Lebanon resembles
the way the nation became involved in Vietnam.

Respondents also expressed strong support for the United Nations and its
presence in New York City.

There was, however, increased endorsement of the President's response to the
downing of the jetliner. Compared to another poll earlier this month, the
percentage of those who believed Mr. Reagan's actions were ''about right''
increased from 34 to 41 and the percentage of those believing he was ''not tough
enough'' dropped from 56 to 46.  Despite some Administration hostility toward
the United Nations in recent weeks, the poll showed that 89 percent believe that
this country should remain in the United Nations. Moreover, 65 percent believe
that the world body itself should remain in the United States; 20 percent said
the United Nations should move.

Americans' fears about Lebanon are an important factor in the erosion of support
for Mr. Reagan's foreign policy. There have been slight margins of disapproval
in earlier Times/CBS News Polls, but the latest telephone poll of 1,587 people,
conducted from Saturday to Wednesday evening, represents the first time that the
rate of disapproval exceeded approval by more than the survey's potential
sampling error of 3 percent.

Meanwhile, the public's overall approval rating for the way Mr. Reagan is
handling his job as President remained steady at 46 percent, with 41 percent
indicating disapproval.

The main factors affecting the growth in Mr. Reagan's foreign-policy disapproval
rate appear to be the situation in Lebanon and the response to the Russians'
downing of the South Korean jet with 269 people aboard.

Ranking the Issues

More than three weeks after the plane was destroyed by Soviet missiles, and as
Lebanon has dominated the news, Americans still consider the jetliner incident
the most important foreign-policy question facing the nation. Lebanon is second,
with Central America third.

Sixty-three percent of the sample could identify Lebanon as the place in the
Middle East where American forces are involved in a military conflict. That far
exceeded the 38 percent in a poll in November 1979 who could identify the
countries involved in the talks on limiting strategic weapons and the 25 percent
in a poll in June who could identify which side the United States backed in El
Salvador.

According to the latest poll, a majority do not approve of supporting the
Lebanese Government in its armed struggle against its opponents. By nearly 3 to
1, Americans believe that the United States should withdraw from Lebanon rather
than increase the Marine contingent there if it becomes apparent that the
Marines cannot achieve their goals without substantial reinforcement.

But many do not believe that the United States Government has tried hard enough
to explain its reasons for sending the Marines and Navy to Lebanon.

Those who feel an adequate explanation has been offered are more likely to
support American policy there. Among the 23 percent who do think that the
rationale for sending forces to Lebanon has been explained adequately, 56
percent approve of the Marines' original mission, that of peacekeeping, as
opposed to 32 percent of those who do not believe an adequate explanation has
been offered. Nearly half of those satisfied with the explanation approve of
Americans actually helping the Lebanese Government in its fighting.

Parallels to Central America

The overall pattern of opinion identified in the poll parallels in large measure
earlier polls on American involvement in Central America. Those polls indicated
that the public had doubts about American commitment in the region, did not
favor further escalation, feared that the situation might come to resemble
Vietnam and did not feel that the Administration position had been explained
well. As in all foreign-policy questions, the level of information held by the
public was modest.

The poll was taken as the debate continued in Washington over whether the War
Powers Act. the decade-old law that Congress passed to restrain the war-making
power of the President, was relevant to the situation in Lebanon. The
respondents, by a margin of 3 to 1, believe that President Reagan should have to
get the approval of Congress to keep the Marines in Lebanon.

The cease-fire began in Lebanon three days into the five-day poll, but only 3
percent of those questioned said they had both heard of the cease-fire and
believed that it would succeed. Conversely, 52 percent had heard of the
cease-fire but believed that it would not last.

According to the poll, the cease-fire had little immediate impact on the
public's view of the situation in Lebanon. But President Reagan's overall
approval rate did rise from 43 percent before the cease-fire to 48 percent
after.

Differences of Opinion

Opinion on the situation in Lebanon is by no means uniform. Substantially more
Republicans than Democrats approve of the original mission of the Marines, and
many more Democrats than Republicans believe that the Marine contingent should
be withdrawn from Lebanon rather than increased if it becomes apparent that it
cannot achieve its goals without reinforcement.

Moreover, while both Republicans and Democrats see parallels between Lebanon and
the early years of the Vietnam War, substantially more Democrats believe
American involvement in Lebanon is much like the way the United States became
involved in Vietnam.

Men and women view the situation in Lebanon differently. Men, by a slight
margin, approve of sending American troops to Lebanon but women, by a 59- to-28
margin, do not.

Similarly, men, by a margin of 60 percent to 34 percent, do not believe that
President Reagan is likely to get the United States involved in a war. Women, by
52 percent to 40 percent, are afraid that Mr. Reagan will involve the United
States in a war.

How the Poll Was Conducted

The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews
conducted Sept. 24-28 with 1,587 adults around the United States, excluding
Alaska and Hawaii.

The telephone exchanges called were selected by a computer from a list of all
exchanges in the country. The exchanges were chosen to insure that each region
of the country was represented in proportion to its population. For each
exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by random digits, thus permitting
access to both listed and unlisted residential numbers.

The results have been weighted to take account of household size and to adjust
for variations in the sample relating to region, race, sex, age and education.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results based on the entire sample will
differ by no more than 3 percentage points in either direction from what would
have been obtained by interviewing all adult Americans. The error for smaller
subgroups is larger. For example, the margin of sampling error for men is plus
or minus 4 percentage points.

In addition, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of public
opinion may have introduced other sources of error into the poll.

Edward R. Tufte, professor of political science and statistics at Yale
University, assisted The Times with this survey.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph of public support for Pres. Reagan's foreign policy (Page A8)

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Times Columnist Is Awarded Fellowship by Colby College

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 99 words

DATELINE: WATERVILLE, Me., Sept. 29


Anthony Lewis, columnist for The New York Times, has been named the 31st Elijah
Parish Lovejoy Fellow by Colby College.

Mr. Lewis, who is to be honored in a convocation on campus Nov. 11, was named
for distinctive writing and unusual courage in stating his views on a variety of
subjects, including the Supreme Court, the Vietnam War, South Africa and the
Middle East.

Elijah Parish Lovejoy, a native of Albion, Me., was graduated from Colby in
1826. He was killed in Illinois in 1837 while he was defending his newspaper's
press against a mob angered by his campaign against slavery.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Quotations of the Day

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 54 words


''It would be tragic if we did not accept this beginning of a first step toward
the reinvigoration of a bipartisan foreign policy.'' - Senator Howard H. Baker
Jr.

''Some say that Lebanon is not Vietnam. But I reply, we must not give the
President the power to turn it into one.'' - Senator Edward M. Kennedy. (A1:6.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 543 words

DATELINE: ITHACA, N.Y., Sept. 29


George McGovern, who won only Massachusetts and the District of Columbia in the
1972 Presidential election, said tonight that he was ''a wiser and more
thoughtful man'' as he started another quest for the Democratic Presidential
nomination.

''I've tried to take advantage of a somewhat less-hectic life,'' the 61-year-
old former South Dakota Senator said. ''It's important for a public figure not
to get exhausted and not to be too frenetic.''

He was making his first New York speech of his two-week-old Presidential
campaign at the Cornell University campus here - one of many schools across the
nation that provided a major impetus to his 1972 campaign.

''I'm not going to run this time as if Western civilization will collapse if I'm
not the President,'' he said with a broad smile.

Radical Image a 'Misperception'

Mr. McGovern spoke to a friendly standing-room-only audience of about 600 at the
last of seven Presidential forums sponsored by the New York State Democratic
Committee.

Mr. McGovern said his image as ''too radical'' in 1972 was ''a vast
misperception.'' He said his positions against the Vietnam War and arms buildups
were ''intelligent and conservative.''

He argued that his willingness now to have the United States declare a
unilateral freeze on development of nuclear weapons was not radical, although he
acknowledged that it differed from the positions of the six other Democratic
Presidential candidates, who favor mutual, verifiable nuclear-arms freezes.

''Don't waste money on something you don't need,'' Mr. McGovern said.

The candidate also departed from his Democratic competitors in calling for an
immediate withdrawal of United States Marines from Lebanon, saying the United
States has ''no obligation'' to be involved in that war-torn country.

War Powers Act Warning

He said the invocation by Congress of the War Powers Act that would allow the
Marines to stay in Lebanon for up to 18 more months was reminiscent of the 1964
Gulf of Tonkin Resolution that paved the way for greater United States
involvement in Vietnam.

In contrast to several of his competitors, who have argued that Israel deserves
special treatment as an ally, Mr. McGovern said the United States should be ''an
honest and even-handed broker in the Middle East'' and should acknowledge that
Israel is ''capable of grevious mistakes,'' such as the invasion of Lebanon.

Mr. McGovern also called for the end of United States military involvement in
Central America; a nationwide public-works program, including rebuilding of the
railroads; Government-guaranteed home mortgages for first-home buyers; low-cost
Federal loans for higher education and job training, and Federal takeover of
welfare and Medicaid costs from the states and localities.

The former Senator won the New York Presidential primary in 1972. But he starts
off this campaign with some of the major New York figures who supported him then
- such as Attorney General Robert Abrams, former Mayor Robert F. Wagner of New
York and Richard Wade of the City University Graduate Center, who ran Mr.
McGovern's New York campaign - either supporting other candidates or remaining
uncommitted.

Professor Wade said he was supporting Senator Alan Cranston of California.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 304 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1983, Friday, Late City Final Edition

332 DANCE ON A RECORD 3,389TH 'CHORUS LINE'



BYLINE:
By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 2168 words


From the four continents to which they had dispersed, from stardom and from
unemployment lines, 332 dancers who once appeared in ''A Chorus Line'' gathered
last night to share in the performance that made the musical the longest-running
show in the history of Broadway.

With its 3,389th performance, ''A Chorus Line'' surpassed the mark held by
''Grease.'' Many theater experts say that ''A Chorus Line,'' more than setting a
performance record, altered the direction of American musical theater with its
use of a realistic book and ensemble rather than individual acting.

The show's moment of triumph arrived at 12:45 A.M., when all 332 dancers flooded
the stage of the Shubert Theater for the finale, a song called ''One.'' A
sustained standing ovation resounded, as it had at the conclusion of a black-tie
dress rehearsal in the afternoon.

All of the applause came amid 15 hours of show-business spectacle, in which the
entire Booth Theater served as an enormous dressing room and Shubert Alley was
covered with a tent and transformed into an outdoor restaurant. There, after the
milestone performance, the cast and crew and about 2,500 guests from theatrical,
political and business circles celebrated with a supper that included 30 pounds
of caviar and 35 cases of champagne.  It was almost 10 years to the day, said
Michael Bennett, since he began developing the musical by interviewing itinerant
dancers over coffee and sandwiches from a delicatessen.

Mr. Bennett, the play's director, built ''A Chorus Line'' from the dancers'
stories of auditioning for largely anonymous roles, of their need for work and
their love of dance. The play had a book by James Kirkwood and Nicholas Dante,
music by Marvin Hamlisch, lyrics by Edward Kleban and choreography by Mr.
Bennett and Bob Avian.

Joseph Papp's New York Shakespeare Festival opened ''A Chorus Line'' at The
Public Theater on April 16, 1975, to enthusiastic reviews. It began previews on
Broadway on July 25, 1975, and officially opened on Oct. 25, 1975, after a delay
due to a musicians' strike. A total of five companies ultimately toured the
United States, Canada and Europe. The American hostages in Iran chose to see ''A
Chorus Line'' together after the New York parade celebrating their release in
1981.

''A Chorus Line'' won a Pulitzer Prize, the New York Drama Critics Circle Award
and nine Tony Awards, including those for best play, best direction, best
choreography and the performances by Donna McKechnie, Sammy Williams and Kelly
Bishop. In its eight years on Broadway, ''A Chorus Line'' has played to more
than 14 million people and grossed more than $75 million.

Yesterday's events were part celebration, part reunion and part theatrical
history.

'For Our Time'

''It's highly inventive, but it's still in the tradition of the belle epoque of
musicals,'' said Alan Jay Lerner, the lyricist and author of ''My Fair Lady,''
''Gigi'' and ''Camelot.'' ''Someone once said that every generation has a great
show business story. '42d Streeet' was. 'Singin' in the Rain' was. And 'A Chorus
Line' was for our time.''

''It loosened the bonds of what our conception of a musical was,'' said Maury
Yeston, the composer and lyricist of ''Nine'' and an associate professor of
music at Yale University. ''It altered our concept of the relationship of a book
to a score. Instead of having to tell a story in a specific way - like, say,
'Gypsy,' where every event led to another event - it created a form in which a
series of monologues linked by an idea could support an evening of theater.''

Mr. Yeston said that ''A Chorus Line'' opened the way for movies such as
''Fame'' and ''All That Jazz'' and plays such as ''Working,'' ''Runaways'' and
Mr. Bennett's ''Dreamgirls.'' Mr. Papp said ''A Chorus Line'' had fulfilled his
aspiration of linking the artistic theater to the commercial theater.

Not everyone, however, applauded the innovations. ''What little I can say in
favor of 'A Chorus Line' is that it isn't 'Grease,' '' said Gerald Bordman, a
theater historian and the author of several books, including, ''American Musical
Theater'' and ''American Musical Comedy.'' ''How many songs can you really
remember from it? How does it compare to the music of a Gershwin or a Jule Styne
show? But in the last 20 years you don't get shows like that so often. So if you
get a good show - and 'A Chorus Line' is a good show - everyone goes to see
it.''

Acquaintances Renewed

The reunion of former cast members and the preparations for last night's special
performance and supper amounted to a show business story of their own, consuming
three months of planning and $450,000.

The names of all 332 performers moved across the electronic message board of the
Shubert Theater. Backstage at the Shubert, inside the Booth and at parties and
dinners all week, the casts and crews of eight years of ''Chorus Line'' renewed
aquaintances.

When the curtain rose on the record-breaking performance at 10:30 P.M., the 200
actors watching it on television monitors in the Booth erupted into applause,
cheers and tears. Two of the performers were pregnant and one danced on a knee
still healing from recent surgery.

''In this business, you never feel like you belong,'' said Stanley Kramer of New
York, who portrayed Greg in the international company. ''You go from one show to
another, from one home to another. Today, for once, we all feel like we
belong.''

''It's the best class reunion you ever could go to,'' said Tony Teague, who
played Zach for three years in a national touring company. ''It's hard to put
this into words. There's an aura about it, when you have 332 voices singing
'What I Did for Love.' ''

Miss McKechnie returned from California to play Cassie, the role for which she
won a Tony Award in 1976. ''This completes an important circle,'' she said.
''Now I can come back to the show and say, 'Good bye. Good luck. I love you.
Thanks again.' ''

Actors and stage managers, wardrobe mistresses and carpenters introduced new
wives, passed around baby pictures and shared stories.

Cherylene Lee, who was Connie in the national and international companies,
recalled losing four pairs of contact lenses doing double-pirouettes.

Delyse Lively told of seeing ''A Chorus Line'' for the first time as a
14-year-old on a school trip to New York from her hometown of Pearland, Tex. She
remembered being especially taken with Val, who sings graphically about the
anatomical improvements she has purchased to advance her stage career.

''I said I'd love to be Val, but I couldn't say those words,'' Miss Lively said.
''Then I got the part at an audition three days after I graduated from high
school. It wasn't easy because I'd never cussed before. But I learned how and
now I do it all the time.''

Alyce Gilbert, the wardrobe mistress since ''A Chorus Line'' opened, had much to
remember. ''At one time or another,'' she said, ''I've met them all. They came
to me for their shoes. My God, they were pretty. Still are, as a matter of fact.
It's wonderful to see them. I remember the first time I saw Cassie dance. I
remember the time Michael Stuart missed the quick change for the finale because
he couldn't untie his shoes. There are people here who had all different times
in the show. Who loved it. Who were chewed out. Who were fired. But here they
all are.''

Generations of Cassies

Behind the reunion and the record- breaking performance whirled a maelstrom of
activity.

Mr. Bennett revised the choreography and blocking for the special show. The plot
was not changed, but some scenes were given over to a specific company and one
was performed in several foreign languages. Miss McKechnie delivered Cassie's
soliloquy to Zach and began her solo dance, but then was joined by seven other
Cassies. Paul's monologue about being a homosexual was shared by nine other
Pauls. Three Vals sang the tart ''Dance: Ten; Looks: Three.''

''When I saw the amount of people, I said, 'How are we going to do this?' ''
said Leigh Webster of Los Angeles, who played Judy Turner in the national
company. ''It takes 15 minutes just to line everyone up and get from the
wardrobe room into the theater.''

''When we were rehearsing the finale,'' Mr. Teague said, ''It was, 'Oh no, where
do I go now?' We'd forgotten. But it doesn't take that long to remember. They
gave us scripts the first day and pretty soon everyone was throwing the scripts
away. We had the chemistry back - in spades.''

Wendy Mansfield, the stage manager, spent three weeks trying to find 457 members
of current and past casts. ''We'd call four and five phone numbers for some,''
she said. ''One would be disconnected. Or the person didn't live there anymore.
I was ready to pay someone out of my salary to help me out.''

Miss Mansfield found cast members in London, Tokyo, Australia and West Germany,
and in corners of the United States from Ashland, Ore., to Jupiter, Fla. Some
were starring in their own television shows, she said, and others were waiting
tables or looking for jobs.

Miss McKechnie now directs the cheerleaders of the Los Angeles Raiders, and Miss
Bishop recently performed on a road tour of ''Pal Joey.'' When Miss Mansfield
could not find an actor, a gossip network often did. ''I had a girl call me two
days ago from Paris and ask, 'Why wasn't I invited?' '' she said.

Of the 125 performers who did not come to New York, Miss Mansfield said, some
could not be located, others were pregnant or caring for infants, a few could
not leave their jobs and one or two seemed to bear grudges. Miss Mansfield said
the managers of such Broadway shows as ''La Cage aux Folles,'' ''42d Street,''
''My One and Only'' and ''On Your Toes'' gave the night off to alumni of ''A
Chorus Line''

Inside the Booth Theater, Miss Grace and a dozen aides spent the week at five
sewing machines and eight ironing boards, preparing to outfit the 332
performers.

Miss Gilbert's costume census revealed, among other items, 150 pairs of mesh
hose, 453 pairs of shoes, 12 shirts with a ''tkts'' logo, and 315 top hats -
with more in production. As yesterday afternoon's curtain approached, one aide
was dyeing the leotards for all the Cassies the same shade of red.

Meanwhile, Tom Pritchard of Madderlake, a flower shop and special events
company, supervised the metamophosis of Shubert Alley. He said that he had begun
planning for the evening's party in July and that in the last three days his
company had installed 1,200 square feet of carpeting, the tent, two 30-foot bars
and eight searchlights.



Outlasts Hundreds of Plays

''It's the glamour,'' he said. ''It's the big event. It's almost 'Day of the
Locust.' ''

The 2,500 guests for the party included Helen Hayes, Meryl Streep, Kevin Kline,
Mikhail Baryshnikov, Francis Ford Coppola, Joshua Logan, the producer and Martin
E. Segal, the chairman of Lincoln Center. ''It's always fascinating,'' Garson
Kanin, the writer and director, said during the party, ''to be part of
history.''

Since ''A Chorus Line'' opened, 467 other plays have come to Broadway, and most
have gone. In the past year alone, ''A Chorus Line'' passed ''Tobbaco
Road''(3,182 performances) ''Life with Father,'' (3,224) ''Fiddler on the Roof''
(3,242) and ''Grease'' (3,388) on its way to the record performance.

Theater experts and historians say most of those plays succeeded in part because
of their relation to their time. ''Tobacco Road,'' running in the Depression,
and ''Life With Father,'' staged during the Depression and World War II, were
escapist vehicles, not unlike television situation comedies, said Mr. Bordman.
He added that ''Fiddler on the Roof'' and ''Grease'' simultaneously generated
and profited from cultural events: a surge in Jewish pride in the 1960's for
''Fiddler'' and the revival of 1950's rock-and-roll for ''Grease.''

But those who created ''A Chorus Line'' say they cannot link its success to a
specific message, except a desire by the public for increasingly realistic
musicals. It was a musical with jokes but not a musical comedy. Profanity and
homosexuality figured in the plot and boy did not meet girl.

''If you had called me any day in the year we worked on the play,'' said Mr.
Kleban, the lyricist, ''and said, 'What do you think?' I'd have said 'No way.'
We were playing by very different rules from the norm. I remember talking to a
friend the week before it opened. I'd been paid $500 for my whole year's work,
and I said I didn't know if that would be it or if I'd make a fortune.''

''There had been so many plays about backstage life,'' said Mr. Kirkwood, the
co-author, ''and it made it seem so frivolous. God knows it has its glamour, but
the rest is something akin to the Vietnam War. We thought we'd expose the
reality. It was the whole idea of competition and baring it openly on stage.
When you see the 16 boys and girls competing for 8 jobs, there's something so
naked about it.  You want everyone to get the job, but you know only half can.
And that's the pull.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Marianne Black and daughter Kaitlyn (Page C5); photo of Joseph
Papp and Meryl Streep (Page C5); photo of cast of 'A Chorus Line' (Page C5);
photo of dancers from 'A Chorus Line'

                   Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
