
                               1 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 1, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Independent Psychiatrists To Examine Garwood

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 139 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Sept. 30


A military judge said today that an independently appointed board of
psychiatrists would examine Pfc. Robert Garwood of the Marines before his
court-martial on charges of desertion and collaboration with the enemy in
Vietnam.

Yesterday, the judge, Col. R.E. Switzer, granted a request by prosecutors to
require the 34-year-old marine to undergo another psychiatric examination if he
intends to use insanity as a defense.  At a

National news appears on pages A16-25; political news,

pages B6-7.
hearing today, Colonel Switzer refused the prosecutors' request to allow them to
pick the panel of psychiatrists that will examine the defendant.

Instead, the director of the National Naval Medical Center at Bethesda, Md.,
will name the board, with at least one member to be a doctor experienced in
dealing with prisoners of war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 1, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

RELIGION,POLITICS AND SELECTIVE CRITICS

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 296 words


To the Editor:

In recent weeks we have heard a great deal from reporters and columnists in the
broadcast and print media about the involvement of conservative evangelical
religious groups in politics. The concern is frequently expressed that ''church
and state should be separate'' and that these activities are somehow
inappropriate to the American political system. §uch a concern has no basis in
the United States Constitution.  While the First Amendment protects the free
exercise of religion and prohibits the establishment of a state religion, it
wisely does not reject views expressed from religious, or any other, conviction.

The opposition to the political involvement of evangelical conservatives does
not, it appears, derive fundamentally from the principle of separation of church
and state - not, at least, as that principle is enshrined in the Constitution.
Rather, the opposition seems to be based on the content of the opinions
expressed.

Those who now loudly warn of the dangers of mixing religion and politics were
nowhere to be heard when Martin Luther King fought for civil rights, when
William Sloane Coffin fought against the Vietnam War or even when Jimmy Carter
spoke in the Ebenezer Baptist Church.  No, those who proclaim the gospel of
separation of church and state save their preaching to oppose the Catholic
Church's position on abortion or the political activities of conservative
ministers.

The observers must draw the sad conclusion that an argument ostensibly drawn
from universal principle is to be applied only sparingly, dependent upon whose
ox is being gored.  PETER F. GRILLI Tampa, Fla., Sept. 21, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 1, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
THE MADNESS OF POLITICS

BYLINE: By James

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 937 words


Reston UNITED NATIONS, N.Y. - The Secretary General of the United Nations, Kurt
Waldheim, is a rational and optimistic man, but he is dealing with an irrational
problem in the latest Middle East war, and is not very hopeful.

He thinks the fighting between Iraq and Iran may go on for a year or two,
probably not at the present level of violence, but with alarming possibilities
for the commerce and maybe even for the peace of the world.

He has a private letter from President Saddam Hussein of Iraq offering to
negotiate a cease-fire under conditions clearly unacceptable to whoever, if
anybody, is in charge in Teheran. Mr.  Hussein says he would negotiate, but like
President Carter on the hostage problem, he cannot find anybody in Iran with
authority to negotiate.

This is the latest nightmare of world politics - not that the major nuclear
nations would make war, but that irrational men in the Middle East, like blind
dogs in a meat house, might go mad and create all sorts of unintended miseries.

Iraq and Iran do not have the power to dominate the oilfields of the Middle
East, on which both the rich and poor nations of the world depend, but they do
have the power to destroy each other and to interrupt the flow of energy long
enough to create a crisis in the rest of the world.

Fortunately, there is now an oil surplus that may last for three or six months,
depending on undependable estimates, but Iraq has already knocked out most of
Iran's export oil, Iran has bombed out most of Iraq's oil, and has threatened to
bomb every other oil-producing country that supports Iraq and exports fuel to
Europe, Japan and the United States.

The sad thing about this is that, despite the divisions within the Iranian armed
services, and the shortage of parts for the air force, Iranians still have
enough air power and determination, as a result of the Iraqi invasion, to bomb
every oilfield and capital in the Middle East that opposes them. And they are
just mad enough to do it, unless the United States and the other industrial
nations make clear, and quickly, that they will use their combined military
force, if necessary, to intervene to keep the oil routes open.

This will be a test of the Atlantic alliance and Japan, all of whom depend on
fuel from the Persian Gulf. The United States has already indicated that it is
ready to send American airborne warning and command systems to Saudi Arabia to
defend that country's main supply of fuel to the industrial nations. But that
may not be enough to deal with the problem.

It may be necessary to send more American air power into Saudi Arabia, Egypt and
Israel, and more naval power into the Persian Gulf, the Mediterranean and the
Indian Ocean in order to persuade Iraq and Iran to stop this war, and maybe more
important, to remind the Soviet Union that any other move by Moscow to take
advantage of the war between Iraq and Iran would create a more serious world
crisis and a new arms race.

Mr. Waldheim has tried to get Secretary of State Muskie and the Soviet Foreign
Secretary, Andrei Gromyko, together to agree on a compromise to end the war
between Iraq and Iran. They met and agreed only that the war in the Middle East
should not interfere with the more important problem of controlling the arms
race between the United States and the Soviet Union.

They also agreed, without quite saying so, that the struggle between Iraq and
Iran should not be allowed to create an even more serious crisis between
Washington and Moscow; that they could differ about the causes of the war, but
should cooperate, without openly acknowledging it, to keep the war from getting
beyond control.

Mr. Muskie and Mr. Gromyko were talking about the future though neither of them
could know whether Mr. Carter or Leonid Brezhnev would still be in charge at the
end of this year. So they stuck to their briefs, and argued about the past,
neither knowing what the issues or personalities would be at the beginning of
the coming year.

What they had in common, however, was the war in the Middle East, and the sense
that the vicious regional divisions might create a confrontation between the
major nuclear powers which neither wanted.

The Soviet Union has serious problems with China, with Vietnam, in Afghanistan
and in Poland. It may be tempted to take advantage of the Iraqi-Iranian war, and
move its power toward the Persian Gulf, but crossing the power lines against the
West in the Middle East could mean a major war, and this could destroy all the
gains the Soviets have made since their revolution in 1917.

The chances are that both Washington and Moscow will work behind the scenes to
end the war between Iraq and Iran, without quite admitting that they are doing
so. They have at least one thing in common: they don't want to be drawn into a
major war by the ancient struggles of third powers.

They will play politics with Iraq and Iran, but will be careful to keep the oil
flowing. They know that nothing has been lost in this latest Middle Eastern war,
but that everything could be in danger, so they are being very careful. It's
almost enough to make the disunited nations and the insecurity council here in
New York pay attention. Maybe even to make Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan
remember that the world goes on, and that our civilization is mortal and has the
same fragility as life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 1, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ARMING AFGHAN REBELS

BYLINE: By Bill

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 880 words


Bradley WASH INGTON - The United States should provide significant military aid
to the Afghan rebels in their struggle against the occupation forces of the
Soviet Union. Our assistance to them must be limited. They do not need
airplanes, sophisticated computer technology or American soldiers. But the
automatic rifles and ammunition that they reportedly have been receiving are not
enough.  They need hand-held surface-to-air missiles, antitank guns, land mines
and 50-caliber machine guns. All of these weapons would maximize their mobility
and effectiveness against Soviet helicopter gunships and counterinsurgency
forces.

Providing such assistance would place the United States on the proper side of
this popular Islamic liberation movement. It also would demonstrate to the rest
of the world that the Vietnam era has passed - that we can act decisively to
further our national-security interests.

Even now, nine months after the Soviet invasion, such aid - a logical, carefully
circumscribed response -would send Moscow the clearest message about American
interests and intentions.

The United States continues to have a vital strategic interest in deterring
Soviet encroachment in the Persian Gulf region, an area that exports 60 percent
of the industrial world's oil and that at this moment is torn by the
Iraqi-Iranian conflict. But the Soviet Union and our allies will never know that
we mean business unless we are willing to take concrete action.

Assistance to the Afghan rebels identifies our security concerns with those of
the moderate Arab states in the Persian Gulf, most notably Saudi Arabia. We
share their desire to promote stability in the region and to resist Soviet
pressures on independent countries.  Significant assistance to the rebels and
credible security support to neighboring Pakistan (far greater than our offer of
a $200 million military-aid package rejected as inadequate last January) would
express United States resolve and avoid the drawbacks of providing the Saudis
with F-15 equipment. Indeed, it would give us an unusual opportunity to support
the rising Islamic consciousness and to reinforce it against the threat to the
region posed by the Soviet Union.

Those who argue against American aid to the Afghan rebels fear that we will fall
into the trap of escalating assistance to one faction in a foreign struggle, or
that such aid, particularly if it went through Pakistan, would invite Soviet
aggression there. Both fears spring from the bitter memories of our experience
in Vietnam. But just as Munich was no analogy for Vietnam, so Vietnam is no
analogy for Afghanistan. Action directed to achieve a limited aim can serve our
broader national interests, and success will be more probable if we set limits
and clearly defining our expectations before we act.

As for the fear that the Soviet Union would invade Pakistan, it is important to
recognize that the costs to the Russians of such an invasion would be far
greater than the costs of their march into Afghanistan last December. The
Russians already had been entrenched in Kabul. They invaded after two years of
rule by Soviet partisans who had turned entire ministries over to Soviet
military officials, thereby giving them control of Afghanistan's military forces
before the actual invasion.

No similiar control exists in Pakistan. The Russians would have to commit at
least five times the number of troops they have in Afghanistan in order to
secure Pakistan militarily. Not only would they meet the resistance of a
well-trained and reasonably wellequipped Pakistani Army but also they would be
plagued by guerrilla attacks as they tried to subdue a nation of 77 million
people. Soviet Central Asia might strain under the casualties to soldiers who
come from Soviet Moslem families. In addition, an invasion of Pakistan would
divert military forces that the Soviet Union now prefers to hold in reserve
because of the unrest in Poland and the widening rapprochement between the
capitalist world and China.

United States inaction on Afghanistan is no guarantee that the Soviet Union
would refrain from action against Pakistan. As their charge into Afghanistan
demonstrated, the Russians would put pressure on Pakistan if they thought it
were in their interest to do so and would manufacture the excuse of American
assistance. Moreover, Soviet pressures on Pakistan would be more effective if
there were no American resistance to counter it.

Clearly, significant military aid to the Afghan freedom fighters would identify
us with their just cause of national liberation, deliver an unambiguous message
to the Russians at this time of conflict in the Persian Gulf region, and above
all show that we have emerged from the shadow of Vietnam as a confident, prudent
power - one that knows how to advance its national interests as well as when to
accept its own limitations.

Bill Bradley, junior Democratic Senator from New Jersey, is a member of the
Energy and Natural Resources Committee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ZIA'S PEACE TRIP TO PERSIAN GULF ENDS IN FAILURE

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 1


President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq of Pakistan implicitly acknowledged today that his
peace-seeking mission to Iran and Iraq had failed, that he had only been able to
discover the conflicting views of the Persian Gulf combatants.

At the same time Iran rejected the Security Council's call to end the
hostilities. President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr said in a

Text of Bani-Sadr letter is on page A16.
letter to the United Nations that the Council's plea ''cannot be considered'' as
long as Iraqi troops are on Iranian soil.

Two days ago President Saddam Hussein of Iraq said his country was ready to stop
the fighting if Iran would do the same. Diplomats here said the two letters made
clear the essential difference that General Zia had found: Baghdad is satisfied
with what it has already won but Teheran intends to continue struggling until it
gets back what it has lost.

Tonight, at a closed meeting of Islamic foreign ministers, General Zia described
the conditions that Iraq was attaching to its ceasefire proposal. Baghdad, the
general reported, wants all Iranian military action to come to a halt, insists
that Iran stop issuing statements criticizing proposals for negotiations and
demands a pledge from Teheran's ''highest authority'' that it will accept the
cease-fire and agree to negotiate on Iraq's territorial claims.

If Teheran accepts all these conditions, General Zia said, Iraq will stop firing
next Sunday. An account of the general's report was given to journalists by Agha
Shahi, Pakistan's Foreign Minister. The Iranian representative here, Jamal
Shemirani, said the terms were unacceptable.

The Islamic ministers urged General Zia to continue his efforts to bring peace
to the warring nations, but he set no date for another trip to Baghdad and
Teheran.

General Zia was sent on his peace-seeking mission last week by the Islamic
nations. But in his hourlong address to the General Assembly today he made only
a brief reference to his trip.

He said he had been ''able to ascertain the views of my two brothers,'' an
allusion to President Bani-Sadr and President Hussein. ''I have faithfully
conveyed to each brother the views and position of each other,'' he said, and
hoped ''that a peaceful solution will be found to their differences.''

General Zia, Pakistan's chief martial law administrator as well as its
President, described his trip as a ''fact-finding'' and ''good will'' effort.
Islamic and other third-world envoys here agreed that the cryptic report was
evidence that General Zia had failed to bridge the gap between the two sides.
Several of the envoys forecast a long and continuing struggle.

For his Assembly appearance General Zia gave up his customary military uniform
and his delegation members abandoned their business suits for national costumes,
tight-fitting black vests over baggy white trousers. This was apparently done to
underscore the theme of Islamic brotherhood that the General delivered to the
delegates.

Softening of Attacks

Diplomats were particularly struck by the general's repeated softening of
attacks on the Soviet Union that were contained in the prepared text of his
speech. On at least five occasions General Zia changed the words.

In his prepared text he blamed the ''tragic conflict'' in the Gulf on
''superpower rivalry,'' a thrust at the Russians and the United States. But from
the podium he called the war ''a colonial legacy,'' third-world parlance for
Western powers.

In discussing the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, his written text referred
to ''negative attitudes of the Soviet Union and the Kabul regime.'' The speech
General Zia delivered deleted this reference to the Soviet Union although it did
retain one other.

The word ''aggression'' in the written text was converted to ''armed
intervention'' in the delivered speech. A phrase describing the new Afghan
regime as having been ''foisted on an unwilling people'' was dropped. The term
''puppet'' was also edited out of a description of the Government installed in
Cambodia by Vietnam, a Soviet ally.

Assault on U.S. Maintained

In contrast, the general did not relax his assault on the United States.
Washington was blamed for ''hostile confrontation with the Arab world'' because
of its ''open-ended support to Israel, which encourages that country to pursue
aggressive policies in defiance of world opinion.'' The United States, said
General Zia, ''bears a heavy responsibility'' for Israel's usurpation ''of the
legitimate rights of the people of Palestine.''

Some diplomats ascribed the editing in the speech to the changed power relations
in Southern Asia. After the Soviet move in Afghanistan General Zia's Government
toyed with the idea of seeking military aid from the United States. But that
fell through, according to Asian officials, when Pakistan asked for American
guarantees of support against attacks from Russia in the west and India in the
east. Now, diplomats observed, General Zia has Soviet troops as his neighbors
all along the border with Afghanistan and must tread warily.

The Bani-Sadr letter rejecting the call to end hostilities was addressed to
Secretary General Kurt Waldheim. It was foreshadowed a day earlier by Ayatollah
Ruhollah Khomeini in a radio address in which he denounced any compromise with
Iraq and promised to fight ''right to the end.''

Iraq Accused of Aiding Revolt

Mr. Bani-Sadr accused Iraq of promoting rebellion in the western and
southwestern provinces of Khuzistan and Kurdistan since the Khomeini regime took
power in 1978. He charged Baghdad with ''staging a war of aggression inside our
territory and striking against our vital interests.''

He added that Iraq's acceptance of the Security Council call was a ''deceptive
use'' of the world body's ''peaceful initiative.'' He said: ''While the Iraqi
war of aggression is continuing, the proposals contained in the Security Council
resolution cannot be considered by our Government. So long as Iraq is in
violation of our territorial sovereignty, we see no use in any discussion,
directly or indirectly, concerning the conflict.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Mohammad Zia ul-Haq

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FINANCING BILL AND ABORTION;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1006 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 1


''This is the 96th time the Senate has voted on abortions,'' Senator Warren G.
Magnuson, Democrat of Washington, chairman of the Appropriations Committee, told
his colleagues in disgust shortly before 2

A.M. today.  In the last eight years, few issues have engendered such passionate
controversy in the Congress or so consistently threatened to bring the
Government to a halt for lack of funds appropriated by Congress.  Foes of
abortion, outnumbered in the legislative committees that have jurisdiction over
the issue, have followed the lead of opponents of the Vietnam War and busing and
have focused on amendments to money bills.

The intensity of the dispute is attributed to a variety of factors, including an
uncompromising core of dedicated partisans on both sides of the issue. Other
factors include fear of retribution at the polls, the increasing success of the
anti-abortion forces, the rise of one-issue campaigns and the success of
fundamentalist Christian organizations, such as Moral Majority, which have
already helped defeat some Congressmen for re-election.

Little Flexibility

Late last night, as House and Senate conferees were deadlocked over language on
Medicaid payments for abortiions, Representative Joseph P. Addabbe, Democrat of
New York, looked enviously at the senators across the table and said,
''Two-thirds of those guys aren't up for election this year.''

At the center of the dispute are Congressmen on both sides whose consciences
allow little flexibility on the issue. ''This is an issue that has all the
emotion that the abolitionist movement had,'' said Representative Henry J. Hyde,
Republican of Illinois, author of the amendment that places tight restrictions
on Medicaid abortions.

On the other side, Senator Bob Packwood, Republican of Oregon, whose re-election
campaign has so far received $600,000 raised by a letter written by Gloria
Steinem, the feminist who opposes such restrictions, said that ''This is a
deeply held moral and religious issue, and the arguments are passionate.''

Congressional involvement in the abortion issue began in the spring of 1973,
five months after the landmark Supreme Court decision, Roe v. Wade, that
overturned state bans on abortions. The House of Representatives overwhelmingly
approved legislation that prohibited the Government from forcing hospitals or
physicians to participate in abortions against their conscience or policy.

In 1974 and 1975, Congress decisively defeated efforts to restrict Medicaid
abortions. Such a measure was approved by the Senate but defeated by the House
in a House-Senate conference. An estimated 250,000 Medicaid abortions were
performed annually. In 1976, Congress adopted the Hyde amendment, which
prohibited Medicaid abortions except to save the life of the mother. In 1977, at
the Senate's insistence, abortions in cases of rape or incest were added. The
Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the Hyde Amendment last June.

Last year, sensitive to criticism that their efforts had been directed only at
poor women, the antiabortion forces won prohibitions on the use of Federal funds
for abortions by members of the armed forces and their dependents and members of
the Peace Corps.

Time Limit for Reporting Rape

Early this morning, a new compromise on Medicaid abortions was hammered out and
later accepted by both the House and Senate. The House, which had sought to
revert to the original Hyde amendment and allow medicaid abortions only to save
the life of the mother, eventually agreed to allow those abortions in cases of
rape reported within 72 hours and in cases of incest. Under the old law,
reporting was merely required to be ''prompt,'' which was interpreted under
regulations to mean within 60 days.

In another, potentially far-reaching innovation that could extend to other
legislative items, both the House and Senate agreed to allow the states to
decide for themselves whether to allow Medicaid abortions. This decision is
expected to shift the abortion battle to the statehouses, where antiabortion
forces are generally stronger than in Washington. It also is expected to lead
poor women in antiabortion states to travel to more liberal states such as New
York to obtain their abortions. The Supreme Court has held residency
requirements in welfare cases unconstitutional.

By turning the abortion issue over to the states, Congress will also be able to
duck some of the controversy that many members find extremely uncomfortable.

Those who opposed abortion restrictions are focusing on the Congressional
campaigns. ''We see the voting booth as the battloegroud,'' said Janet Beals,
spokesman for the National Abortion rights Action League. ''We can't do much
with Congress unless we remove their fear of being kicked out of office.''

Further Constroversy Expected

Abortion foes seek a constitutional amendment that would overturn Roe v. Wade
and prohibit abortions. However, the judiciary commitees in both the House and
Senate are dominated by liberals, and such an amendment has little chance of
getting out of committee. Similarly, the House Education and Labor Committee and
the Senate Human Resources Committee are also liberal-dominated, leaving
abortion opponents little hope of changing substantive abortion laws.

Thus, the abortion issue is likely to continue to be attached to money bills,
and the language, far from settled, is expected to continue to generate further
controversy.

''Each year I think it's going to be settled for the last time, and each year it
comes up again,'' lamented Representative Robert H.  Michel, the Republican
whip, who has played a role in fashioning compromise legislation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analyisis

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 753 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
FAULT LINES. By James Carroll. 248 pages. Little, Brown. $11.95.

WITH his new novel, ''Fault Lines,'' James Carroll shows us that he's good on a
small scale, too. Having entertained us grandly with his previous novel,
''Mortal Friends,'' a multi-generational family history set in Ireland and
America, Mr. Carroll has now narrowed his scope to cover a few critical days in
the life of a contemporary American family.

Indeed, Mr. Carroll has shrunk his canvas so small that it's difficult to
describe the plot of ''Fault Lines'' without evoking a sense of claustrophobia.
The central complication of that plot is a custody fight between a film star and
a novelist over the novelist's son by her earlier marriage to a soldier who died
in Vietnam. And the main dramatic questions that radiate from this plot
complication sound like the trailer of an episode in a soap opera.

Dramatic Questions

Will the film star, Cheney McCoy, who may be going violently mad, discover that
the novelist, Eddie Brewster Dolan McCoy, has hidden her son, Brendan, with her
mother at the family summer home in Maine, and try to kidnap him? Or will David
Dolan, Eddie's brother-inlaw by her dead husband, who once had a fling with
Eddie and has just returned from eight years of draft-dodging in Sweden, get to
Maine in time to save Eddie and little Brendan from Cheney?

But in execution, ''Fault Lines'' doesn't read in the least like soap opera. The
novel's action never becomes confined to mere plot, even at its smashing climax
in that house up in Maine. For one thing, Mr. Carroll has told his story from
all the characters' points of view - which is to say that the narrator's voice
jumps from one character's mind to another's even within a single conversation.
And by doing so he's made his people too strong and complex to be reduced to
mere agents of the action.

For instance, David Dolan, Eddie's brother-in-law, doesn't set out for Maine in
order to save her and little Brendan from Cheney McCoy.  He's simply lost in an
America that doesn't want to remember Vietnam, and, as he explains to Eddie when
he finally tracks her down, ''coming back from Sweden means trying to pick up
the pieces.'' (''Like me?'' Eddie asked. David ''blushed, and slapped his
forehead. 'My English suffers. Please make to forgive me.' '') Nor does Cheney
really set out to kidnap Brendan, at least as far as he is aware.  Rather he
wants to know why Eddie's leaving him - for the very good reason that he hit her
in front of Brendan -has hurt his pride as no other rejection has done before.

But far more important to the richness and resonance of ''Fault Lines'' is the
way every incident and theme is echoed and re-echoed throughout the story. For
instance, Cheney McCoy isn't just a machine that goes crazy. He first taps the
source of his violence while rehearsing the funeral-seduction scene in ''Richard
III'' for an Actors Studio production. (Mr. Carroll actually dramatizes this
transformation in what is one of the book's most brilliant scenes.) Not only
does this emotional breakthrough enable Cheney to ''solve'' the characterization
of crookbacked Richard (and raise some interesting questions about Method
Acting, which Mr. Carroll, himself a playwright when he isn't writing novels,
neatly exploits), it also identifies Cheney with the evil Richard, whose
eventual victim is of course the young Prince of Wales.

Fault-Line Magnified

In such a manner does Mr. Carroll magnify the fault-line that lies at the
foundation of little Brendan's existence, and thus give credence to the fear the
boy expresses at one point that if cliffs could rise out of the sea, ''like a
sea monster,'' in prehistoric times, ''then what couldn't be?''

Of course, if Mr. Carroll has a fault of his own, it is that he magnifies a
little too incessantly. So pervasive are the many themes of ''Fault Lines'' that
I found myself wondering for a momment if the limpets that Brendan likes to
watch coming and going with the tide had anything to do with the story's
leitmotif of Exile and Return.  And certainly it is gratuitous that in order to
reinforce his story's analogy to ''Richard III,'' Mr. Carroll has Brendan
articulate his interest in sea creatures by dubbing himself ''the Prince of
Whales.''

But one easily forgives such over-reaching. For Mr. Carroll succeeds far more
often than he fails. And he thereby turns what might have been domestic
melodrama into a novel of interesting depth and subtlety.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of James Carroll

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. Navy Ship Rescues 103 Vietnamese Refugees

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 47 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Oct. 2


The United State guided missile destroyer Cochrane has rescued 103 Vietnamese
refugees in a 30-foot boat that was running out of food and fuel, a Navy report
said today.

The Vietnamese were picked up last night in the South China Sea 540 nautical
miles east of Ho Chi Minh City.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IRAQ SAID TO SEND PLANES TO FOREIGN HAVENS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 795 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 2


United States military analysts said today that the Iraqi Air Force had
scattered many of its Soviet-built planes to safe havens in neighboring Arab
countries, including Saudi Arabia. The analysts said this might explain the
absence of largescale air combat in Iraq's war with Iran.

On the other side of the front, the Iranian Air Force, its planes largely
acquired from the United States, has been restricted to hitand-run strikes
against political and psychological targets because it lacks a command
structure, intelligence and communications, the analysts said.

For those and other reasons, the military analysts believe that the conflict
north of the Persian gulf will probably sputter along inconclusively.

While it has not been clear why the Iraqis have withheld the bulk of their air
force from battle, the analysts said, it seemed that the Iraqi high command was
saving it as a trump card.

U.S. Electronic Planes on Patrol

Despite President Carter's declaration of neutrality, some of the Iraqi planes
have come indirectly under the early-warning protection of four United States
electronic surveillance planes, known as Awacs, that have just begun operating
in Saudi Arabia.

Other Iraqi planes, mostly bombers and transports, were reported to be in
Jordan, Kuwait, Oman, and Yemen.  The Iraqis have not put up their fighters
against Iranian attackers, the analysts said, because their defenses rely
largely on Soviet antiaircraft missiles. The analysts pointed out that a missile
could not tell the difference between an Iraqi defender and an Iranian attacker.


Pilots Take the Initiative

The Iranian Air Force, decimated by the Islamic revolutionaries more than a year
ago, has been reduced to operating in the barnstorming style of World War I,
even though the pilots have modern F-4 Phantom fighters. With no commanders, the
pilots were said to get together, decide on a target, load up and take off.

They streak to an Iraqi target flying under Iraq's inadequate radar screen, drop
their bombs and peel off before Iraqi missiles can be brought to bear. Because
some of the radios in the Iranian planes don't work, the pilots resort to hand
signals.

On the ground, the analysts said, Iraqi tanks have given a good account of
themselves. But there have been few large tank battles, despite the nearly 2,000
tanks on each side, because the Iranians have little army command hierarchy to
order them into battle.

Iran Watches the Strait

At sea, Iran has stationed three small warships in the Strait of Hormuz to check
on vessels passing in and out but have made no move to interfere with traffic,
the analysts said. Iraq has a only a few patrol boats.

With the war proceeding unevenly, analysts here said they had begun to feel that
the outlook for the United States was not so bleak as first thought.

For one thing, military officers have said that keeping the Strait of Hormuz
open would be relatively easy, given the strong American naval presence centered
around two aircraft carriers in the Arabian Sea. Nothing Iran has could possibly
match that, they said.

In addition, they foresaw few political problems as the United States would not
intervene with force unless asked to by the Arab nations and the West Europeans
and Japanese, for whom oil imports are important.

Moreover, they said that intelligence reports from the Middle East indicated a
favorable Arab reaction to American policy, even though President Carter has
proclaimed neutrality. That has come, they said, from the sending of four Awacs
to Saudi Arabia and by refraining from military aid to Iran.

Arabs Approve U.S. Presence

The analysts said Arab diplomats had privately informed the United States they
feared that only the Soviet Union could gain by the conflict. The Arabs were
said to have expressed approval of the presence of American naval and air power
in the region.

President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt voiced that thought openly today. He was
quoted in news reports as having said in Cairo that the ''chaos'' in the region
would benefit only the Soviet Union. ''I hope the United States is vigilant just
for once after the Vietnam complex and won't allow the Soviets to win
everything,'' he was quoted as having said.

The analysts noted that the Soviet Union, even though it is the main arms
supplier to Iraq, has hesitated to resupply Baghdad. Two Soviet ships, loaded
with military gear shipped before the hostilities began, have turned away from
Iraqi ports in the Persian Gulf.

The anlysts here suspected that the ships would sail to the Jordanian port of
Aqaba, where the equipment could be unloaded and taken overland to Iraq.

On the other hand, the analysts had no signs that the Russians would begin a
large-scale resupply of Iraq.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Iranian prisoners of war

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DEBATE IS GROWING ON LEGALITIES OF RELIGIOUS ACTIVISM

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 793 words


As evangelical Protestants and anti-abortion Roman Catholics have stepped up
their political activism in this election year, a debate has developed around
the question whether some of these activities violate the tradition of
separation of church and state.

This political awakening has become an important factor in the 1980 elections,
and it has also raised questions about the constitutional limits of such
activism and challenges to the legitimacy of the taxexempt status of some
groups.

Among the causes of unrest have been the campaigns by religious groups against
certain candidates who favor abortion as a choice, thinly veiled endorsements of
candidates by single-issue religious interests and the alleged mixing of
politics and religion by some preachers.

Defenders generally underscore the right of church groups to press their causes
by working for candidates who share their views. Several political action
groups, such as Moral Majority, Christian Voice and Religious Roundtable, have
been formed as separate organizations whose supporters do not receive tax
deductions for their donations.  Other evangelists, such as the popular
television preachers James Bakker and Pat Robertson, have given moral support to
these programs but have backed away from outright involvement in the political
drives.

Suit Against Catholic Church

But the appearance of broad mingling of overt and covert politicking by
religious figures has raised questions about the proper line between legal and
illegal participation.

The rising concern was highlighted yesterday by a suit filed in Federal District
Court in Manhattan against the Secretary of the Treasury, G. William Miller, and
the Commissioner of Internal Revune, Jerome Kurtz. The suit seeks to strip the
Catholic Church of its taxfree status and accuses a variety of church dioceses
and agencies with attempting to elect or defeat certain candidates.

Under the Internal Revenue Service code, nonprofit groups are exempt from filing
tax returns so long as they refrain from direct involvement as organizations in
partisan politics. Members of any group are free to participate in politics as
individuals.

In presenting the suit, a coalition of pro-abortion groups cited several
examples of alleged violations. One was a widely distributed 1978 letter,
written by a priest on church stationery, opposing Senator George McGovern's bid
for re-election in South Dakota.  Another was the recent pastoral statement by
Humberto Cardinal Medeiros of Boston that implicitly opposed two Democratic
Congressional candidates in the Massachusetts primary who favored abortion as a
choice. Both candidates won.

A Right to Be Active

Constitutional experts generally support the First Amendment rights of religious
activists. But most specialists on the amendment also believe that the rights
conferred under the provisions of freedom of speech and religion do not preclude
the Government from taxing groups that get involved in partisan politics.

''Religious groups have a right to be politically active,'' said Prof. Laurence
Tribe of the Harvard Law School. ''The tradition of the intermixture of religion
and politics is too ingrained in our national life to be eliminated. It is
extremely important to the principle of freedom of speech that this process not
stop just because some are distressed by the content of the speech or the
speaker.''

While affirming the right of religious groups to exercise this right, Professor
Tribe envisions a danger to the country's ''civil peace'' if there develop
religious factions that are intolerant of one another. ''That would accentuate
certain centrifugal forces that tear up the center,'' Professor Tribe said.

In the past, church groups have participated vigorously in causes that entailed
political goals. Among them have been abolition, prohibition, civil rights, the
Vietnam War and Israel. Accordingly, religious groups have often measured
political candidates by these issues.

Some observers believe that the current wave of complaint against religious
activism, such as those who criticize anti-abortion forces, is based more on
political than constitutional grounds. Under this theory, those who are
complaining had become complacent and are now wary about their opponents, who
appear to have organized more effectively.

''Some fears are legitimate,'' said Prof. Herbert Wechsler of Columbia Law
School, referring to the complaints about the new conservative activism. ''But
the method of dealing with it is not to suppress them. It is to resort to public
opinion and defeat them. The activist Court of the past few years has given a
false impression that to win a fight is to take it to court rather than to fight
it out on the hustings.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FRANK C. ERWIN JR.,EX-TEXAS U. REGENT

BYLINE: By JOAN COOK

SECTION: Section D; Page 15, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 418 words


Frank C. Erwin Jr., former chairman of the Board of Regents of the University of
Texas and a political friend of the President Lyndon B. Johnson and former Gov.
John B. Connally Jr. of Texas, died of a heart attack yesterday at John Sealy
Hospital, Galveston, Tex., after a brief illness. He was 60 years old.

Mr. Erwin was responsible for pursuading Mr. Connally, then a Democrat, to
return from Washington, where he had been Secretary of the Navy, to try his hand
at Texas politics. After Mr. Connally's election to his first term as Governor
in 1962, he appointed Mr.  Erwin to the Board of Regents in 1963, on which he
served until 1975.

A prototype of the conservative Texas Democrat, Mr. Erwin served as chairman of
the State Democratic Party during the Johnson Administration.

Mr. Erwin was credited with bringing the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and
School of Public Affairs to the campus virtually singlehandedly.

'A Rare Human Being'

''He was a rare human being who leaves a lonesome place in the world and the
hearts of all who knew and loved him,'' Lady Bird Johnson said of him yesterday.
''Most people have ideas. Frank Erwin had ideas and ran with them.''

A man who gave little quarter to his foes and received little in return, Mr.
Erwin disagreed with protests against the Vietnam War by university students. At
a birthday party for President Johnson on the University of Texas campus in
1967, Mr. Erwin was angered when the President was met by angry demonstrators.

''I am disturbed because a bunch of dirty nothings can disrupt the workings of a
great university in the name of academic freedom,'' he said. ''When it comes to
the point where 300 armed policemen are needed to keep from embarrassing the
President, we need to re-examine the goals of higher education.''

In 1970 a student referendum was held demanding that Mr. Erwin be removed as
chairman the Regents for ''unwarranted interference'' in the operations of the
campus.

The students and faculty voted to have him removed, but Mr. Erwin chose to
ignore the vote.  The same year, the faculty and the Regents engaged in an
battle that was marked by great bitterness and contributed to Mr. Erwin's
decision to step down as chairman in 1971. Nevertheless he vowed to complete his
six-year term on the board.

Mr. Erwin's wife, June Carr Erwin, died in 1969.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Frank C. Erwin Jr.

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 4, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT POLITICS;
DOWN AND OUT AND BLACK IN THE CAPITAL

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 3


A few blocks from the monumental buildings that symbolize whatever the nation
stands for, the unemployed of Washington were 100 deep, four lines across and
out the door Wednesday morning when James Louis Davis began laughing at the
candidates' definition of Presidential issues.

''Racism? Nuclear war?'' said Mr. Davis, a 34-year-old Vietnam war veteran who
occasionally panhandles to pay for his $2 nightly bed at the Gospel Mission.
''That stuff has as much bearing on the common man as a night at Tiffany's.''

In his own way, with his unemployment benefits long since used up, Mr. Davis
knows as many Washington angles as any lobbyist in town. He knows the best
''catch-out'' corner - Eastern and Georgia Avenues - for the off-the-book
transactions in which the middle class drives up as if going to market and hires
day laborers from among the city's huge pool of unemployed black males.

''This Saudi Arabian picked me up to build a terrace for his office in
Rockville,'' said Mr. Davis, citing the best of times.  ''Five dollars an hour.
I could use more of that.''

The worst of times, as he described it, goes unnoticed in this busy world
capital. ''I make sure I don't look in shop windows,'' he said, ''So I don't
wind up wanting everything and building up strong bad temptations.''

That is the political issue for him -not war and peace, but how to avoid
stealing when conditions dip down again. ''You need character,'' he said. While
it may not be as galvanized a message as the Moral Majority is offering this
political season, Mr. Davis found suitable comfort in the kind of Christ
described the other night in the Gospel Mission sermon. He explained:

''They preached that Jesus, the son of man, 'carried the stick' all his life.
You know what that means? He didn't have a place of his own to sleep at night,
same as us when I have to sleep in the street and keep a stick nearby to scare
off intruders.''

Four years ago, when Mr. Davis had a job, he recalled, he voted for Jimmy Carter
and even wrote letters to friends urging them not to sit the election out. This
year he says he will not vote for President Carter, and as he talks of the
special problem of the black unemployed he almost sounds ripe for the pitch
Ronald Reagan is making this year on free enterprise and black employment.

(A few miles and a light year of politicking away to the west, in Arlington,
Va., Mr. Reagan's campaign deputy on black voters, Sam Tucker, talks of a
''great discovery'' being made by blacks that, while Governor of California, Mr.
Reagan did foster their opportunities but has just never bragged about it until
now. Mr.  Tucker, a public relations specialist in the black community, worked
for Jimmy Carter in 1976, for a consulting fee. He decided that Mr.  Carter had
failed on his promises to blacks and so this time he switched to Mr. Reagan, and
is now working to dent the President's majority among dissatisfied blacks like
Mr. Davis.)

''I've heard Reagan,'' said Mr. Davis. ''But look, this problem is going to take
a flat commitment at the White House for full employment. Only Kennedy talks
that way. Capitalism runs on eight million unemployed - the economists will tell
you that.''

Mr. Davis talked politics for a while outside the unemployment office that
spills crowds out onto C street in the mornings. This is the great capital
sidewalk pastime, talking politics amid all the grave buildings. Everyone is an
expert, so Mr. Davis is as entitled as any to be heard from here in the shadows
of power. He expounded:

''Theodore White emphasized in his autobiography that Franklin Roosevelt was the
first President to assume that every American is entitled to a job, and I say
thank goodness for that.''

He stayed quiet for a minute for emphasis, as the lines held fast at the
unemployment office. Obviously Mr. Davis is still waiting for politics to get
back to the Roosevelt assumption.

For himself, he tries the ''catch-out'' corner for an odd job in the morning
before joining the minimum-wage pool at the unemployment office, where dozens of
black men sat reading newspapers and staring idly this morning. Most important,
he waits for word on his standing for a job as a Federal interoffice mail
messenger, a $5-an-hour job that he says he successfully tested for last
November.

''That would mean security,'' he declared. It would be the key to summoning his
10-year-old son back from the grandparents in South Carolina to rebuild his
family, the key to being able to look again in the shop windows of Washington.

None of this, he emphasized, absolutely none of it, rests in the hands and
rhetoric of the candidates now running for the White House, 14 blocks down from
the unemployment office.

''No way I can see how the election makes a difference,'' Mr. Davis said amid
the jobless crowd. ''It doesn't really matter.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 4, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WRONG TIME TO APOLOGIZE TO

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 180 words


IRAN To the Editor:

So the United States refuses to apologize to Iran because of ''an artificial
cult of national honor'' (Paul N. Siegel's letter, Sept.  26). National honor -
out of which museum did Mr. Siegel retrieve that odd remnant of U.S. antiquity?

Doesn't he know that it died a slow death over years of selfflagellation, that
it was chipped away by race riots, stomped on by Vietnam, disassembled by
Watergate and buried by the U.N.?

No, it is not national honor that prevents the U.S. from apologizing. It is the
holding of innocent Americans hostage that precludes it.

To apologize at this point lends credibility to an act of terrorism and a
violation of diplomatic immunity as a legitimate method of extracting U.S.
concessions. It doesn't take a tremendous leap of the imagination to see what
this would do to the future of civilized international negotiations.

While the U.S. may have been wrong in its previous dealings with Iran, Iran is
certainly not any more right in its illegal actions toward the U.S.
MARCIA BRITTON, New York, Sept. 26, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SCORES ON SCHOLASTIC APTITUDE TESTS CONTINUE TO DECLINE

BYLINE: By GENE I. MAEROFF

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 606 words


The steady decline in the scores of college-bound high school students on the
Scholastic Aptitude Test, a phenomenon frequently cited as evidence of
deteriorating academic achievement, has continued into its 18th year, according
to figures released yesterday by the College Entrance Examination Board.

Average scores on the two-part test have fallen from 502 to 466 in mathematics
and from 478 to 424 in verbal skills from 1962 to 1980.  The highest possible
score on either part of the examination, which is administered to almost one
million students a year, is 800.

From 1979 to 1980, scores declined one point on the mathematics section and
three points on the verbal section, the largest combined drop since 1977.

''The continuation of this trend has been a matter of concern to educators and
others for some time,'' said Robert G. Cameron, an official of the College
Board, which sponsors the examination. ''It persists despite serious efforts by
many schools to improve education and may not be reversible by changes in formal
education alone.''

Decline Frustrates Educators

There has been considerable speculation about the reasons for the decline, but
educators have been frustrated in their efforts to find a way to end it. A
special panel appointed by the College Board to study the problem concluded
three years ago that the causes were probably so diverse that there was no
direct solution.  They are thought to involve such factors as changes in family
structure, relaxed academic standards and anxiety over the Vietnam War.

In addition to the declining scores on the Scholastic Aptitude Test, this year's
report on the high school seniors of 1979-80 also shows a pattern of decline in
another indicator of academic talent, the Test of Standard Written English,
which was introduced in 1975.

Average scores on the written English test have fallen from 43.2 to 42.4 in the
five years of its use, each year producing a slightly lower average score than
the previous year. The highest possible score is 60. The test uses
multiple-choice and short-answer questions to evaluate the ability of students
to cope with the language in college textbooks.

The decline of scores on the writing test has occurred, according to the College
Board, ''even though there has been a well-publicized concern for the writing
skills of entering college students.''

Role in Admissions Decisions

Since the tests sponsored by the College Board are important criteria in the
admissions decisions of institutions of higher education, they have been at the
center of the debate over whether standards are declining.

Yet, because the reasons for the falling scores seem to be so complex, educators
are divided as to how much signficance to attach to the trend.

''While the trend has significance as an indicator of college readiness of a
large number of students,'' Mr. Cameron said, ''it cannot be used as a measure
of the overall character of this year's high school graduates, or the quality of
the schools from which they came.''

On some examinations such as the College Board's achievement tests in individual
subjects, the trend has been less definitive. For each score that has gone down,
another has gone up.

In each of the last three years, for example, scores have risen on the tests in
biology, literature, Russian, European history and English composition. Scores
have dropped in tests of mathematics, chemistry and Spanish.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DRAMA OF VIETNAMESE ORPHANS: INA BALIN'S STORY

BYLINE: By JUDY KLEMESRUD

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 82, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1211 words


In a television movie this Thursday, Ina Balin plays the improbable role of a
glamorous, unmarried Hollywood movie star who gets intensely involved with an
orphanage in South Vietnam and winds up adopting three of its orphans.

Improbable or not, Ina Balin is playing herself.  Miss Balin, best known for her
screen roles in ''From the Terrace'' and ''The Greatest Story Ever Told,'' is
today the legal mother of three Vietnamese girls whom she helped evacuate from
Saigon during the final days of the war: Nguyet, 21, Kim Thuy, 5 1/2, and Ba-Nhi
Mai, also 5 1/2. The family lives in a rambling old Spanish house in West Los
Angeles.

''Adopting those children was the best thing I've ever done in my whole life,''
the 42-year-old actress said here the other day. ''It gives you a whole other
perspective on life. It gets you involved with someone other than yourself,
because children truly need you.''

Red Tape Is Overcome

Miss Balin was in New York to talk about the television movie, ''The Children of
An Lac,'' based on the efforts of two American women (Miss Balin and Betty
Tisdale, who has five adopted Vietnamese daughters and five American stepsons)
in 1975 to evacuate 400 Vietnamese orphans from the An Lac orphanage in Saigon
to the United States. The movie will be shown at 8 P.M. Thursday on CBS.

The Brooklyn-born actress said she had been associated with the orphanage - she
was at one time its vice president - since she first visited it in 1970 while
touring South Vietnam with a U.S.O. show.

''I just fell in love with the place,'' she said.  After encountering
considerable Vietnamese Government red tape, Miss Balin and Mrs. Tisdale, who
headed a volunteer organization in the United States that had raised money for
the An Lac orphanage, finally obtained permission to evacuate all orphans under
10 years of age - around 215 of them.

Miss Balin said that her oldest adopted daughter, Nguyet, then 16, was sneaked
on board one of the evacuation planes because she was half black and faced a
dismal future in South Vietnam.

Speaking of the multi-adoption, Miss Balin smiled and said: ''I didn't plan for
three. I had been going with someone for a long time and it didn't work out, and
I wasn't getting any younger. But I kept thinking, 'I still might get married, I
still might have my own.' I also didn't think it was fair to a man or the child
or myself to have an illegitimate child. So finally I began thinking about
adopting one.''

When she couldn't decide between two infant girls at the orphanage, she said,
she took them both. Nguyet became No. 3 when she managed to board the transport
plane secretly.

Did Miss Balin have any problems as a single mother trying to adopt three
foreign children? At the time, she said, there was a Federal law, since
repealed, prohibiting the adoption of ''intercountry children'' by single
persons. ''But once the children were in California,'' she recalled, ''it was
all right, because it was legal for single persons to adopt in Los Angeles
County. Still, the adoptions kept being postponed and postponed. It took about a
year and a half for them to become legal.''

When asked what the reaction of her family and friends had been to the
adoptions, Miss Balin grimaced and said: ''They thought I was crazy. And my
mother thought I was ruining my life, as far as my career and finding a husband
were concerned. She thought, 'Ina's going around the bend.' ''

Her mother, Betty Balin, was so upset by the adoptions, Miss Balin said, that
the two of them had ''a big fight in the middle of Bloomingdale's,'' which was
followed by a two-year estrangement.  Finally, during a visit to California,
Mrs. Balin met the children for the first time and then told Ina, ''Either
you're crazy or you're absolutely wonderful.'' She died two weeks later of a
brain aneurysm.

One former male friend wrote Miss Balin what she called ''a Dear John letter,''
but also wished her luck with her new family. She said the children had
curtailed her social life in another way in that she no longer accepts social
invitations unless she really wants to go out, ''because I'd rather be home with
my children.''

The dark-haired, dark-eyed actress said she also thought her career had suffered
since she adopted her daughters, ''because a lot of industry people think I
retired to become a mother.''

''Well, I'm not retired,'' she said. ''I'd like to know how I'm supposed to
support the kids if I retired.'' Nguyet, who also plays herself in ''The
Children of An Lac,'' is attending a Los Angeles junior college and is also a
licensed nurses' aide. She wants to be a registered nurse specializing in
pediatrics, Miss Balin said.

Six months ago, Nguyet moved out of Miss Balin's home and into an apartment a
half-block away. ''It was my idea,'' the actress said.  ''Otherwise, she would
have stayed with me forever, and clung to me.  She needed to learn how to be on
her own.''

The 5 1/2-year-old girls, who are not twins, attend a Los Angeles public school
and are cared for by a full-time housekeeper when their mother is away. Whenever
Miss Balin feels they need a father figure, she arranges for them to get
together with her brother, Richard, a producer, who also lives in Los Angeles.

Movie Idea Was Hers

Miss Balin said it was her idea to do a television movie based on the evacuation
of the An Lac orphans. Armed with 42 pages of a magazine article that she never
finished and tapes she made during the evacuation, she went to see several
producers. The actress said that at first she encountered some opposition from
producers who thought she might not be right for the part of herself. ''Ina, you
know, the networks have their favorite actresses,'' she said one man told her.
Eventually, a deal was made, with Miss Balin cast as herself, Shirley Jones as
Betty Tisdale, Beulah Quo as Madame Ngai, the head of the orphanage, and all
three of Miss Balin's adopted daughters in minor roles.

Filming began last February in the Philippines and was finished 30 days later.
And even though Miss Balin said she had had her differences with the producer
and director, ''in the end, I think the film turned out very well.''

''The most difficult part for me was trying to keep the emotion down,'' she
said. ''There were so many moments of deja vu during the filming. The worst part
was seeing those C-141 transport planes sitting there on the runway ready to
take off. It looked so real that I burst into tears and had to take a few
moments to compose myself.''

If she knew back in 1975 what she does now, would she still adopt three children
as a single parent? ''Absolutely,'' she replied. ''I think people should not be
afraid of single parenthood. It can be an absolute joy. But it has to be
something you want. You have to give up certain things, but compared with what
you give up, you get so much more.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ina Balin with adopted children Nguyet, BaNhi
Mai and Kim Thuy

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FROM 'BREAKING AWAY' TO 'DIVISION STREET'-IN LOVE WITH AMERICA

BYLINE: By ROBERT BERKVIST

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2845 words


''Iwas born in the old country but my dreams were born in America.  The dream
...it lives!'' The words are from Steve Tesich's new play, ''Division Street,''
and they come straight from the playwright's heart. Steve Tesich believes in the
American Dream and its ideals and, what's more, he is not ashamed to say so. He
said it one way in his Academy Award-winning screenplay for ''Breaking Away,'' a
film about teen-age angst and true grit in a Midwestern college town. He says it
again, in quite another way, in ''Division Street,'' a comedy about a wrung-out
60's radical in Chicago, trying unsuccessfully to jettison his past in order to
catch up with the ''Me'' generation. For Steve Tesich, America is more than a
way of life; it is a carnival of possibilities.

Steve Tesich is, in fact, almost too good to be true. He is the Dream
personified - the immigrant whose success story has outstripped even his wildest
childhood fantasies. He remembers, as a small boy in the late 1940's, delighting
the graybeards of Titovo Uzice, Yugoslavia, his birthplace, with fanciful tales
about America. The townspeople gave their pint-size bard an occasional coin for
his trouble, and nicknamed him ''Truman.'' When he and his friends played in the
wartorn streets of Titovo Uzice, their favorite toy was an abandoned army truck.
''We'd pretend it was a submarine, or a boat or airplane that was taking us
someplace else,'' he recalls. ''When it was my turn, I always told the other
kids we were going to America.''

The films he loved best were American - ''the Westerns, with those endless
prairies and the cowboy heroes'' - and he knew that one of his grandfathers had
crossed the ocean to hunt for gold. When at last he arrived here as a bewildered
teen-ager with his mother and sister, en route to East Chicago, Indiana, to meet
his father - a man separated from his family by war and politics for 14 years -
he looked in vain for prairies and buffalo, and stared dubiously at a bowl of
something called ''cornflakes'' sitting next to a strange little wax-covered box
that contained, of all things, milk.

Now Steve Tesich sits sipping coffee in an apartment he has subleased at the
Dakota. He is in town to help prepare ''Division Street'' for its Broadway
opening, Wednesday night at the Ambassador. The show won raves and broke the
house record in its premiere at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles last May,
but he knows that a West Coast triumph is no guarantee of similar success in New
York. He has been tinkering with the script.

He has also been working on his new film projects. Thanks to ''Breaking Away,''
a low-budget ''sleeper'' that was a perfect blend of writing, casting and
directing, Mr. Tesich, at 38, has become one of the most sought-after
screenwriters in the business. He and Peter Yates, who directed ''Breaking
Away,'' immediately teamed up on another film, this one a mystery called
''Eyewitness,'' which has just been completed in New York. Another Tesich
screenplay, ''Four Friends,'' is currently being filmed in Chicago by Arthur
Penn.  Meanwhile, Mr. Tesich has been hard at work on the screen adaptation of
John Irving's best-selling novel, ''The World According to Garp.''

His life is hectic, but sweetly so. After all, he wrote five unproduced
screenplays before ''Breaking Away'' brought him an Oscar. The six plays he
wrote before ''Division Street'' were all staged Off Broadway at the American
Place Theater, to fair-to-middling reviews.  Now, if ''Division Street'' works
for East Coast critics and audiences, he will have gained a major theatrical
foothold as well.

He still marvels at how moviegoers reacted to ''Breaking Away,'' which was drawn
from his past and was in many respects a salute to his adoptive country. ''I
only write about what I know,'' he said, speaking slowly and with just a trace
of a European accent. ''It was kind of a personal thing from my life and I just
didn't think it would resonate for others. When I saw the final cut and really
liked it, I was positive nobody else would. So it was a wonderful shock when we
had out first audience and they loved it.''

The hero of ''Breaking Away'' is Dave, a teen-age bicycle racer whose admiration
for an Italian championship bicycle team and all things Italian knows no bounds
- to the near despair of his parents - until he is abruptly disillusioned. With
Indiana University in Bloomington as its setting, and the conflict between
college students and ''townies'' as its connecting thread, the film was a
humorous and affectionate portrait of life in Middle America. It had green lawns
and ivy-covered campus buildings. It even had an idyllic country swimming hole.
Its central character loved his parents and they loved him. And its climactic
scene, a bicycle race between the collegians and the outclassed ''townies,''
touched basic emotions in a way that brought even the most jaded moviegoers to
their feet cheering and applauding.

Why did audiences embrace ''Breaking Away''? Mr. Tesich now thinks he knows the
answer. ''People find their own parallels in things they see,'' he said.
''Everyone's been some kind of an outsider, like Dave and the other 'townies.'
And, again like Dave, everyone's experienced that time in their life when it's
time to move on, and yet painful to break away. I really think that if you're
honest about your own feelings, those feelings will affect others. Mostly we
share the same feelings.

''And then there was something about that little town and the family's life.
'Breaking Away' was full of things that a lot of people assumed were part of the
past - the family unit, respect for the father, family love. But you don't have
to go back to the Depression and the Waltons to find it. It still goes on. And
that swimming hole is there, I didn't have to make it up or idealize it.

''I made Dave's father a used-car salesman, for two reasons. One was that he was
a former stone-cutter who had left the quarries to better himself, and thought
he had done so. I found that kind of sad, and maybe typical of a lot of men's
lives, because his heart was really back there in the stone yard. But I also
liked the idea of the father being preoccupied with cars and his son with bikes.
It was a neat way to separate the two of them, give them each a clean image.''

Key elements of ''Breaking Away'' were autobiographical, and Mr.  Tesich
cheerfully acknowledges that he draws heavily upon his own experience in his
writing. ''I need to know the environment and the people who inhabit it,'' he
said. ''If I have to do research on some topic, I know it's not for me.''

He himself went to Indiana University in Bloomington - on a wrestling
scholarship, as it happened. He had done some moderately serious bicycling
before college, however, and quickly decided to join the school racing team.
''We actually won the 'Little 500,' the race that's depicted in 'Breaking Away,'
'' he said, with a touch of nostalgia in his voice. ''In fact, I rode seriously
until quite recently. Two years ago I had my best season. I won three races,
came in second in three and third in three more. Once I'd done that, I just
didn't want to train anymore. I still ride, but right now I don't race.''

The chunky, dark-haired Mr. Tesich, who still looks young and fit enough to make
the wrestling team, credits his mother with supplying the drive and
determination that helped him overcome a number of handicaps. ''There was no
question in my mother's mind that I would get terrific grades in high school and
go on to college,'' he said wonderingly. ''From the time I was 5, she just kept
telling me that I was destined to be something great. She was certain of it,
plus she gave me great love and security. My father died after five years here.
Our getting together again never really worked for him. Too much time had
passed. The family was my mother's family.

''I did get to know my father, but only from a distance. He was a very unhappy
man who just wasn't living the kind of life he wanted to live.'' The father-son
relationship is a theme that crops up regularly in his work. The father and son
in ''Breaking Away'' is a particularly good example of two generations striving
for mutual understanding.

Mr. Tesich's first year in America fell considerably short of his fantasies.
''First of all, I couldn't speak English, so I was the butt of a lot of jokes
and was put way back in school. There I was, this idiot who couldn't say
anything. That was kind of hard. Besides, East Chicago was pretty ugly to a kid
who'd just come from a European town with a clean river flowing through it, and
with mountains and trees on the horizon. Suddenly there I was in this polluted
place, with its refineries, factories and smokestacks.

''But as soon as I started learning English, it was almost as though I had a
tuning fork in me that could respond to the language and the country. I started
looking at the incredible variety of American life, the nationalities, the
people who would never be living next door to each other in any other nation,
and somehow they were getting along. It was such a unique feeling to see that
kind of flexibility in an enormous country, and to watch it function. It got to
me, and made me love the place very much.''

He also started looking at television, at situation comedies like ''My Little
Margie'' and ''Father Knows Best.'' They, too, helped shape his new vision of
America. ''And the English language! I don't think I ever would have started
writing in my own language.  Serbo-Croation was something you spoke, but you
never saw it from the outside as a tool. The rhythms of English were exciting.
It took a year, but once I learned the language they put me in the right class
again. Later I found that being able to speak two languages gave me a special
vantage point when I began writing.''

At Bloomington, and then as a graduate student at Columbia University, he
majored in Russian literature. He quit the Ph.D.  program because, he says, he
felt he knew better than the professors whenever they commented on the writer
and the writing process.  ''Anyway, I started hanging around undergraduate
writing classes.  Jack Gelber had a playwriting course and I used to go there.
Harvey Swados and Grace Paley were teaching courses in the short story, so I
went there. Finally I got a letter from the chairman of the Slavic department
more or less accusing me of having other interests. I was guilty as charged.''

He was at Columbia during the student rioting against the Vietnam war. ''Some of
the rallies I went to were so religious, they were like the crusades,'' he
recalled. ''I was always the guy who was there, but at a distance, taking it all
in. But once in awhile, even I'd get so caught up in it that I'd catch myself
screaming my lungs out, and it would amaze me. Mark Rudd was in my playwriting
class, Jack Gelber's class, when I first met him. It was like time-lapse
photography. First there was this clean-cut guy who was writing bad plays, and
then there he was with a beard and a bullhorn, raging at a marine sergeant. It
was as though some caveman mentality, some primitive anger, had taken over.

''The destructive things that happened at Columbia and elsewhere in the 60's
were really bad. But I don't think we can dismiss that time by saying that all
it produced was angry weirdos. It really affected many people for life. It
affected me. We had the sense of a community of people heading in one direction
toward something wonderful. God, I miss that!

''But that kind of idealism is ingrained into this country, I think. A lot of
people say it's dead, but I can feel it coming back.  It's that old tuning fork
again, and it's vibrating in a way that makes me feel better. I think people are
tired of this sitting-on-afence mess we're in. And the people who can be
instrumental in finding a way out are the people who survived the 60's with
their idealism intact. That's the central thread of 'Division Street.' It's also
a major concern in 'Four Friends,' which is probably the most autobiographical
thing I've ever written. The bulk of that movie, which takes place in Chicago
-so does the play, by the way - deals with the 60's and with three guys and a
girl whose ideals were tested during those years.''

As the 60's drew to a close, Mr. Tesich left New York, but not for Chicago.
Accompanied by his wife-to-be, Rebecca, he headed west and settled in Denver.
''I was feeling boxed-in by the expectation of a lot of people that, unless I
wrote something very political and leftist, I wasn't being a true writer. But
I'm just not very political.''

His first play, ''The Carpenters,'' was staged at the American Place Theater in
1970. It and some of his subsequent dramatic efforts were seen by many critics
as heavily overloaded with symbolic freight about American society. ''I remember
one critic writing something like 'Symbols fell like snow,' '' he said, with a
rueful smile. ''I think only 'Baba Goya' escaped being interpreted in that
fashion.

''I saw all those people as people, not as symbols of Old America or New America
or whatever. But I think there was something in me, till I started writing
films, that considered theater as a place reserved totally for higher ideas, a
place where you had to be exposed to something that really taxed you. If that
didn't happen, then it wasn't theater. Films were kind of a breakthrough for me.
I could portray reality as reality, and say things that meant a lot to me,
without adding a layer of heightened theatricality in order for it to have
meaning.''

His association with Peter Yates began at the American Place, where Mr. Yates
directed one of his plays, ''The Passing Game,'' in 1977.  ''It's a very
comfortable relationship,'' Mr. Tesich said. ''We don't have to guess what we're
trying to say. I have the same kind of relationship with Arthur Penn. Nobody
feels they have to protect their turf. Nobody's paranoid. It's a nice way to
work. I'm sort of spoiled now.''

The Tesichs, who are childless, still live in Colorado despite his increasing
involvement in films. ''All together, I don't think I've spent more than six
weeks in California,'' he said. ''Live there?  Never.''

Why did he call his new play ''Division Street''? ''I wanted the setting to be
Chicago, and Division Street in Chicago is a street that historically has been
inhabited by almost every nationality, which is one of the points I wanted to
make. I actually didn't know there was a Division Street in New York. It came up
a few weeks ago when we were discussing advertising for the play and someone
said, 'Well, we have to tell people this is a comedy set in Chicago, or
otherwise they'll think it's a piece about struggling Jews on the Lower East
Side.' To me, Division Street is a place that says to its people, 'Well, here
you are. Now where do you go from here?''

Where Mr. Tesich goes from here is deep into ''The World According to Garp,''
which he hopes will be filmed next spring. ''Wait, I'll show it to you,'' he
said proudly, running into the next room for the manuscript, on which he is
working with the director George Roy Hill. ''Naturally the book affects me
differently than it affects John Irving,'' he said. ''I'm sure that a lot of
things John considers crucial are not going to be in the movie, because they
can't be.''

Mr. Tesich says he wrote the first draft of his ''Garp'' adaptation in about
three weeks of intensive work this summer at a borrowed house in Easthampton.
''I hope this doesn't sound artificial,'' he said, ''but I wrote it in a
wonderful state of inspiration. Suddenly, I just knew how to do it, and I don't
this it would have happened if I hadn't gone to Easthampton. I was in this
place, and it was just so clear - the sand, the blue of the sea and the sky -
that my mind felt completely uncluttered. And I needed to see that book with
utter clarity.

''The similarity between Garp and me made me feel much less original, even down
to the fact that we were both wrestlers who became writers. I see Garp as an
idealist, too. You know, I don't want to be preachy. I don't want to put people
off. There's something about optimism that makes people suspect you, so unless
you can just sort of sneak it in there, they just stop listening because it
sounds like Walt Disney. You have to find the back door.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing photo of Steve Tesich (page 4)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW NATION-STATES PICK UP NASTY HABITS OF THE OLD ONES

BYLINE: By FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1388 words

DATELINE: PARIS


The concept of inviolability of national borders and the sovereignty of states
as the keystone of international relations has been buffeted from many
directions lately.

From the founding of the United Nations in 1945 (with 50 members), through a
solemn series of regional and global repetitions, the principle has always been
honored with a substantial amount of breach. But there tended to be excuses -
colonial liberation movements, national unification (Korea and Vietnam,) or
appeals for foreign assistance against outsiders (Angola and Ethiopia).

Now, there has even been an erosion of the sense of need to justify military
excursions with the rhetoric of international morality.  Realpolitik, the
compulsion of naked self-interest, has been gaining ground in the third world,
just when the United States sought to reassert a more principled policy, which
it had been bitterly attacked for lacking in the 1960's and early 1970's.

The Iraqi invasion of Iran, after steady escalation of mutual provocations, is
the latest example of violation of borders and an attempt to change them by
force. The Iraqis had agreed in 1975 on a settlement of their old border dispute
with the Shah, in return for Iran's stopping support for rebellious Iraqi Kurds.
Baghdad could argue that Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's Iran broke the spirit of
the agreement by calling on Shiites to rise against the Iraqi regime, but that
doesn't change the fact that Iraq has gone to war to change the borders, and
then some.

A few weeks ago, Poland appeared to teeter on the brink of becoming another
example of violated sovereignty. Although troops did not move, the threat of
possible Soviet intervention played a key role in limiting the demands of
striking workers against their own Government.

And in December, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan on the pretext that
somebody else was menacing intervention, in effect extending the Brezhnev
doctrine beyond the Warsaw Pact area. That doctrine attempted to justify Soviet
military imposition of a new regime on Czechoslovakia in 1968, claiming that
Moscow had a right to sustain revolutionary governments that were in danger of
falling.

Each of these recent moves responded to a specific set of circumstances, but
each represented one more step away from the hard-won international recognition
of sovereign borders.

The slippage had already gone far, however.  The Organization of African Unity
emerged from the colonial era with a firm rule of respect for the existing crazy
quilt of borders.  It opposed outside intervention because the whole map of
Africa would blow up if ethnic and geographical logic were accepted as reasons
to force change. That view was victorious in the wars of secession in the
Belgian Congo (now Zaire) and Nigeria and helped protect Ethiopia from Somalia
and from Eritrean rebels for years before Addis Ababa's shift into the Soviet
camp.

But it scarcely arose in the 1978 Ugandan invasion of Tanzania, followed last
year by the more effective Tanzanian counterinvasion.  The wars of southern
Africa, until the cease-fire and electoral settlement which created Zimbabwe,
sent Rhodesian and South African troops across borders of neighboring countries
harboring hostile guerrilla movements. That too reduced the meaning of borders.
They are now open almost willy-nilly to the effectiveness of arms.  Zimbabwe
guerrillas dominated vital areas of Zambia during the long Rhodesian war, as the
Palestinians had in Jordan until 1970 and later in Lebanon, where they left
little more than a shell of a state with Syrian, Palestinian, and, for a time,
overt Israeli military control of large sections of the country.

Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia was only barely disguised as support for an
alleged internal rebellion and China's invasion of Vietnam was openly described
as ''punishment'' in unabashed 19th-century terms. The Pakistani border has been
repeatedly violated during the fighting in Afghanistan, though so far the
implicit threat of invasion or, more likely, of dismantling the country with
armed support for restive tribes has not materialized.

There have long been signs of strain on the Libyan-Egyptian border. Western
authorities said there was a new build-up of armies on both sides two months
ago. The Russians again spread the word that they would react vigorously to any
attempt to bring down Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. Without consistent regard for
religion, ethnicity or ideology, Libya in turn has intervened covertly or
overtly from the Philippines to Northern Ireland to the Sudan. Among others,
Tripoli reportedly supported Bishop Abel T. Muzorewa's private army in Rhodesia
and, for a time, helped the Mengistu regime in Ethiopia against Moslem Somalis
and Eritreans. Libya also sent expeditionary forces to Uganda and Chad, where
they suffered serious defeats.

Libya illustrates changing international standards. Before World War I, an
overpopulated hungry country such as Egypt, bordering an almost empty but
suddenly wealthy area, Libya, would simply have spilled over and colonized or
absorbed its neighbor, subject only to the constraints of rival international
interests. After World War II and the proclamation of sanctified borders, such
behavior was defined as aggression and ruled internationally unacceptable. The
strains of unequal circumstance persisted nonetheless. But for nearly a
generation they led to the reverse phenomenon of rich Libya trying
unsuccessfully to ''buy'' population by merger or subversion. The latest attempt
was with Syria, but nobody expects that to last any longer than Colonel
Qaddafi's other state unions.

A generation or more after their liberation, former colonial nations have
acquired increasingly imposing armed forces, which heighten the temptation to
use force. Rules of international conduct devised by the victors of World War
II, fuzzy and at times violated as they have been, are not taken so seriously
among themselves by the new or revived countries who joined the United Nations
too late to help write these rules. And even if they yearned nostalgically for
the old techniques of gunboat diplomacy, the industrial countries have armed the
third world so heavily with modern weapons that it would take a very different
order of force today even to try to impose a decision in the 19th-century way. A
new international atmosphere seems to be emerging. The established powers no
longer find themselves so capable of imposing their system of world order,
thanks in part to the standoff among their blocs and in part to the world
political and power changes which they helped develop. And the rest of the world
has not yet forged from ravaging experience the same felt need for fairly
orderly international relations that European and Western nations learned so
painfully.

The new countries have learned the value of the claim to sovereignty in the
existing system. Without a state, population groups have no voice on the
international scene - witness Palestinian frustration and the perennial despair
of the much larger Kurdish nation. With a state, and armed force, almost
anything goes in the absence of a West European-style system of collective
security or a mutual balance of fear, as in East-West relations.

The European-born state system has been adopted around the globe.  But the will
and ability to accept the responsibilities with the privileges of states have
not always followed the fashion. It took Western states centuries of mutual and
third-party massacre to agree to link rights and obligations. The spread of
international violence seems to show that it isn't enough to have a world
organization where disputes can be argued and lip service paid to principles.
There is still a need for acceptance of the idea that more is to be lost than
gained in provoking war. It has by no means become universally obvious.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon of doors

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOME REFLECTIONS ON WASHINGTON, SEEN IN A MOSCOW MIRROR;
by Craig R. Whitney

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1619 words


As head of the Institute of United States and Canadian Studies of the Soviet
Academy of Sciences and the Kremlin's ranking expert on American-Soviet
relations, Georgy A. Arbatov has the ear of Andrei A. Gromyko and Leonid I.
Brezhnev. He reflects the Soviet leadership's perceptions - and misconceptions -
about the United States. Last week, in the Institute's 18th-century mansion, Mr.
Arbatov sat down over tea with Craig R. Whitney, chief of The New York Times
Moscow bureau, who is completing a three-year assignment there. Excerpts from
their taped interview follow.

Question. To see how bad U.S.-Soviet relations have become, it is enough to look
at the way both countries suspect each other's motives in the Iran-Iraq war. Why
do you keep accusing us of somehow trying to profit from it?

Answer. Such suspicions are widespread, not only in the Soviet Union. I suspect
that had the atmosphere of detente flourished, there would have been much less
chance of a war - in particular, if events in the Middle East had gone along the
lines of the joint Soviet-American understanding of October 1977 instead of the
now rather futile-looking lines of the Camp David agreement. I personally
believe that, in the long run, nobody will gain from this war. That it came to
such a war just shows how unhealthy the situation in the region is. And the
presence of the American Navy nearby doesn't make things any better.

Q. What would be the Soviet reaction if the United States or other Western
countries intervened to assure the flow of oil through the Strait of Hormuz?

A. Very negative. We understand very well what oil means to Western Europe, the
United States, Japan and many other nations. But we don't think it confers on
them any special rights in this area. It would be better for everybody in this
region if the Persian Gulf were demilitarized.

Q. Would the Soviet Union be willing to cut off arms supplies to Iraq?

A. I am not aware that such a problem exists at this moment.  Q. Is arms control
the main agenda item, the only important thing, in U.S.-Soviet relations?

A. The main thing is prevention of nuclear war. Arms control is very closely
connected. But we already have proofs from recent history that it doesn't help
arms control if it remains the only issue in our relations. If we look back to
1972, we will see the scope of our relations has become narrower and narrower.
Maybe the first victim was trade. After the Jackson-Vanik Amendment (to the 1974
Trade Act, linking increased commerce to increased Soviet emigration), nobody
could regard trade as a very promising field.  Then Europe - the United States
has been trying since the Helsinki Conference in 1975 to take advantage of those
hard-won accords to make things as difficult as possible for the Soviet Union.
The Middle East - we lived through wars but came to understand that we had to
establish a mechanism to work together, that it was impossible to reach a
settlement without the United States and impossible without the Soviet Union.
And there was Camp David. Everybody was trying to forget about the Soviet Union,
to isolate it from the settlement in the Middle East.

Q. If President Carter is re-elected, the Administration says it will try to get
SALT II ratified. Suppose it fails?

A. They'd better not.

Q. Can relations improve without the treaty? Can we work around it and negotiate
agreement on medium-range weapons systems in Europe?

A. We can negotiate immediately about medium-range missiles and American
forward-based systems in Europe. But nothing can go into force until the big
equation - SALT II - is solved. There could be damage-limiting operations, but
it would be a tremendous blow to detente and to the future of Soviet-American
relations, to arms control, even to the guarantee of peace.

Q. Suppose Ronald Reagan is elected? He says he is against SALT II.

A. First, we do not interfere in your internal affairs and we are ready to work
with any Government. As a student of American affairs, I can add quite privately
my observation that your politicians tend to drift to the center after they get
to power, from whatever side.  You know our Marxist view about how the U.S. is
ruled. And even in American, non-Marxist terms, nobody would deny the importance
of the Establishment, how it tries to envelop each new President and show him
the way to go. But if Mr. Reagan remains in this position of simply rejecting
SALT II, it will be very harmful to Soviet-U.S.  relations and to basic American
interests.

Q. But who would be your favorite candidate?

A. Comrade Gus Hall.

Q. There is a feeling of strategic inferiority in the U.S.

A. These feelings were encouraged by the difficulty of psychological adjustment
to a new situation. Americans lived for many years behind two oceans, with a
feeling of 100 percent security. Then they lived a couple of decades after World
War II with a feeling of overwhelming strategic superiority. Now they have
become just as vulnerable as we are, as all Europeans. We have lived with that
for centuries. The Americans have become vulnerable for the first time, so there
have been constant attempts to somehow reverse the situation. And there was the
naive hope that more dollars and more military hardware could make you
invulnerable again. Now there is parity. Whatever you do won't be able to change
that. You cannot increase security by arms appropriations, only by detente, by
rebuilding international relations, developing the widest possible cooperation.
No U.S. leader would exchange his strategic situation for our strategic
situation - say, having on the U.S. northern border the Warsaw Pact nations; on
the Mexican border something like China with a billion people, nuclear armaments
and claims to territory beyond the Rio Grande, and somewhere offshore, Japan.

Q. But aren't you confirming that there has been a tremendous Soviet buildup,
that gave you parity with us?

A. We had to keep up with you.

Q. We consulted on Vietnam. Why couldn't we have had consultations on
Afghanistan before you sent in troops?

A. You never consulted us about whether to go into Vietnam, only about how to
extricate yourselves. The Government in Afghanistan is a sovereign Government.
By this reasoning why shouldn't we discuss the composition of a government in
Pakistan, South Korea or El Salvador?

Q. The Soviet attitude toward what is happening in Poland causes great concern.
You accuse the West of interfering, which raises alarms about what you might do
there.

A. There are attempts by right-wing West Germans and Western right-wing trade
union leaders to interfere. We warn them and the Poles warn them. But in
general, the foundations of society there are solid and firm and I'm very
optimistic about the prospects. You must understand why we are so sensitive. The
West has interfered in our affairs from the first days of our revolution. Even
now, you have a Captive Nations Week sponsored by the Congress and the
President. It is declared that, in your opinion, all our republics don't
actually belong to the Soviet Union, even the Urals and the northern Caucasus
and Siberia. We are left with the space maybe from Moscow to Leningrad, from
Smolensk to Gorky. What would the American reaction be if our Supreme Soviet,
our President, would declare a Captive Nations Week of America and demand with a
lot of justification, by the way, that your country be given to whom it belongs:
Indians, Mexicans, Canadians, blacks, and Alaska, maybe, to us?

Q. Is the cold war coming back in the 1980's?

A. It is not easy to freeze the world in a permanent new cold war because of
changed international realities.

Q. What do you have in mind?

A. Begin with the changed military situation. From the U.S.  viewpoint, the cold
war might have seemed meaningful because of a hope to coerce the Soviet Union
into doing what Washington wanted.  These designs never materialized even then.
Under a new balance, under parity, there are no chances at all to succeed in
them. Second, by comparison, Cold War II would involve a much greater number of
participants in international power games, many uncontrollable and even
irresponsible, which would tremendously increase the risks.  Also, the U.S.
allies very probably won't simply follow the leader without thinking of their
own interests. They are greatly vulnerable even to a small war in Europe, which
may be considered strictly ''tactical'' from the American viewpoint. And take
economic relations. West German trade with the U.S. is about as great as with
Eastern Europe. The picture is similar for other West Europeans' trade. Finally,
in the U.S. itself, it won't be easy to endlessly increase a military budget.
Washington can't cut back severely on social appropriations.

Q. Will the Soviet Union always remain willing to improve the atmosphere with
the United States?

A. I don't know about ''always'' and ''willing'' - it depends on what you do in
the meantime. We don't want to denigrate the U.S. It is a strong power that
plays a great role in the world and bears heavy responsibility for its actions.
But we aren't begging for detente as some special favor. The interest is mutual.
And detente can work only if this is understood by both sides.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Arbatov photo of Soviet marines landing on
beach

TYPE: interview

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHEMICAL ARMS: A PANDORA'S BOX;
by Gordon Burck

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 874 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Pandora never heard of nerve gas. In fact, only a few German pesticide
researchers and the managers of their one factory knew about nerve gas before
the end of World War II. In the early 1950's, United States fears of massive
Asian armies and Soviet fears of nuclear attack were allayed by the seductive
potential of lethal chemicals as a mass-destruction weapon. Both countries began
to manufacture huge quantities of nerve gas, putting it in artillery shells,
bombs and missile warheads. By 1970, this passion had faded.  Although thousands
of tons of such weapons remain in stockpiles, and weapons research has
continued, no chemical weapons have been added by either country for a decade.

Fear is now rising again. News reports that an anthrax bomb was exploded in
Sverdlovsk and that lethal chemicals have been used Afghanistan are inconsistent
and inconclusive. Yet merely on the basis of suspicion and rumor, Congress is
reaching into the laboratory for binary chemical weapons. The difference from
past weapons lies in the method of packaging: two components are carried
separately, as with epoxy glue. The lethal nerve gas is created only after the
weapon is fired. What is new is that Congress has appropriated money for a
factory that would make the first chemical weapons in America since 1968.

There is little awareness in Congress, much less among the public, about what
else will escape from this Pandora's box: increasingly heavy costs, weapons
proliferation, new chemicals, escalating danger.

The recent appropriations vote is only the beginning of much greater spending.
Of the overall $22.15 million outlay, $3.15 million will be used to renovate
buildings at Pine Bluff, Ark., where we have made mustard gas and biological
weapons, and the remaining $19 million will equip a chemical plant and an
assembly line for artillery shells that release GB, a nerve gas. But that is
only the first of a four-phase seven-year construction program. Phase two will
expand the chemical plant and triple the assembly line's capacity, to 70,000
shells a month, at a price of $42 million. Phase three will build additional
factories to make bombs and shells for VX, the deadliest existing nerve gas, at
a cost of $100 million. Phase four will provide factories for new weapons
systems at unknown cost.  Making all the weapons could cost $3 billion to $4
billion more.

Worse than the expense will be the damage to our security. Such a concrete
renewal of interest in chemical warfare will legitimize and encourage the spread
of chemical weapons. Industrialized nations have frequently used chemicals on
neighbors (Japan in China), on insurgents (Portugal in Angola), and on peoples
resisting domination (Italy in Ethiopia, America in

Vietnam). None of these victims could strike back in kind. Such victims also
observe that the nuclear powers continue to pursue greater mass destruction in
the name of deterrence. A legal arsenal of mass-destruction chemical weapons
will be attractive as a deterrent of their own.

The new binary technology is well within the grasp of many countries. Terrorists
may also have greater access to it, both at the increasing number of production
sites and also as weapons are shipped to Europe and distributed among
Atlantic-alliance combat units.

Further, we may severely damage our relations with Europe. In 1970, West Germany
invited us to remove our chemical weapons from its soil; they are still there.
America's move toward making new weapons destined for European sites without
first asking our allies might result in eviction of the stockpile in West
Germany. What would be more serious for our nuclear policy is that the Pershing
II missiles, accepted only after much arm-twisting, could be rejected as well.

In the future, the weapons may become hundreds of times more lethal. All nerve
gases in current stockpiles are members of a single chemical family and were
developed between 1938 and 1953. The major American nerve gas, GB, is ''only''
as lethal as curare or chlorine gas. VX, the most lethal nerve gas, is an order
of magnitude less toxic than dioxin, the byproduct chemical in the herbicide
Agent Orange. Botulism is 1,000 times more lethal than dioxin.

Chemical-warfare research could grow rapidly out of this infancy.  The
tremendous advances in the last 25 years in biochemical and medical research
provide the potential for creating chemicals to attack any mental or other
physical process, even limiting the effects to specific races or ethnic groups
(say, those that are dominated by one blood group).

The consequence of the geographic spread of ever more deadly chemical weapons
poses extreme danger for everybody in the world.  Congress has made a terrible
mistake in reopening this poisonous Pandora's box.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Gordon Burck, a chemical engineer, is an analyst for the Center for Defense
Information, a nonprofit research organization.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon of dead humans positioned like dead insects

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LIGHTING UP THE NEURAL SWITCHBOARD

BYLINE: By RICHARD LINGEMAN; Richard Lingeman is author of ''Drugs From A to Z:
A Dictionary'' and, most recently, ''Small Town America.'' He is executive
editor of The Nation.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1110 words


THE MARRIAGE OF THE SUN AND MOON A Quest for Unity in Consciousness.  By Andrew
Weil.  Illustrated. 289 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. $9.95.

ALTHOUGH some will find it hard to believe, the psychedelic movement, in its
innocent early days, had the rather solemn air of a religious quest about it. It
was an underground church of believers sending fervent signals to one another,
adopting distinctive symbols and paraphernalia, speaking a secret language. Its
adepts were like early Christians, carrying on their arcane rituals in
Cambridge, Mass. and Haight-Ashbury, San Francisco.

Eventually, the 1960's psychedelicatessen descended into corruption and
pathology. ''Wasted'' was the underground term for being totally stoned; Vietnam
G.I.'s used it to mean death. And, in the ordinary sense of the word, lives were
wasted - in jail, in mental institutions, in Dropoutsville. The dream was dead
before anyone could decide if it was a good one.

In view of the dream's collapse, Andrew Weil's book ''The Marriage of the Sun
and Moon'' has the curious ring of an account written by a left-over acolyte of
the 1960's who is carrying on the work of the original band of true believers.
Dr.  Weil, a graduate of Harvard Medical School and a research associate in
ethnopharmacology at the Harvard Botanical Museum, writes in a spirit of
scientific inquiry; he is an explorer of off-the-beatentrack pharmacological and
spiritual byways, observing the local flora, fauna and eth-nology carefully
(though with charm and lightness of touch) and setting down a record of what he
learned. Many chapters of the book, which describes his travels through Central
and South America, are about drugs - or rather the naturally occurring
mood-altering substances in plants and mushrooms. His objective is the ''high''
- a state of altered consciousness to be valued because it promotes a ''fuller
use of the nervous system'' and ''the emergence of unconscious forces long
denied by our culture.''

But though he retains some of the quasi-religious motives of the psychedelic
pioneers, Dr. Weil inevitably belongs to a later generation, tempered by the
backlash of ecstasy. When he journeys to the Valley of Sibundoy in southwestern
Columbia in search of an Indian who knows the ritual ways of preparing the yage
vine, he finds the area overrun by hippie tourists. The old medicine men demand
money and liquor before they will perform their services - which, as it turns
out, they do perfunctorily and in a state of drunkenness from aguardiente, the
''local firewater of South America.'' Dr. Weil can only observe sadly the
passing of a way of life, and the abasement of a ritual.

Yet the author believes that drugs are neither bad nor good in themselves. The
drug experience, he writes, is not chemically determined; it consists, rather,
of ''indirect associations between the feelings drugs cause and experiences
waiting to be released by our nervous systems.'' In other words, the
individual's expectations and state of mind (the ''set'') as well as the
cultural context (the ''setting'') in which the drugs are taken are controlling.
Moreover, he contrasts ''pure'' or chemically refined drugs, such as cocaine,
heroin or sugar, with their natural antecedents (cocoa, opium, raw sugar), and
finds the former baneful and the latter at least relatively benign. ''Pure''
drugs produce their effects quickly and directly, while the natural forms are
lower-key, more controllable.

Through it all, Dr. Weil keeps his sights on the valuable high, which results
from ''some sort of interchange of energies between the solar mind and the lunar
mind'' - between the conscious, problemsolving, rational side of the mind and
the darker intuitive side, which has been repressed in our culture, Dr. Weill
says. Drugs or - preferably - other techniques of achieving a high restore the
lines of communication with this aspect of our being. Neither side should
dominate; there should be a healthy balance, a ''marriage,'' for ''without the
directing and guiding function of solar consciousness, the lunar mind is
productive of disorder, violence and insanity.''

At one point, Dr. Weil alludes to the ''oceanic feeling,'' a phrase used by
Sigmund Freud to describe the religious experience. But whereas Freud located
religion in the yearning of the unconscious for infantile dependence, Dr. Weil
places it in the nervous system - the religious experience as powerful
pulsations lighting up the neural switchboard; God as divine spark crackling
between the synapses; a new Church of the High, templed in our brains. Religious
feeling is reduced to an energy flow triggered by drugs or ''nonhurtful pain''
or yoga or eating mangoes or dance or meditation or even jogging.

Some may find this interpretation the most extreme solipsism; God, after all, is
held by most religions to be the ultimate power outside us, toward which we
strive for union. Yet religions as diverse as Buddhism and Quakerism have taught
that direct experience of God arises from within. Dr. Weil is offering a
scientific hypothesis - yet to be proved of course -that will more precisely
describe this feeling. He speculates that the lunar consciousness is located in
the ''deep-brain and brainstem structures as opposed to cortical ones.'' Perhaps
one day ''we will be able to detect increased activity of the deep centers
during experiences of alternate states,'' he writes.

In any event, this is a steadily interesting and intriguing book, whether or not
one accepts the author's sun and moon division of the mind. And although Dr.
Weil's travels take him deep into the exotic country of psychedelia, he emerges
with a temperate and sane report that seeks to take us beyond drugs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHERE TAXES ARE BITING DEEPEST

BYLINE: By JOHN MAHER

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 20, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1245 words


WE USED to blame Washington for all our tax woes. Today, however, we have
discovered that it is the state and local governments who have more ruthlessly
preyed upon the taxpayer.

In 1950, for example, states and localities collected $15 billion in taxes, only
43 percent as much as the Federal heist of $35.2 billion. But in 1977, the lower
forms of government made off with $176 billion, or 72 percent of the Federal
take.

In the 27 years after 1950, Federal tax collections rose at a compound annual
rate of 7.4 percent, while state tax collections compounded at 10.4 percent and
local taxes at 8.6 percent.

If we apply these annual rates to a 30-year period, bringing them up to 1980, we
can better grasp their meaning. For every $100 of taxes collected in 1950, the
governments will collect the following amounts in 1980: Federal, $851; state,
$1,946; local, $1,188.

So the states' haul per $100 becomes, in 1980, more than double the Federal
rate; the take of the cities and towns is about 40 percent more than what
Washington gets per $100.

At the same time, civilian employment at the Federal level has climbed at a mere
1 percent annually, about the same rate as the population has grown. But state
and local employment has risen at nearly 4 percent annually. Again, Federal debt
shows an average annual increase of something over 5 percent, while states and
localities have gone into the red at nearly 8 percent a year.

Before a citizens' tax revolt can take hold, however, more is required than an
increase in the tax burden. The ability to bear the burden must become weakened.
And here inflation, an insidious tax, has done the job. By eroding incomes and
living standards, inflation has undermined the ability to bear the growing
burden. Put differently, most families have enjoyed no increase in their income
to match the growth in tax burdens.

It is hardly surprising that California's Proposition 13 tax revolt of three
years ago has spread across much of the country and is now breaking out in
Connecticut. Eighteen months ago, for instance, I surveyed residents in towns
adjacent to New Haven and found overwhelming sentiment among homeowners and
renters alike for statutory limits on property taxation. In New Haven, Cheshire,
Hamden, Waterbury, and elsewhere, the citizens are aroused.

Since 1950, Connecticut's taxes and expenditures have risen more than 17-fold,
growing at a rate of more than 10 percent a year, which is in line with national
averages.

At all levels of government, politicians respond to outcries of injury with the
same refrain: If taxpayers demand services from government, then they must pay
for them. It sounds true enough. But is it?

On the Federal level, such ''services'' include the war in Vietnam and subsidies
to every strong minority with an effective lobby. In Connecticut, they include
the buy-out from farmers of their land development rights, the I-91 connector
through New Britain, the earth-moving devastation along the Merritt Parkway and
a current proposal to install 70 miles of lighting along the highways.

Were these expenditures for services that the citizens demanded?  At the local
level, Hamden is a fairly representative city. As in other cities throughout the
county, millions of dollars were spent there on new schools, despite a decline
in the school population.  Now, some of the schools must be closed. A few years
ago, plans for a second high school were aborted only after a stormy session at
town hall. In the last year or so the city fathers created a highway extension
of Sherman Avenue, one of the least traveled roads in the city, and continued
many other such building schemes.

Which of these expenditures are for ''services'' that the residents of Hamden
have demanded?  Recent news stories tell of a new development called Old Hamden
Center, diagonally across from the town hall. Into this, the state will pour
$750,000 to permit the town to unscramble traffic, $350,000 coming from an Urban
Action Grant. Private investment is expected to be $7 million with a tax yield
to the town of $150,000 annually. Is this an example of state and city spending
for services demanded by the citizens?

To top off the Hamden story, two final injuries are noteworthy.  First, Mayor
Richard Harris proposed a 10 percent increase in town spending. Second, the new
evaluation of residential property points to a doubling of property taxes on
residences and, simultaneously, tax relief for business.

Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr. once said that referenda on spending and taxation
were not cures for the ills of government excesses and that such measures as
Proposition 13 unnecessarily restrict the power of elected officials. Instead,
he said, if elected representatives do not perform responsibly, the voters
should throw the rascals out at election time.

But Senator Weicker's proposal to exchange one set of elected rascals for
another will never prove as effective in checking irresponsible officials as
will a statute requiring voter approval of tax and budget proposals. Ask the
folks in Cheshire, where residents have voted on the budget several times so far
this year.

There is, however, a related proposition. If the competitive market system is
allowed to work smoothly, the need for many costly decisions by politicians will
be eliminated. Consider again the example of the development of the Old Hamden
Center shopping area. If this is a profitable, attractive investment, let
private enterprise do the developing, without hundreds of thousands of dollars
of state aid. If it is profitable, it will pay its fair share of taxes. If it
does not pass the test of profitability in a free market, let it remain undone.
Surely no tax is forgone from so unprofitable a venture. The same is true for
loan guarantees for Chrysler and Lockheed and subsidies for the United States
Post Office and many other inefficient operations.

Certainly market competition is a better way to achieve efficiency in the use of
our resources than is the joint decision of Federal, state and local politicians
who are yoked to the dilemma of spending B's money to benefit C.

Tax revolts against the excesses of cities and states will undoubtedly spread.
Homeowners, faced with incomes that barely keep up with inflation, are unlikely
to tolerate the growing burdens of state and local taxes. Since property taxes
bear no necessarily close relation to ability to pay, such taxes are a prime
target for reform. The United States Supreme Court has already cast aspersions
on the fairness of using property taxes to finance educational outlays.  Thus,
movements to reform the tax and to assert citizen control over budgets are
likely to succeed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
John Maher is a professor of economics at Southern Connecticut State College in
New Haven. He recently held appointments as a guest scholar at the Brookings
Institution and as a visiting faculty fellow at Yale.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTERS NOTEBOOK:A TRIAL THA OFTEN SEEMS A FLASHBACK TO THE EARLY 1970'S

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1097 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 5


For the last two weeks, prosecutors at a remarkable trial here have been trying
to prove that two former officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, W.
Mark Felt and Edward S. Miller, conspired to violate the Constitution they had
sworn to uphold. The trial, which will resume on Monday, has become a symbolic
test of the old investigation bureau, its tactics and values. At times it has
seemed that the Nixon Administration and the Vietnam War were on trial with Mr.
Felt and Mr. Miller. Defense attorneys have said they may call on the former
President to testify about the political climate of the early 1970s.

The mood in the courtroom has been as unusual as the spectacle of high
Government officials being tried for deeds dating back seven or eight years.

The prosecutors have called many bureau agents and former agents to testify
about the break-ins they had conducted while hunting for fugitive members of the
Weathermen group of militant anti-Vietnam War radicals in 1972-73. The
indictment charges that Mr. Felt, as acting associate director of the bureau,
and Mr. Miller, as chief of the intelligence division, authorized the break-ins,
known as ''black bag jobs.''

Reluctant Witnesses

The agents have been reluctant witnesses, so reluctant that, in a bizarre role
reversal, the prosecutors often have tried to discredit the testimony of their
own witnesses and the defense attorneys have tried to rehabilitate them.

John W. Nields Jr., the chief prosecutor, had come to an impasse rather quickly
when questioning John G. Glennon, a retired agent who now is a high school
principal.

''Did there come a time when you did a bag job on the home of Jennifer Dohrn?''
Mr. Nields asked.  ''I object to the adjective 'black bag job,' '' Mr. Glennon
replied. There followed this exchange: Q. What is a black bag job? A. I remember
reading about a black bag job. Something like a burglar running around with a
little bag of tools, doing something he's not supposed to do.

Q. Did you do a black bag job on Jennifer Dohrn's home? A. No, I did a
surreptitious entry.

In an ordinary jury trial, the jury decides questions of fact in the light of
the law as explained by the judge. But in the Felt-Miller trial, jurors also
have been asked to consider complex legal questions. The trial often sounds like
a law school seminar on the Fourth Amendment, which prohibits ''unreasonable
searches and seizures.''

James L. Vermeersch, an agent who has admitted to ''15 to 20 surreptitious
entries,'' insisted that they had been legal and constitutional. He acknowledged
that the evidence could never be introduced in court because, he said, it was
''tainted,'' having been obtained through a ''technical trespass,'' without
obtaining search warrants or the occupants' consent.

Mr. Nields suggested that the evidence was contaminated because it had been
obtained through illegal Government conduct. Mr. Nields appeared to win the
legal argument, but Mr. Vermeersch's testimony supported a central contention of
the defendants, which Mark D.  Cummings, an attorney for Mr. Felt, underscored
for the jury.

''This whole area of what's legal and illegal, what's tainted and not tainted,
what's admissible and inadmissible, is pretty confusing, isn't it?'' Mr.
Cummings asked.

''Yes,'' said Mr. Vermeersch, ''it is to me, even to this date.''

The crimes alleged in the indictment of Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller can be
understood only in relation to the passions aroused by the Vietnam War. Those
passions seem distant now. But every so often they were flashed back before the
jury in a particularly abrasive courtroom exchange.

Documents have been introduced as evidence to show that Mr. Miller authorized
agents to enter and search the Manhattan apartment of Frances Schreiberg, an
attorney for some of the Weathermen, in December 1972.

Miss Schreiberg testified, in response to questions from a defense attorney,
that she had given money to the Provisional Revolutionary Government,
representing Vietnamese Communists, at the Paris peace talks in 1971.

''You gave money to an enemy of the United States?'' asked Brian P. Gettings, an
attorney for Mr. Felt.  ''They were not my enemies,'' Miss Schreiberg replied.
''The United States was interfering in a war between two factions in Vietnam.''
The money, she said, was to be used for ''humanitarian purposes.''

Mr. Gettings was eager to pursue the point, but William B. Bryant, chief judge
of the Federal District Court, told him to ''move on to something else.''

The targets of the break-ins were described as ''friends and relatives'' of the
Weathermen radicals. But that description does not fit Murray Brookchin, who
said that he was an anarchist and that he ''hated the Weathermen.'' The
Weathermen, he asserted, were Marxist-Leninist-Maoists whose desire to
centralize power for their own purposes was totally at odds with his libertarian
philosophy.

Typically, when Federal agents entered an apartment, they would leaf through
books looking for letters sent by Weathermen fugitives.  Mr. Bookchin had 2,000
to 3,000 books in his apartment, and Mr.  Glennan remembers that it was ''a
mess.''

Mr. Bookchin, a 59-year-old college professor in a corduroy coat and baggy
pants, said that when he had learned of the break-in, he resented it as ''a
violation of the Bill of Rights, for which I would give my life.''

Defense attorneys have done well in cross-examining bureau agents called
originally as prosecution witnesses. But they have not fared as well in their
relations with Judge Bryant. The judge, in overruling objections of the defense
attorneys, has scarcely concealed his irritation at the way in which they seemed
to challenge his authority.

Judge Bryant told Thomas A. Kennelly, an attorney for Mr. Miller: ''You've made
an objection. I've made a ruling. I don't appreciate your speech.''

The whispered conferences at the bench, over the use of national security
information, were said to have been even more heated.  ''The judge doesn't like
us very much,'' said one of the six defense attorneys, who described himself as
a ''lightning rod'' for the judge's criticism.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: notebook

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 881 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
AS SUMMERS DIE. By Winston Groom. 319 pages. Summit. $12.95.

WINSTON GROOM'S new novel, ''As Summers Die,'' begins with a dangling gerund -
''The land, looking from its highest point, stretched westward and south'' - and
ends with a ''differently than.'' In between, the narrative informs us that
during the time before the novel's action begins, ''a dark and silent geologic
process was taking place, and in fact had been taking place long before the
first'' ''progenitors'' of what turns out to be the story's villains ''began
hauling themselves up out of the primordial mud. The billions of living
organisms of the Paleozoic era, having long since died and sunk into the ground,
were slowly pressed into a warm, decayed and gaseous loam. Eventually, by the
fierce quashing weight of the earth itself, this loam was squeezed, fermented,
pressed and boiled into a thick, black, gooey substance called oil.''

And yet despite such failures of syntax, diction, and tone, ''As Summers Die''
turns out to be so good-natured in its outlook on people, so innocent in its
apprehension of American history, and so sure-handedly plotted, that I found
myself slipping into it as if it were the old swimming hole underneath the
covered wooden bridge - a pleasure we all remember, though for most of us it
never existed.

The Rich Against the Poor

Actually, it is a kind of fairy tale that Mr. Groom has written.  It's the rich
and powerful against the poor and humble, contending over who owns the rights to
what may be a huge amount of that ''thick, black gooey substance called oil,''
which appears to lie beneath several hundred acres of land on the coast of
Louisiana. The rich and powerful Holt brothers say it's theirs because their
family has owned the land ever since an ancestor was granted it by the Spanish
throne. The blacks of Creoletown (the time is 1959) say it's theirs by
squatters' rights, or, in the case of Elvira Backus and her two light-skinned
children, Daniel and Priscilla, because old Jonathan Holt 2d went up to Elvira's
place one Christmas shortly before he died and deeded her the place in
acknowledgement of the two children she had borne him.

Enter P. Willis Croft, a 42-year-old lawyer who once saw his
green-light-at-the-end-of-the-pier in the form of a carnival-float blonde who
smiled and threw him a chocolate kiss, but who has since settled for a feckless
career of representing petty felons. Willis, called Willie, is hired by Elvira
Backus and the blacks of Creoletown to defend their property against the
plundering Holt brothers and to help them drill the oil themselves. And before
too long we find ourselves hissing the villains as they figuratively twirl their
black mustaches, and cheering for Willie as he champions the underdogs and cats.

Why are these cliches so satisfying? Partly because Mr. Groom has invented any
number of lively touches -like the scene in which Willie embarrasses the Holt
brothers' stuffy lawyer by paging him in a pornographic-movie theater. Or the
character of the Holts' Aunt Hannah Loftin, upon whose failing memory Willie's
entire legal case depends, but whose recollections get sharper and sharper, as
Willie discovers to his delight, with each succeeding glass of sherry she
consumes. Or the character of Daniel Holt, the mulatto son of Elvira Backus and
the Holt brothers' father, who likes to quote Shakespeare's ''bastard'' speeches
as he consolidates the power of the Obsidian Oil Corporation, which he and
Willie have helped to form.

But more than these touches, it is Mr. Groom's endorsement of the American Dream
that is appealing - the notion that Willie Croft, the son of a gas-station
attendant, can catch the brass ring and make it into his hometown's elite, or
that the humblest American black can acquire the power conferred by owning and
refining that ''gooey substance called oil.''

Upward Mobility or Not?

At the end, Mr. Groom - whose previous book was the powerful Vietnam war novel
''Better Times Than These''- tries to set some limits on his fantasy of upward
mobility. Whitsey Loftin, a member of the Holt clan who has inadvertently teased
Willie into falling in love with her, finally decides she can't marry him
because she doesn't really love him. And Willie bitterly realizes that for all
his taste of glory and the luxuries of wealth, he is better off among those
''with the cutoff ears from knife fights, or the three-card monte sharks and
wife beaters and child molesters and automobile thieves, shop-lifters, crap-game
sponsors, pickpockets, brawlers, small-time embezzlers and safe-crackers -the
lower end of the wonderful human race, who, despite their felonious intentions,
felt the heat and rage and loneliness that he was feeling now.''

But we know better. We know that the morning after the novel, Whitsey will
change her mind and welcome Willie onto the carnival float. Then we can go on
dreaming our silly dreams.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 7, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Efforts by U.S. to Trace Missing Soldiers Stalled

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 159 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 6


Two United States officials who visited Hanoi for talks on missing servicemen
learned something about Vietnamese tracing procedures but otherwise made little
progress, sources close to the talks said here today.

Lieut. Col. Paul Mather and James Tulley, who are based here with the Joint
Casualty Resolution Center, held working-level talks with Vietnamese officials
from last Wednesday to Saturday on the estimated 2,500 Americans missing since
the Vietnam War.

The sources said the Vietnamese officials had refused to agree to hold regular
talks on the subject, saying their capability had been reduced by budget and
personnel problems resulting from what they called the continuing threat of a
Chinese invasion.

But the sources were told that the main difficulty was that the Vietnamese felt
that the United States was allied with China, and the officials did not want to
cooperate in the tracing efforts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 7, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

'Government-Sponsored Flows' Of Refugees Denounced by U.S.

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 157 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Oct. 6


In a speech before the United Nations, the United States today denounced
''government-sponsored and government-directed flows'' of refugees as a
''vicious new threat to the international community''.

Victor H. Palmieri, the United States Coordinator for Refugee Affairs, named no
governments in his address at a session of the 40-member executive committee for
the program of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

However, many delegates took his remarks about governments that ''vent their
bitterness over their failed revolutions'' by forcing their citizens into exile
as being directed against Vietnam and Cuba.

Mr. Palmieri also alluded to Cuba when he told the committee that the expulsion
of ''common criminals and of other persons who represent threats'' to the
country where they land was a ''grievous violation'' of international norms.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 7, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ASIA TO STAR IN MUSEUM'S BIGGEST ANTHROPOLOGY SHOW

BYLINE: By LAURIE JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1276 words


The largest anthropological exhibition ever undertaken by the American Museum of
Natural History in its 111-year history will open Oct. 17.

The caravan of visitors will travel, in miniature, the length and breadth of
Asia. Scenes will be re-created in perspective by 23 life-size or scale-model
dioramas, and at least a dozen more lifesize displays will stand among the 150
tall, glass-walled exhibit cases.

After 14 years of planning and nearly a decade of winnowing its 60,000 Asian
artifacts, the museum has chosen 3,000 treasures to illustrate the cultural
history of the continent from Peking Man to the 20th-century Middle East. The
resulting permanent exhibition occupies 20,000 square feet of second-floor space
newly designated as the Gardner D. Stout Hall of Asian Peoples. Mr. Stout, a
77-year-old retired investment banker, was the museum's seventh president,
serving from 1968 to 1975.

Made Possible by Gifts

The $2.8 million cost of the hall, including contract construction, was offset
by state, city and private contributions, the largest being $1 million from the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

''No media can do justice to Asia,'' warns a placard at one entrance, but the
museum will try to ''give a very slight inkling of the immensity of the Asian
contribution to human life.''

There is also the impact of recent events, notably the renewed American
relationship with China. ''For the last 40 years, the United States has been
heavily involved in Asia, but our policies are often based on fundamental
misunderstandings of its cultures and civilizations,'' said Dr. Walter A.
Fairservis Jr., who since 1966 has been the scientific authority for planning
the new hall.

Today's headlines speak most urgently of Iran, Iraq, Israel or Afghanistan, he
noted. A few years ago the most anxious attention was focused on Vietnam,
Cambodia, Laos, India, Lebanon. Even earlier, Ameri can history was being
dislocated by events in Korea, Japan and the Philippines.

The museum, Dr. Fairservis said, ''has been careful to avoid the political,''
dealing with cultural regions rather than specific countries. ''But while the
material of cultures has been around for a long time,'' he added, ''museums are
just beginning to zero in on the meanings.''

Because the Asian collections preserve artifacts that many cultures have all but
discarded in their rush to technology, the hall evokes ways of life that have
disappeared. Most of its thousands of items - masks, sculptures, tapestries,
shrines, garments of rich and poor, musical instruments, ceramics, jewelry,
tools and household objects - were collected between 1870 and the 1920's, the
heyday of both private and institutional expeditions.

On view, for example, is the first piece ever collected for the then new museum
more than 100 years ago, a shaggy fiber-thatch raincoat from rural Japan that is
worn with straw boots. Dr.  Fairservis himself headed three of the museum's own
archeological expeditions between 1949 and 1960 - one to Pakistan and two to
Afghanistan - and his own Manchu-size fur coat is among the extensive Afghan
exhibits. Another is a black purdah-style robe - crystal-pleated from neck to
floor, with an embroidered face veil covering even the eyes - in the ''Women in
Islam'' section of the hall.

Other sources have been tapped more recently. Doranne Jacobson, a cultural
anthropologist from Columbia University's Southern Asian Institute, went to
central India for two months to assemble ''a few hundred things that were all of
a piece'' for a Hindu wedding scene.

''Basically I 'arranged' a Hindu marriage for the museum, using people in the
village as models,'' said Dr. Jacobson, a research associate and consultant at
the museum. ''I dealt with tailors, potters, shopkeepers and bazaars. And some
individuals gave or sold me things.''

Religions the 'Cement'

The exhibition, emphasizing Asian religions as the ''cement'' of many cultures,
includes a special section on Christian Armenia, artifacts from Masada (a gift
of the Israeli Government) and fetishes from primitive animism. Zoroastrianism
from Persia is represented, and the eye-for-an-eye Code of Hammurabi, in
Babylonian cuneiform, is on a recently acquired fiberglass reproduction of the
original monolith, which was rediscovered in 1910.

Museum staff members and temporary aides have been sorting, cleaning and
restoring the items for display over the last several years, while more than 100
curators, technicians and artisans - carpenters, masons, fabric specialists,
model makers and background painters - worked on the installations, with Alex
Williams as the chief designer.

''I salute Dr. Fairservis for subjecting himself to criticism from all the
specialists in hundreds of fields -we're painting with a broad brush,'' Thomas
D. Nicholson, director of the museum, said in his office in one of its twin
turrets on West 77th Street. ''The staggering challenge, of course, was Asia's
diversity of peoples and environments - from tundra to desert, from highlands to
flood plains. We chose two simultaneous approaches.

''First, we take you through the traditional peoples of Asia in a geographic
pattern, with color-coded exhibit units covering eight regions. Second, we use
the cycle of life as a unifying concept. We deal with birth, death and other
family mileposts and relationships, as expressed in life styles and the arts.
That includes theater and dance as well as music, which is heard throughout the
exhibit. And always the understanding is that life style follows environment.''

Recent Changes Bypassed

The other basic decision was to ''trace the elements of change in Asia'' only to
the 20th-century period before World War II. ''After that,'' Dr. Nicholson said,
''we're still too close to judge the permanent significance.''

The Hall of Asian Peoples joins the Hall of Man in Africa, opened in 1968;
People of the Pacific, now being expanded to reopen as the Margaret Mead Hall of
Pacific Peoples next year; three halls covering American Indians and Eskimos,
and the less anthropologically oriented Hall of Mexico and Central America.

The new hall has two entrances. One, expected to be used by twothirds of the
visitor traffic, starts the visitor at the beginning of man's rise to
civilization, stressing Asia as a part of Eurasia. A Neanderthal child's grave -
a reproduction of one that Soviet archeologists found in Central Asia in the
1940's - is covered with a fur rug and surrounded with upright goat horns.

At the other entrance is Samarkand, a painted fantasy of its overflowing bazaar
and gold-domed mosque and minarets. To the museum, this ''fabled crossroads'' of
caravans and trade routes typifies the cross-pollination of Asian cultures.

Outside this entrance is a statue of Gautama, the Buddha of India, labeled with
a legendary explanation: He was born to Queen Maya ''as the result of a visit by
a white elephant who ran around the bed three times and then returned to the
Heavenly Mountain.''

''You can go through and read all the labels,'' Dr. Jacobson said, ''but some
people can only stand so much without turning off, so you don't boggle them with
what they can't grasp quickly.

''Other people want to examine every last detail. Even a scientist can go
through this exhibition and get a visual thrill.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 7, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ASIA TO STAR IN MUSEUM'S BIGGEST ANTHROPOLOGY SHOW;
An Appraisal

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 588 words


The glittering new Hall of Asian Peoples at the Museum of Natural History is a
crowd-pleaser - a tour de force complete with canned Asian music, a real Mongol
skeleton sprawled in front of a representation of China's Great Wall and a
little flying carpet whisking over the mosques of Isfahan.

It is jammed with breathtaking objets d'art and curios - snuff botttles and
porcelain, bronzes and tapestries, Samurai swords and Afghan daggers. It is an
eclectic but pleasing mix of objects that are immensely valuable and others that
can be bought for a few dollars at airport souvenir stores.

As usual, the museum's diorama makers are the stars of the show. A set of
miniature dioramas by George Campbell particularly catch and hold the eye. They
depict four historic trade cities, including Ur in the third millenium B.C., and
their miniature architecture, street scenes, costumes and perspectives are
marvelously convincing.

But the hall purports to be a comprehensive ''historical and cultural panorama
of the world's largest continent,'' and in this, despite its many attractions,
it does not succeed.

Gaps in the Show

One of the problems is in the definition of Asia, a question scholars have never
entirely settled. The organizers chose to construe the word in its broadest
classical sense, to include a region from Mesopotamia to the Bering Strait. This
conveniently permitted inclusion of all kinds of odds and ends for which there
never had been appropriate niches in the rest of the museum.

A problem arising from this broad definition is that too much had to be crammed
into too little space. Furthermore the show lacks proportion, and some of its
lacunas are glaring. The Middle East, China, India and Central Asia, including
even Tibet, are well represented, but Southeast Asia is virtually ignored.
Museum of ficials give two reasons for this. The first is that the recent
Vietnam War is still so fresh in memory that displays about Southeast Asia could
irritate the political sensitivities of viewers.

Another reason mentioned by Dr. Walter A. Fairservis Jr., the exhibition's
principal organizer, is a constraint preventing the museum from acquiring
archeological artifacts from much of Southeast Asia. Private collections that
have been offered to the museum from many important sites in Southeast Asia are
assumed to have come originally from looters, and the museum does not accept
anything suspected of being contraband.

But this does not excuse the exhibition's failure to fill in the gaps with
paintings, charts, models or dioramas. The hall offers nothing to evoke for the
visitor the splendor of such benchmarks in Asian civilization as Champa and
Angkor in Indochina and Pagan in Burma, to name but a few.

As for sensitivity about the Vietnam War, the idea that political considerations
should affect the design of an anthropological exhibit seems surprising. For
that matter, one wonders about the wisdom of trying to weed war out of
anthropology in the first place. The Hall of Asian Peoples has been cleansed of
conflict, apart from a few weapons and a very interesting Japanese family
history that notes in passing that most of one family was killed off by World
War II.

The Hall of Asian Peoples is flawed. But for all that, it is a sparkling exhibit
that no New Yorker should miss.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 7, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

INGRID BERGMAN: NO REGRETS AT 65

BYLINE: By JUDY KLEMESRUD

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1097 words


Ingrid Bergman, 65 years old but looking nowhere near it, took a quick puff on a
cigarette in her Pierre Hotel suite, smiled, and said in her husky voice still
strongly flavored with a Swedish accent:

''I'm happy it all happened to me. I've had a very rich life. There was never a
dull moment. When I was very young in Sweden, I used to pray, 'God, please don't
let me have a dull life.' And He obviously heard me.''

The three-time Oscar winner was talking about her rather remarkable life in
which she went from being America's No. 1 box office star to the subject of an
international scandal when, in 1949, she left her husband, Dr. Petter Lindstrom,
and daughter, Pia, to live in Italy with the director Roberto Rossellini, who
directed her in ''Stromboli.'' She bore him an out-of-wedlock son before they
were finally married, and then went on to have two more children (twin girls) by
him, to divorce him, marry husband No. 3 (Lars Schmidt, a Swedish theatrical
producer) and divorce him.

For a time, public opinion was so against her that a United States Senator,
Edwin C. Johnson of Colorado, denounced her on the Senate floor in March 1950 as
''one of the most powerful women on earth today - I regret to say, a powerful
influence for evil.'' He also introduced a bill demanding that actresses be
licensed.

Miss Bergman, who today lives alone in the Chelsea section of London, set it all
down in her new book, ''Ingrid Bergman, My Story,'' written with Alan Burgess.

Book Suggested by Son

She wrote it, she said, at the suggestion of her 30-year-old son, Roberto
Rossellini, now in the real-estate business in Monte Carlo, who she said told
her: ''Mother, I wish you'd put it down. Do you realize that when you are dead
many people will throw themselves on your life story, taking information from
gossip columns, rumors, and interviews. Your children can never defend you,
because we don't know the truth.''

Unlike many recent movie star autobiographies, Miss Bergman's skips explicit
sexual details and avoids naming lovers she did not marry. She does say,
however, that she had been ''in love'' with Robert Capa, the photographer who
died in 1954 while covering the French war in Vietnam, and that she had
''loved'' the late Victor Fleming, who directed her in ''Joan of Arc'' in 1948.

''I'm a tasteful person,'' Miss Bergman said.  Miss Bergman, who at 5 feet 8
inches was initially considered too tall to be a Hollywood star, looked very
slim in an orange and black printed long-sleeved cotton dress. As usual, she
wore little, if any, makeup, and her dark blond hair was worn in a simple
pageboy style, parted on the side and falling a little below her ears.

In her book, Miss Bergman writes frankly about the two mastectomies she
underwent in separate operations in 1974 and 1979. ''For a long time I didn't
tell many people,'' she said. ''Then, when we had to cancel a tour of 'Waters of
the Moon' in America in 1979, after a big success in London, it brought out a
lot of rumors. So I wanted to set them straight. The rumors had it that I was
dying. Besides, I thought it might help other women, and show them that life
isn't over.''

Does she bear any grudges about the way she was treated after she went to live
with the late Mr. Rossellini? ''Not any more,'' she said. ''If you live long
enough, they come and say I'm sorry. In 1972, your Senator Percy gave a speech
on the Senate floor apologizing for the way I had been treated, and that sort of
healed all wounds.'' Miss Bergman was in Washington at the time, appearing in
the play ''Captain Brassbound's Conversion.''

Asked why she thought Americans had reacted so strongly against her, Miss
Bergman said: ''People say they loved me so much because of my roles in 'The
Bells of St. Mary's' and 'Joan of Arc' and that the love turned to hatred. They
had put me on a pedestal, and they felt they had been cheated, that I had
betrayed them.''

Would she have married Mr. Rossellini if she hadn't become pregnant by him?
''Nobody's ever asked me that before,'' she replied softly.  ''Certainly, I
would have married him. I was very much in love with him, for heaven sakes.''

Miss Bergman said that although her favorite film was ''Joan of Arc,'' she
thought that the one most Americans remembered her for was ''Casablanca.''

''It was such a mess, it was so terrible,'' she recalled of the making of the
1942 film, in which she played the woman to whom Humphrey Bogart uttered the
immortal, ''Here's looking at you, kid.'' She added: ''There was no script and
the dialogue was written at night as we went along. Bogey was very upset, and
stayed mostly in his dressing room, sulking. I never really got to know him.''

Asked about her career plans, Miss Bergman said sharply: ''Nothing. My career is
finished. I don't get anything I'm interested in, and I don't see anything
ahead. Besides, it's very good to stop when you're on top. Why go downhill in
small parts just to be in the movies?''

The actress said that although she lives alone in London, ''I am not lonely. I
have a lot of friends.'' She spends her days, she said, ''cleaning my house,
doing the dishes, watering the plants, doing a little shopping and thinking
about Christmas.''

Miss Bergman said she also liked to visit her four children and three grandsons.
Besides Roberto, they include Pia, now 42 and a television journalist who lives
in New York with her husband and two sons, and the 28-year-old twins, Isabella,
who lives in New York with her husband, the director Martin Scorsese, and
Ingrid, who lives in Rome with her husband and son.

Miss Bergman said she often thought of Pia, whom she was not allowed to see for
long periods of time during her marriage to Mr.  Rossellini, while she was
filming Ingmar Bergman's ''Autumn Sonata'' in 1977. In it, she played a world
famous pianist who visits her embittered daughter (played by Liv Ullmann) after
staying away from her for seven years.

''But Pia and I never had such dramatic scenes,'' she recalled.  ''We laughed
more. I asked Ingmar if we could put some jokes in, but not with Ingmar. He's
too serious.''

When asked if she thought her children by Mr. Rossellini had suffered from the
scandal surrounding their parents, Miss Bergman emitted a single loud guffaw and
said: ''My Italian children are perfectly fine. They always laugh when people
say, 'Oh, you must have so many complexes.' They have no problems of any kind.
They are Italians. Italians don't have the problems you Americans have, always
running to psychoanalysis and trying to find your roots.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 8, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam to Get U.N. Wheat Aid

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 41 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 7


Vietnam will receive 11,600 tons of wheat for victims of a typhoon last month,
officials of the United Nations World Food Program said here today. The typhoon
seriously damaged the rice crop that is to be harvested soon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 8, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Flagship of Seventh Fleet Saves 2 Boats of Vietnamese Refugees

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 105 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Oct. 7


The flagship of the United States Seventh Fleet, Blue Ridge, has rescued 91
Vietnamese refugees aboard two crippled boats in an apparent new surge of
Indochina ''boat people,'' the United States Navy said today.

An antisubmarine P-3 Orion plane on a regular refugee-spotting flight sighted
the first boat, carrying 54 Vietnamese, in the South China Sea southeast of Ho
Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon.

The second refugee boat, carrying 37 refugees, was located by a helicopter from
the Blue Ridge about 30 miles away from the first vessel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 8, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FACTS SUPPORT BOTH SIDES ON HOLTZMAN DEFENSE VOTES;
by Ralph Menthal

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1326 words


A review of Representative Elizabeth Holtzman's eight years in Congress shows
that she has voted against every defense appropriation and authorization bill,
as her opponents charge, while still voting billions of dollars for defense, as
she has contended.

Each of the eight pro-defense votes Miss Holtzman cites were supplementary
appropriations - end-of-year grab-bag bills containing civilian as well as
military items. Miss Holtzman also lists votes for budget resolutions, which set
spending goals rather than actually allocating funds.

In addition, her staff members now acknowledge that in their haste to respond to
opposition allegations, they inadvertently overstated some of the amounts for
which she voted. The same haste is blamed for other slips and initial confusion
on how to respond to the opposition's attacks.

The conflicting claims over Miss Holtzman's defense record relate to
Congressional budget procedures, by which money to run the Federal Government is
voted on in several steps. The complexity allows Miss Holtzman, the Democratic
candidate for United States Senator from New York, and Alfonse M. D'Amato, the
Republican, Conservative and Right to Life candidate, to offer sharply opposing
interpretations of her votes on defense spending.

Votes Are a Campaign Issue

That record has become an issue in the hotly contested three-way race, which
includes the incumbent, Senator Jacob K. Javits, a longtime Republican running
on the Liberal Party line. His voting record on defense is not being disputed.

Whether the defense issue will ''cut,'' as Mr. D'Amato obviously believes, or
pass largely ignored by the electorate, as last month's Democratic primary
results suggest, cannot be ascertained until Election Day, Nov. 4. Meanwhile,
the debate has generated considerable heat, if not always light.

The attack on Miss Holtzman's defense record began last summer during the
Democratic primary campaign. Bess Myerson's staff drew up a list of 44 key
defense bills that Miss Holtzman, usually along with only a few dozen other
members, voted against from 1973 to 1979. Miss Myerson - who later lost to Miss
Holtzman, along with former Mayor John V. Lindsay and the Queens District
Attorney, John J.  Santucci - charged that Miss Holtzman had voted ''No'' on
every defense appropriation, authorization, procurement and construction bill.
All were passed.

The charge was later picked up by Mr. D'Amato. ''She has voted against every
Department of Defense appropriation bill since she entered Congress,'' he stated
on Sept. 30, citing a list of 62 bills and 28 amendments he said she opposed.
''That is not cutting fat.  That is cutting out the muscle and bone. That is
voting against the existence of an Army, Navy and Air Force.''

Miss Holtzman Lists Record

The same day, calling her record ''misstated,'' Miss Holtzman replied, ''I have
regularly voted for legislation containing billions of dollars for defense,''
and she listed six bills she had supported. She also cited nine budget
resolutions containing a total of about $356 billion for defense that she had
supported.

Linking recent setbacks in military readiness to ''failure to scrutinize defense
expenditures closely,'' she added: ''All too often, defense bills are not drawn
up to satisfy basic defense needs - rather, they are written to provide
contractors with huge profits or committee chairmen with military installations
to help them win re-election.''

The real issue, she contended, is this: ''Who will stand up to the Pentagon
against ever more extravagant and unworkable weapons systems? Who will expose
the waste and collusion in military procurements?''

The key measures Miss Holtzman opposed ran from a $20.4 billion bill for
military procurement and aid to Vietnam in 1973 through a $119 billion general
defense appropriations measure in 1978 to a $3.8 billion authorization for
military construction in 1979.

Four Absences Cited

This year, according to the Myerson campaign staff, Representative Holtzman was
absent for four major defense votes, including the $53.1 billion authorization
bill for weapons procurement and on the conference report on incentives for
middle-level military personnel, which passed unanimously.

Rather than challenge the accuracy of those citations, Miss Holtzman has issued
her own list of supplemental bills that she supported, providing extra funds for
a combination of Federal agencies, including the military. The second
supplemental appropriations bill for 1976, for example, totaled $12 billion, of
which about $2.5 billion went for defense purposes, mostly pay increases. Labor
and Health, Education and Welfare received considerably more - $3.6 billion.

Miss Holtzman also cited Congressional budget resolutions of 1975, 1976, 1977
and 1978 that she had supported. She said they ''contained $356.5 billion for
defense.'' However, such resolutions -mandated under the Congressional Budget
Act of 1974 that reformed the budget process starting with the 1977 fiscal year
- are considered merely to set spending targets, not actually vote funds.

Miss Holtzman's list of supplemental appropriations bills that she supported,
including defense items, began with a $1 billion program for pay increases for
military and Defense Department civilian employees and military retirees and for
defense programs in 1973.  That bill also contained amendments to halt the
bombing of Cambodia.  The list concluded with 1980 bill for $6.3 billion for pay
increases for military personnel, military retirees and civilian Defense
Department employees, defense operations and maintenance and military
construction.

In addition, the record shows several defense measures Miss Holtzman supported
but did not cite. On Nov. 29, 1973, she voted for a losing amendment to restore
$1.2 million for 700 equal-opportunity and race-relations officers in the
military. On Aug. 5, 1974, she joined a large majority to provide extra pay for
physicians in initial residency who agreed to stay in the armed services.

On July 22, 1976, she voted with the necessary two-thirds majority to override
the veto of a bill to authorize $3.3 billion for military construction projects
and to require a year's notice of Pentagon plans to close or substantially
reduce any military base in the United States. On June 30, 1977, she voted with
the majority against an amendment to delete $26 million for development of a new
engine for the Navy's F-14 fighter plane. (Later she voted against the bill
itself.)

An Error Is Acknowledged

Carter Eskew, Miss Holtzman's news secretary, acknowledged that the Sept. 30
press release inadvertently overstated by $1.6 billion the supplemental defense
appropriations bills she had voted for. He attributed the mistakes to ''press
inquiries and irresponsible attacks by Mr. D'Amato,'' adding: ''We rushed out a
response perhaps a little too fast.'' There was also some initial uncertainty
and internal debate, he indicated, over whether she should dispute the
allegations or seek to turn them into an affirmation of her independent stance.

The news release, Mr. Eskew acknowledged, also contained a ''typographical
error'' in Miss Holtzman's assertion that ''45 percent of our F-18
fighter-planes can't fly because the Air Force lacks the spare parts to maintain
them.'' The F-18 is still on the drawing board, and the reference, he said, was
to the F-15. Also, he said, the reference in the press release to the new ''X-M
tank'' referred to the X-M1.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Chart

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CAMPAIGN REPORT;
Ford Says a Role for Nixon Could Hurt Reagan Effort

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 225 words

DATELINE: ST. LOUIS, Oct. 8


Former President Gerald R. Ford said today that participation in the Republican
Presidential campaign by former President Richard M. Nixon could hurt Ronald
Reagan.

Mr. Ford had been asked at a news conference about reports that Mr. Nixon had
been acting as an adviser to the Reagan campaign. ''For him to interject himself
at this point is unfortunate,'' Mr. Ford said.

The former President later held a meeting with Mr. Reagan that was scheduled at
the last minute when both men found themselves in St.  Louis.

Mr. Ford told a news conference afterward that President Carter's statement that
Mr. Reagan's election would divide the nation was ''really undoing all the
healing I was able to do during my Presidency.'' He had said earlier in Chicago
that Mr. Carter's contention might reopen wounds caused by the Watergate scandal
and the Vietnam War.

The former President was asked to explain the difference between his statement
in the 1976 campaign that ''Governor Reagan can't start a war, but President
Reagan could'' and Mr. Carter's recent hints that Reagan is a warmonger.

''I think in retrospect we could have been more moderate,'' Mr.  Ford said. He
said his statements were made in a ''totally different context. That was in a
primary between two Republicans.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HERS;
by Lynne Sharon Schwartz

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1354 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
The Hers column was designed as a forum for writing by women. For the next
several weeks, it will be written by Lynne Sharon Schwartz, whose first novel,
''Rough Strife,'' was recently published by Harper & Row.

HE always sat in the back row, as far away as he could get: long skinny body and
long face, thin curly hair, dark mustache. Sometimes his bony shoulders were
hunched as he peered down at his notebook lying open on that bizarre prehensile
arm that grows out of college classroom chairs. Or else he leaned way back, the
lopsided chair balanced on two legs and propped against the rear wall, his chest
appearing slightly concave beneath his white shirt, and one narrow leg, in
jeans, elegantly stretched out to rest on a nearby empty chair.

Casual but tense, rather like a male fashion model. Volatile beneath the calm:
someone you would not want to meet on a dark street. His face was severely
impassive in a way that suggested arrogance and scorn.

He must have been about 27 years old, an extremely thin young man - ascetic,
stripped down to the essentials. His body looked so brittle and so electrically
charged that I almost expected crackling noises when he moved, but in fact he
slipped in and out silently, in the wink of an eye. His whole lanky,
scrutinizing demeanor was intimidating. He would have no patience with anything
phony, I imagined; would not suffer fools gladly.

About every fourth or fifth class he was absent, common enough for evening
session students, who had jobs, families, grown-up lives and responsibilities. I
was a trifle relieved at his absences - I could relax - yet I missed him, too.
His presence made a definite and compelling statement, but in an unintelligible
language. I couldn't interpret him as readily as I could the books on the
reading list.

I was hired in the spring of 1970. It was wartime. Students were enraged. When I
went for my interview at Hunter College I had to walk past pickets into a
building where black flags hung from the windows. I would use the Socratic
method, I earnestly told the interviewer, since I believed in the students'
innate intelligence. To myself, I vowed I would win their confidence. After all,
I was scarcely older than they were and I shared their mood of protest. I would
wear jeans to show I was one of them, and even though I had passed 30 and was
married and had two children I would prove that I could be trusted. I was
prepared - even eager - for youthful, strident, moral indignation.

Far from strident, he was totally silent, never speaking in class discussions,
and I was reluctant to call on him. Since he had a Spanish name, I wondered
whether he might have trouble with English.  Bureaucratic chaos was the order of
the day, with the City University enacting in microcosm the confusion in the
nation at large; it was not unusual for barely literate or barely
English-speaking students to wind up in an Introduction to Literature class. His
silence and his blank arrogant look could simply mean bewilderment. I ought to
find out, but I waited.

His first paper was a shocker. I was surprised to receive it at all - I had him
pegged as the sullen type who would give up at the first difficult assignment,
then complain that college was irrelevant. On the contrary, the paper,
formidably intelligent, jarred my view of the fitness of things. It didn't seem
possible - no, it didn't seem right - that a person so sullen and mute should be
so eloquent.  Someone must have helped him. The truth would come out in
impromptu class papers, and then I would confront him. I bided my time.

After the first exam he tossed his blue book onto my desk, not meeting my eyes,
and, wary and feline, glided away, withdrawing into his body as if attempting a
disappearing act. The topic he had chosen was the meaning of ''the horror'' in
Joseph Conrad's ''Heart of Darkness,'' the novella we had spent the first few
sessions on.

He compared it to Faulkner's ''Intruder in the Dust.'' He wrote at length about
racial hatred and war and their connection in the dark, unspeakable places in
the soul from which both spring, without sentimentality but with a sort of
matter-of-fact, old knowledge. He knew Faulkner better than I did; I had to go
back and skim ''Intruder in the Dust'' to understand his exam. I do know that I
had never before sat transfixed in disbelief over a student paper.

The next day I called him over after class and asked if he was aware that he had
an extraordinary mind. He said, yes, he was. Close up, there was nothing
arrogant about him. A bit awkward and shy, yet gracious, with something antique
and courtly in his manner.

Why did he never speak in class, I asked.  He didn't like to speak in front of
people. His voice and his eye turned evasive, like an adolescent's, as he told
me this. Couldn't, in fact. Couldn't speak.

What do you mean, I said. You're not a kid. You have a lot to say.  You write
like this and you sit in class like a statue? What's it all about?

He was in the war, he said, and he finally looked at my face and spoke like the
adult that he was. He was lost for a long time in the jungles of Vietnam, he
explained patiently, as if I might not know what Vietnam was, or what a jungle
was, or what it was to be lost.  And after that, he said, he couldn't. He just
found it hard to be with people. To speak to people.

But you're so smart. You could do so much.  I know. He shrugged: a flesh and
blood version of the rueful, devil-may-care, movie war hero shrug. Can't be
helped.  Anything can be helped, I insisted.  No, he insisted back, quietly. Not
after that jungle.  Hunter had a counseling service, free. Go, I pleaded.  He
had already gone. They keep asking me questions about my childhood, he said, my
relationship with my parents, my toilet training. He grinned quickly, turning it
on and off. But it doesn't help. It's none of that. It's from when I was lost in
that jungle.

You must work, I said. Don't you have to talk to people when you work?  No, he
was a meter man.  A what?  He went around checking on cars, to see if they had
overstayed their time at the parking meters.  You can't do that forever, I said.
With your brains!  Well, at least he didn't have to talk to people, he said
sweetly.  For now. Maybe later on he would get braver.  And what would he do if
I called on him in class? If I made him talk?  Oh no, don't do that, he said,
and flashed the wry grin again. If you did that I'd probably run out of the
room.

I never called on him because I didn't want to risk seeing him run out of the
room. But at least we stopped being afraid of each other.  He gave up his blank
look, and occasionally I would glance at his face, to see if I was still making
sense or drifting off into some seductive, academic cloud of words.

I thought of him a lot this summer after I saw young men lined up at post
offices to register for military service. I thought of him also when I heard
Ronald Reagan and John Anderson, on television, solemnly pledge themselves to
the defense of this country's shores.  No candidate has yet pledged himself to
the defense of this country's young men, to ''taking every measure necessary''
to ''insure'' that their genius does not turn mute and their very lives become
the spoils of war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TV:'CHILDREN OF AN LAC,'RESCUING VIETNAMESE ORPHANS

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 34, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 565 words


ONCE again, as in Tuesday's ''A Private Battle,'' CBS-TV is offering a movie
based on a true story. And once again, reality seems unnecessarily reduced to
simplistic melodrama.

Tonight at 8 o'clock, ''The Children of An Lac'' recalls the efforts of three
women to evacuate more than 400 orphans from South Vietnam in 1975. The war was
in its final days. Madame Ngai, founder of the orphanage, was desperately
seeking the help of the authorities, Vietnamese and American.

She is joined at the last minute by two long-time supporters of Saigon's An Lac,
which means Happy Place. Betty Tisdale, formerly a secretary to Senator Jacob K.
Javits, Republican of New York, and Ina Balin, an actress who learned about the
orphanage while touring Vietnam in U.S.O. shows. Miss Balin wrote the story,
stars as herself and is associate producer.

Using Manila as a reasonable facsimile of Saigon, the film illustrates the
plight of the children by focusing on a few representative cases - the little
guy who was adopted as a brother by the older kid with a crippled foot, the
young girl who turns mute after watching the murder of her parents and the girl
whose father was obviously an American black. As they should be, these vignettes
are moving.

The story of the three women, however, is not so much dramatized in Blanche
Hanalis's script as merely described. Miss Balin is the chief narrator, telling
the story of An Lac to everyone from a sympathetic television reporter to
preoccupied Government officials.  That leaves Miss Tisdale, played with
suburban tidiness by Shirley Jones, employing little more than a posture of a
gritty determination. ''I'll tell you something,'' she says, ''these children
are coming with us tomorrow whether the Government likes it or not.''

By far the most interesting character is Madame Ngai, portrayed by Beulah Quo in
a performance of strength and dignity. But even here, details are annoyingly
sketchy. It seems the woman started her orphanage in North Vietnam and is now on
a ''death list'' on charges of child-stealing. More information would be
helpful.

In addition, the uncompromising Madame Ngai is used rather arbitrarily in purely
dramatic terms. She is introduced as a veritable saint, dedicated only to the
children. Later, however, the same dedication becomes an obstacle in efforts to
save at least some of the children. Temporarily, the fanatical Madame Ngai is
the villain of the piece. The other women, needless to say, are never less than
models of enlightened efficiency.

As Miss Balin has never been more than a minor star in the Hollywood firmament,
it may seem a wee bit unbelievable that a Vietnamese official would greet her
saying: ''It's a pleasure to meet you. I'm a big fan of American movies.''
Perhaps it is just a case of an associate producer's being allowed a measure of
exaggeration.

There is no doubting, though, the extent of Miss Balin's admirable involvement
in the real An Lac. She eventually adopted three of the portrayed children,
including the Vietnamese-black girl, Nguyet, who plays herself, quite sweetly,
in this film. John Llewellyn Moxie directed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ina Balin and Ba-Nhi Mai

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 382 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 10, 1980 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

GOLDIE HAWN AS 'PRIVATE BENJAMIN'

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 728 words


IN civilian life, Private Benjamin (Goldie Hawn) is Judy Benjamin, the pampered
only child of Teddy and Harriet Benjamin, and the world's most unlikely soldier,
recruited after two disastrous marriages, one of which lasted six months, the
other six hours. Judy Benjamin is, as she puts it, ''29 years old and trained to
do nothing,'' the sort of woman whose second wedding day is almost ruined when
an ottoman arrives upholstered in beige when she had distinctly ordered
mushroom. Judy really doesn't have much to think about.

Things in this country must be returning to what President Warren G. Harding
called normalcy. ''Private Benjamin,'' which opens today at the Sutton and Forum
Theaters, is the kind of service comedy that fell into disrepute during the
Vietnam War, but which, before that, had been a staple in almost any year's
release schedule. Everybody made them - Laurel and Hardy, Abbott and Costello,
Martin and Lewis, Bob Hope, Chaplin, Keaton, even Cary Grant, who starred in
Howard Hawks's classic ''I Was a Male War Bride.''

Private Benjamin'' is an old friend brought up to date in this woman's Army,
which Judy Benjamin joins under the impression she's signing up for an extended
stay at some place like Elizabeth Arden's Main Chance, anticipating three years
of swimming, tennis and boating, plus supervised weight-loss.

Directed by Howard Zieff and written by Nancy Meyers, Charles Shyer and Harvey
Miller, ''Private Benjamin'' is a good deal of fun even toward the end, when
Judy Benjamin must make her predictable choice between returning to an idiotic
private life or staying with the career that's made a woman of her.

Miss Hawn, even when she must look sort of wilted, like the figure on the top of
a week-old wedding cake, is totally chaming as the bemused suburban princess who
foresakes a house with a live-in maid, her membership in the country club and
her role as man's best friend to find life's meaning in the service. She's an
enthusastic farceur, but her characterization is so firmly based that she can
slip from slapstick to romantic comedy and back without losing a beat.

The film also surrounds her with funny actors, not all of whom have been funny
before. Robert Webber is hilarious as a gung-ho paratroop commander whose lust
gets the better of him when, on maneuvers, he finds himself with a terrified
Private Benjamin at 16,000 feet. Eileen Brennan is a comedian, but she's never
been seen to such good effect in a film as she is in ''Private Benjamin,''
playing a manic, spit-and-polish officer with tendencies toward that love that
dare not speak its name.

Also terrifically good are Albert Brooks, the groom in Judy Benjamin's second
marriage, and Sam Wanamaker and Barbara Barrie, as Judy's protective parents,
who are so mortified when she joins the Army that they tell their friends she's
in a mental hospital. Armand Assante plays a French heel with whom Judy falls in
love while on duty in Europe, and Mary K. Place is prominent as her best Army
buddy.

Mr. Zieff demonstrates great skill in keeping the gags aloft and in finding new
ways by which to free the laughs trapped inside old routines about latrine duty,
war games, forced marches and calisthenics.

''Private Benjamin'' is funny, and every now and then, like Judy Benjamin,
possessed of unexpected common sense. Judy is ultimately most appealing because
she's no dope. ''I really didn't get the point of 'An Unmarried Woman,' '' she
says at one point. ''I would have been Mrs. Alan Bates so fast.'' She could also
be a movie critic.

Unlikely Soldier

PRIVATE BENJAMIN, directed by Howard Zieff; written and produced by Nancy
Meyers, Charles Shyer and Harvey Miller; director of photography, David M.
Walsh; film editor, Sheldon Kahn; music by Bill Conti; released by Warner Bros.
At the Sutton, Third Avenue and 57th Street; Forum, Broadway and West 46th
Street; RKO 86th Street I, at Lexington Avenue, and other theaters. Running
time: 110 minutes. This film is rated R.

Judy Benjamin . . . . . Goldie Hawn
Capt. Doreen Lewis . . . . . Eileen Brennan
Henri Tremont . . . . . Armand Assante
Col. Clay Thornbush . . . . . Robert Webber
Teddy Benjamin . . . . . Sam Wanamaker
Harriet Benjamin . . . . . Barbara Barrie
Pvt. Mary Lou Glass . . . . . Mary Kay Place
Sgt. Jim Ballard . . . . . Harry Dean Stanton
Yale Goodman . . . . . Albert Brooks


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: photo of Goldie Hawn

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ACCORD ON RULES OF WAR

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 566 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Oct. 9


A 72-nation conference completed drafting a treaty here today to make nonnuclear
war less inhumane for civilians.  The treaty with its three protocols covering
the new rules of war will be opened to signers at the United Nations in New York
six months after its formal approval at the final meeting tomorrow of the
four-week session.

Governments have six months to sign if they want to be ''original parties'' to
the pact. The treaty will enter into force after 20 countries have ratified it.

Delegates said the most important achievement was the banning of the incendiary
bombing of cities and other areas where civilians are concentrated even if
military objectives are present.

While regretting the absence of agreement on the limitation of the use of
flamethrowers and napalm against soldiers, neutral or nonaligned countries such
as Sweden, Switzerland and Mexico see the total ban on incendiary bombing of
civilian areas as a meaningful advance.

Another Parley May Be Convened

These same countries, and the International Committee of the Red Cross, also
attach importance to a treaty provision that will allow another conference to be
called to amend the treaty terms or elaborate new protocols banning or
restricting the use of additional weapons.

For Francois Pictet, the Swiss delegate, this provision was a consolation
obtained by countries that had hoped for more progress.  Hans Blix of Sweden
said the listing of specific interdictions on the use of booby traps was ''no
mean achievement.'' Designed primarily to protect civilians, these rules forbid
such ruses as the attaching of booby traps to the sick or wounded, to toys,
kitchen utensils and food or drink, as well their concealment at grave sites or
medical facilities.

In addition, the pact seeks to prevent the mass production of booby traps by
banning all those that take the form of an ''apparently harmless portable
object.''

The protocol dealing with booby traps also requires that records be kept of
land-mine emplacements so that they may be made harmless when the fighting is
over.

The conference also adopted a protocol, drafted at a first session last year,
banning weapons that scatter fragments, such as glass or plastic, that are
undetectaable by X-ray in the human body.

Approval of this third protocol proved no problem, delegates say, because such
nonmetallic fragmentation arms are not believed to exist despite rumors that
they were used in Vietnam by the Americans.

Nevertheless, Yves Sandoz of the International Red Cross welcomed the adoption
of the protocol because ''it establishes the principle that weapons that cause
wounds that cannot be treated should be banned.''

Mr. Sandoz sees the treaty as reinforcing the 1949 Geneva conventions and their
additional protocols on the protection of war victims by dealing with specific
weapons. The conventions lay down only in general terms bans on weapons that
''cause superfluous injury.''

To become a party to the new treaty, a government must accept at least two
protocols, which means that acceptance only of the one of what is still a
phantom weapon will not suffice.

The treaty and its protocols are to apply not only to wars between nations but
also to conflicts in which ''peoples are fighting against colonial domination
and alien occupation and against racist regimes in the exercise of their right
of self-determination.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AN OMINOUS GLOBAL FAILURE TO CONDEMN IRAQI AGRESSION

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 697 words


To the Editor:

The invasion of Iran by Iraq is one of the most blatent acts of naked aggression
of this unhappy era. Yet scarcely any member of the international community has
taken note of that fact and condemned the aggression.

It is no answer to say that this failure reflects the international isolation
that the act of taking American hostages has produced.  Iran's isolation is a
fact which a great many Iranians at home and abroad deeply regret. We opposed
the taking of the hostages as morally indefensible and politically destructive.
But we also understand that the taking of the hostages was a response, we
believe a deplorable one, to past American interference in Iran's internal
affairs.

Iran's revolution is a historical fact; the clock cannot be turned back. Today,
Iran is faced with mounting domestic problems resulting from its revolutionary
transformation, and there are as many opinions in the country as how best to
solve these problems as there are problems.

Irrespective of our ideological divisions, we all agree on one thing: We all
love Iran, and under no circumstance can we accept aggression against our
territorial integrity and sovereignty. We are also united in the belief that
Iran's problems are purely domestic affairs, and we will not permit interference
from any outside power.  It is the height of arrogance and a delusion on the
part of Iraq's leaders to think that as a part of its demand for so-called peace
it can dictate the nature and form of government for the Iranians.

We agree with the U.N. concern over the gravity of the threat to international
peace posed by this war and yet the almost unanimous reluctance displayed by the
international community to condemn Iraq's aggression is itself symbolic of even
greater danger to international peace, which in the final analysis rests on the
acceptance of and respect for the principle of sovereignty for every nation
state.

It is extremely important to recognize that the implications for suspending
consideration of this vital principle by the international community as the
issue in this conflict transcends any consideration of issues surrounding Iran's
diplomatic behavior since the revolution, no matter how that behavior is
interpreted. Can the international community any longer legitimately condemn
Vietnam's invasion of Pol Pot's Cambodia or the Soviet Union's invasion of
Afghanistan when if has failed to do so in the case of Iraq's invasion of Iran?

It has not been the Arab's habit to attack their Moslem neighbors or to act
opportunistically when their brothers are faced with domestic difficulties and
are under international pressures. It is an irony of fate that precisely at this
historical juncture, when Iran has attempted to become truly independent in its
foreign relations and has for the first time in its history fully supported the
Arabs' principal cause, it has come under armed attack by an Arab regime that
views itself as the champion of that very cause.

We hope that all Arab nations will consider fully the deeper implications of
this aggression and its long-term impact upon the entire region. By now it
should be well established that as long as Iraq's army occupies Iran no
diplomatic effort by an intermediary can succeed. Only when Iraq has recinded
its territorial ambitions can diplomacy prevail.

We hope and pray that before the flames of war spread devastation and ruin in
both countries and before the conflict assumes an irreversible path, Iraq will
withdraw its forces and respect the treaty which it signed with Iran only five
years ago. All our other differences can then be discussed through diplomatic
efforts for a lasting peace.

Iraq must realize that sooner or later Iran will regain its capacity to fully
protect its territorial totality. Whoever the leaders are in Teheran at that
time, the memory of this aggression will burn fresh. It is to the benefit of the
entire region, and most of all Iraq, to pursue settlement of our remaining
differences.
R. MOGHADAM MARAGHEI, Potomac, Md., Sept. 29, 1980

The writer is a former Governor of Azerbaijan and member of the Constituent
Assembly of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT CARTER HAS DONE TO THE U.S. DEFENSE POSTURE

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 527 words


To the Editor:

May I add a footnote to Tom Wicker's comment that Mr. Carter has suffered some
''low blows,'' namely the (Republican) suggestion ''that he had deliberately
neglected or weakened the nation's military capacity'' (column Sept. 28).n
1975-76, a number of civilian strategists came to the conclusion that the trends
in the military balance were seriously askew; that, without immediate steps to
correct these adverse trends, our missiles, indeed many of our defense systems,
would become vulnerable in the early 1980's, with chilling political and
military implications. This is a matter of historical record.

As a nonpartisan member of the then Secretary of Defense's team, I can record
that not only were the courageous decisions taken to alter the trends but funds
were obtained for the first real increase in defense spending in almost a
decade. This was in the face of the post-Vietnam national mood - but correct in
its anticipation of an early turn-around of the American people when they had
been presented the facts of the Soviet drive.

It is also a matter of record that Mr. Carter campaigned on a platform to cut
the defense budget. Because of Congress's growing recognition of the
deteriorating military balance, he found it impossible to reduce that budget,
but he did manage to cut much of the muscle out of the programs previously
initiated to repair the balance: The MX program budget was halved, as was the
ship construction budget; the B-1 was, of course, canceled, and it was
incorrectly asserted that the cruise missile was a substitute.

Equally important was the ''opportunity cost'' of four years in which we also
undertook no further programs to deal with the incipient vulnerability of our
defenses. Instead, the years were spent facing up to - and finally conceding -
what had already been understood. Thus, for example, we did not undertake the
Minuteman ''multiple-aim-point system'' of multiple silos for each missile,
whose deployment I believe would by now have otherwise begun. Had we done so,
the Minuteman's vulnerability would have been perceptibly under repair as soon
as it had been apparent to our adversaries.  Instead, we are faced with a
decade, perhaps, of susceptibility to Soviet nuclear blackmail.

I might add that many of these strategists, speaking within the community,
envisaged the consequences to such inaction in interesting terms -a Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan, for example; Soviet client aggression around the globe;
the fall of the Shah for lack of adequate U.S. support as our military position
weakened; increasing divisiveness between us and our European allies as Moscow
drove a wedge between us by way of the Persian Gulf. This is all on the record.

Now, four years later, it has become fashionable to support the view that was
then clearly laid out by our defense leaders.  Admittedly, prophecy, when it
turns out to be correct, has never been popular. But must it also be considered
a ''low blow'' to state what is empirically verifiable?
W. SCOTT THOMPSON, Associate Professor of International Politics Fletcher School
of Law and Diplomacy Medford, Mass., Sept. 29, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WELCOME TO DOEVILLE

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 887 words

DATELINE: MINNEAPOLIS


Despite Edward M. Kennedy's efforts, American liberalism is emerging from the
1980 election season in a terminal state.  The number of politicians who
campaign on platforms for oncehallowed liberal goals such as school busing or
national health insurance would scarcely add up to a a rump chapter of the
American Civil Liberties Union. Yet liberalism's collapse has not moved the bulk
of the population to the right, whatever the hopes of Republican strategists.
Few people buy the notion that our energy problems will be solved by ''turning
loose'' the oil companies. None but the most zealous corporate and right-wing
ideologues think that our nation's cities could be rebuilt and our unemployed
youth gainfully employed if only trade unions were eviscerated, environmental
and consumer safeguards rolled back, and women returned to the kitchen.

An enormous vacuum exists in American politics. Public-opinion polls chronicle
declining confidence in big government and big business. What has yet to be
grasped is the counterweight to both that is forming now: an active, informed
citizenry itself. If one looks under the rhetoric about the the ''me decade''
and the meanness supposedly poisoning the American psyche, evidence of a new
spirit of civic idealism and community self-help can be found everywhere.

Self-help groups have grown tremendously in recent years and now involve more
than 15 million people. The scale of voluntary activism itself has expanded
dramatically. According to one study, the number of volunteers grew from 24
million in the mid-1960's to 37 million a decade later.
Neighborhood-organization efforts have transformed thousands of communities.

The National Commission on Neighborhoods last year listed over 8,000
organizations. Moreover, citizen participation in such groups often belies the
image of a disillusioned, cynical public and suggests instead that people are
eager to participate in political processes when they feel they can make a
difference. Thus, an election held by the Union Sara Community Organization in
St. Louis for its neighborhood corporation board drew 6,000 voters, whereas only
1,600 voted from the same area in the municipal election. Other forms similarly
express citizen activism. Networks of women office workers' organizations have
spread across the country. Cooperatives have added more than a million new
members a year. In 1979, the American Agriculture Movement had offices in 1,400
rural communities.

Focused on concrete issues such as utility rates, property taxes, consumer
ripoffs, and crime control, citizen activism also reflects a deep hunger shared
by ever-increasing numbers of once-silent Americans for some say in shaping the
post-Vietnam, post-Watergate world. It represents the reappearance of an old
populist, democratic, American tradition that stretches from the Revolution to
the late Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s ''Crusade for Citizenship.''

Whatever the outcome of the 1980 elections, citizen action will come to
political expression in the next several years. Key themes already suggest
themselves as elements of a ''citizens' agenda'' for the 1980's around which
citizens' politics could coalesce:

* Despite declining faith in government, most Americans do not desire to
dismantle government but rather to have its operations democratized and its
domain carefully defined. Out of citizen activism have come many proposals and
models for return of certain services and other resources to communities
themselves.

* If government programs justified in the name of abstract ''progressive
principles'' have experienced an erosion of public faith in recent years, the
platitudes of ''free-enterprise economics'' similarly are no longer taken at
face value. And, through a variety of means, citizens seek a greater voice in
economic decisionmaking about issues such as plant relocation, regulation, and
investment.

* Citizens have increasingly come to skeptically view calls for large-scale new
weapons systems such as the MX missile that can ravage life. Such resistance
grows from the belief that ''nationalsecurity'' rhetoric cannot excuse the
weakening of our nation's natural and human resources and that our greatest
strength and claim to world leadership comes from our traditions of freedom,
community spirit, and self-help.

From one perspective, this is a time of crisis and paralysis; from another, it
is a time of transition, when people are beginning to challenge the language of
abstract rationalism, secularism, and fixation with material growth above all
that has held sway since the 18th century. Like our revolutionary forebears of
that age, our own generation may well be laying the groundwork for a new kind of
society and a different, more-democratic vision of the future. Again, it may
prove inspiration to peoples everywhere.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Harry C. Boyte is author of the forthcoming book ''The Backyard Revolution:
Understanding the New Citizen Movement.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV WEEKEND;
FOR CHILDREN,MORALS, MISSIONS,AND MAKING MUSIC

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 35, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 944 words

DATELINE: NBC


TV'S newest entry in the sensitive world of children's programming is ''Drawing
Power,'' which will have its premiere at 12:30 P.M. tomorrow. In this instance,
animation, long the staple of standard ''kidvid,'' is being combined with ''live
action.''

Its consultants on content and delivery include Dr. Lee Salk, the child
psychologist, and William H. Hooks of the Bank Street College of Education. The
result is described by NBC as ''cartoons with a conscience.'' According to Mary
Alice Dwyer, head of children's programs, ''We not only enhance positive social
values, but give children a colorful and diversified range of ideas and
thoughtprovoking concepts.''

With George Newall and Tom Yohe as executive producers, ''Drawing Power'' is set
in a workroom harboring three animators. Pop (Bob Kaliban) is the lovably grumpy
one in charge. Kari (Kari Page) is a young black woman, challenging some of
Pop's stuffier ideas. And Lenny (Lennie Schultz) is the office clown, especially
partial to rather startling chicken immitations.

Their banter and bickerings are interrupted several times in the course of a
half-hour for brief cartoons, each offering a lesson of some sort. For instance,
there is ''Super Person U'' (notice the effort to avoid sexism), the Animated
University of the Air. A bully, class showoff and petty thief sees the lights of
reform by being placed in his victims' shoes. Or, in ''Turkey of the Week,''
Dirty Harry finally drops his ''really rotten'' act to take a bath, a haircut
and a dental checkup.

''Whacky World'' uses scattered news items. A hippo's heart attack manages to
deliver the message that ''I guess everything's more complicated when you're
overweight.'' A ''Book Reporters'' segment, cleverly done, ends up advising that
''when you turn off your set, turn on a book.'' Even the live characters get in
on the message act. On a lunch break, Pop explains that his ''junk food'' taco
is more nutritionally balanced than Kari's yogurt.

The ends being cited by ''Drawing Power'' are hardly subtle. The means, though,
are briskly attractive. It remains to be seen if the target audience - 6 to
11-year-olds - will sit still for a barrage of behavioral object lessons.

On Sunday at 1 P.M., the ABC News series ''Directions'' will present
''Missionary,'' written, directed and produced by Howard Enders. It is a
companion piece to his ''Seeds of Revolution,'' an examination of United States
banana companies in Honduras that was broadcast last year.

In this very different instance, the focus is on Roy Johnson, who flies a small
plane on humanitarian missions in a remote jungle area of southern Honduras. Mr.
Johnson is on leave from the Federal Aviation Agency. Much of his flying
experience was gained on Navy carriers, particularly during the Vietnam War.

On its simplest level, ''Missionary'' is about Mr. Johnson succeeding in his
attempts to help the poor in small but important ways. On a large scale, the
film is about a man of war becoming an effective man of peace, surviving where
others about him fail. There are references to scandal and hardship, to Peace
Corps Volunteers and others being unable to cope with the isolation and
remoteness of the job.

Mr. Enders, however, is largely restricted to the comments of Mr.  Johnson, and
this grander dimension eludes his film. The failures are only talked about,
never seen. Details tend to be sketchy. A closing quotation from Joseph Conrad -
''Whether it meant war, peace, or prayer, we could not tell'' -is never fully
earned.

On WNET-TV Sunday at 8 P.M., ''From Jumpstreet'' will continue its explorations
of black music with a half-hour on spirituals and gospel. Oscar Brown Jr., the
singer and composer, is host.

The intentions of this series are laudable. The title comes from a black
expression, ''from the beginning,'' and an intense effort is made to cover
everything from African chants to improvisational jazz. But even with a $1.6
million grant from the Emergency School Education Act, Charles Hobson, executive
producer, is clearly hampered by budget considerations in his effort to deliver
13 episodes. The subject of gospel alone could easily use a few hours, never
mind 30 minutes.

But Robert Kaiser, producer and director for WETA-TV of Washington, certainly
tries. Sunday's program manages to include rousing appearances by the Rev. James
Cleveland, the Mighty Clouds of Joy and the D.C. mass choir. The Reverend
Cleveland and Joe Ligon, leader of the Mighty Clouds, are interviewed by Mr.
Brown.

An opening number with Mr. Brown offering a sermon from his play ''In the
Beginning'' is little more than self-serving for the star of the series. The
time would have been better spent as an addition to a thumbnail sketch of
spirituals and their more prominent composers and performers, from Fisk
College's Jubilee Singers to Paul Robeson and Marian Anderson.

A series of this sort deserves more than a bare survival budget.  In contrast,
just for one example, consider the far richer textures and sumptuous treatments
of much of the same material in the British series ''All You Need Is Love.'' It
is encouraging, though, that public television recognizes the merits of such a
project. And top black performers - Stevie Wonder, Al Jarreau, Carmen McRae,
Dizzy Gillespie, James Moody - make the necessarily sketchy essays well worth
watching and listening to.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bob Kaliban

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 11, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 638 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times in the last week.  Answers
appear on page 20.

Arab, one Asian, were said to be sending equipment to the Persian Gulf. What
nations are they and which country was each supplying?

3. The Bulgarian artist Christo is seeking permission to erect a series of
11,000 gates, each 15 feet high and topped with a freeflowing nylon panel, at
nine-foot intervals along 27 miles of urban walkway. Where does he want to place
it?

4. A manufacturing company announced that it would end production in its
Elizabeth, N.J., plant of something that has fostered homesewn ingenuity. Name
the manufacturer and the product.

5. Alabama's defeat of Kentucky raised Coach Paul (Bear) Bryant's career college
football victories to 300. Only two coaches have won more. Who are they and how
many victories has each had?

6. A crowd of 100,000 or more marched for four hours in Paris. What was the
purpose?  7. Publishing houses say that in the next few weeks they will destroy
or sell at a discount millions of books in their warehouses.  Why?

8. Low tubal ovum transfer, an alternative method to conception outside the body
for many women unable to bear children, was termed possible by scientists. What
does the procedure involve?

9. No Democrat has won the Presidency in this century without carrying a state
where, according to a New York Times/CBS News Poll, the outcome of this year's
election will be a cliffhanger. What state is it?

10. The side effects of large doses of Thyrolar, a prescription drug to cure a
thyroid condition, were in the news. Why?  11. In a recent television program,
the actress Ina Balin played a glamorous, unmarried Hollywood star who becomes
so involved with an orphanage in South Vietnam that she adopts three of its
orphans. What is unusual about that?

12. It appeared that architects might have been feeling their oats when they
designed the new Hilton hotel in Akron, Ohio. Explain.  13. Bitter protests by
young dissidents stunned a country long considered a haven of calm and sanity in
a chaotic world. What country was it?

14. Saying he had been ''carried away on a couple of occasions,'' a Presidential
candidate added that he planned to mute his sharp attacks on an opponent. Name
the candidate and the opponent.

15. The Nobel Prize for Literature was awarded to Czeslaw Milosz, and it was the
second time in three years that it had been awarded to a writer of Polish origin
living in the United States. Who was the other?

16. The United States has tightened procedures for granting visas to citizens of
a foreign country sent to work in their companies' American operations. At which
foreign businessmen is the policy aimed?

17. Even before the National League playoffs began, Philadelphia won a tactical
victory over the Astros. What was involved?  18. Political events in West
Germany and Portugal ended similarly.  Explain.  19. Senator Richard Stone,
Democrat of Florida, joined in an unhappy distinction with three other Senators
-Jacob K. Javits of New York, Mike Gravel of Alaska and Donald W. Stewart of
Alabama.  Explain.

20. The summit meeting of an international economic bloc was indefinitely
postponed because of the conflict between Iran and Iraq. What meeting was it?

21. A poet whose reputation had ''ascended incessantly'' was honored at a
symposium marking the 150th anniversary of her birth.  Her name?  Linda Amster

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Defector May Shed Light on Thai Communist Split

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 597 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 9


The defection of a former student leader who spent four years with Communist
rebels in the jungles of Thailand may shed some light on ideological disputes in
the Communist Party of Thailand that are said to have grown out of the
Chinese-Vietnamese confrontation.

The Thai Communist Party, pro-Peking and Maoist in its line and strategy, had
convenient sanctuaries in Laos and Cambodia, Thailand's Communist neighbors,
until last year, when Vietnam, a close ally of the Soviet Union, extended its
grip over them.

The defector, Seksan Prasertkul, 32 years old, has declined to discuss major
ideological issues in interviews published here since his surrender to the
military authorities last week. He is still being interrogated, but statements
made public so far have made him appear more a disillusioned idealist than the
keeper of any great secrets about the party.

Possible Insights Into Guerrillas

Mr. Seksan, a key figure in the student agitation in 1973 that led to the
overthrow of military rule, must have gained insights into guerrilla thinking
even if distrust among old-guard leaders who are intellectuals kept him from the
inner councils.

The secretary general of the National Security Council, Squadron Leader Prasong
Soonsiri, said recently that suggestions that the Thai Communist Party had split
into pro-Chinese and pro-Soviet factions was ''just talk initiated by only a few
people, not organized yet.'' He added that a close watch would have to be kept
because some party leaders were trained in Hanoi many years ago.

In a 15-year insurgency campaign the party has been unable to make dramatic
gains since Laos and Cambodia fell into Communist hands five years ago at the
end of the Indochinese wars.

Squadron Leader Prasong noted that the Chinese-Vietnamese conflict and the
fighting between the rival Communists in Cambodia had led the Thai Communists to
change tactics, although not ultimate strategy. He estimated their strength at
10,000 armed insurgents.

''Instead of attacking as before, they try to keep quiet and try to persuade the
Thai people by pointing their finger to the enemy, Vietnam,'' he said.

Possible Doubts About China

What Mr. Seksan may be able to divulge is whether this tactic of appealing to
Thai patriotism is having any success, whether the Thai Communist leadership is
having doubts about China - especially now that the Peking and Bangkok
Governments are on such good terms -and whether there is the serious prospect of
an ideological split in the party. Some analysts suggest that the Thai
Communists might be trying to lose their pro-Peking image, especially in view of
China's improving relationship with the United States and the non-Communist
Southeast Asian countries.

In a published interview Mr. Seksan would not be drawn into ideological issues,
saying: ''My main problem was that I was not given fair treatment on certain
issues. My conflicts were with certain groups of people in the jungle.''

His defection has been hailed as a setback to the Communist insurgency, and he
is considered the latest and possibly the most significant member of a group of
returnees benefiting from a Government amnesty for student rebels announced two
years ago. Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda has said that Mr. Seksan, who
surrendered with his wife and a colleague, is eligible for pardon. He says he is
no longer a revolutionary and wants to write.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VOTERS AMBIVALENT ON MILITARY STANCE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 36, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1017 words


The sun was warm and soothing at the Oklahoma State Fair the other day, but Mal
Heyworth was troubled as he talked about the politics of 1980.  "We need to do
something with the Iran situation." said the 30-year old construction worker, a
registered Democrat.  "Carter's done nothing, but Reagan might do too much.  We
could be in a war right now if he was President." Mr. Heyworth was expressing a
deep ambivalence that seems to be plaguing many voters this election year.  The
stalemate on the American hostages in Iran has stimulated a debate about the
broader questions of foreign and military policy, and many voters seem to want a
President who will exert stronger leadership than they believe they have been
getting from President Carter.  But other voters - and sometimes the same voters
- often express the fear that Ronald Reagan would carry aggressive leadership to
the point of rashness, even danger.  Put another way, voters seem to want a
balance between softness and hardness, between timidity and folly.  The peace
marches of the Vietnam era are over, but the scars linger.  As Gene Eckerson, a
27-year-old paper worker in Erie, Pa., put it: "This country definitely needs to
stand up on its own two feet, but the way Reagan talks, he's too military.  We
need some of what he says, but he goes a little too far." This ambivalence was
demonstrated by the most recent New York Times/ CBS News Poll. When asked if
they thought the United States should be militarily superior to the Soviet
Union, a position generally espoused by Mr. Reagan, the Republican nominee, 61
percent said yes.  Yet when asked if any candidate would be likely to lead the
country into war, 34 percent of those polled said the former California Governor
would be, and only 23 percent cited Mr. Carter, the Democratic nominee.  A
recent Associated Press/NBC News poll turned the question around and asked
voters which candidate would keep the country out of war.  Forty-one percent
said Mr. Carter, and only 16 percent named Mr. Reagan.  The issue of American
power and performance in the world is central for both sides, and the Reagan
forces seem convinced that they can tag Mr. Carter as a weak leader.  Mr. Reagan
has been stressing his commitment to a stronger national defense and criticizing
such foreign policy initiatives by Mr. Carter as the Panama Canal Treaties,
which became law, and the strategic arms limitation treaty, which did not.
Conversely, the Carter camp believes that it can paint Mr. Reagan as a
trigger-happy warrior with little experience in the foreign area. And in recent
weeks the President has frequently asserted that this election could mean the
difference between war and peacae.  In Chicago Monday, Mr. Carter stepped up his
attach, accusing his opponent of following a "jingoistic" policy that could
"lead our country toward war." The Carter strategy is clear: to get voters to
ask themselves which finger they want on the nuclear button.  Voters still site
the economy as the major issue of the year, but
a Presidential election is considered virtually the only time that voters take
foreign policy into account in making political judgments, and the issue crops
up repeatedly in conversations around the country.  This year the most immediate
problem is Iran, where 52 American hostages have now been held for nearly 11
months.  In the early primaries last winter, that issue seemed to help Mr.
Carter, because the country instinctively rallied around the President at a time
of crisis, but recent interviews and public opinion polls show that the chorus
of criticism is steadily rising.  "No two-bit country should be dictating to a
superpower," snapped Kathleen Kennedy, a civil servant in Oklahoma City who is
abandoning Mr. Carter.  "If Reagan were President, he'd say you have two weeks
to turn the hostages loose or we're coming in." "But the prospect of that sort
of move is precisely what frightens many voters about Mr. Reagan, including
Marjory Altsman, an office worker in Eris, Pa., who is leaning toward the
President.  "On the one hand, I'd like to say that we should take action to get
our hostages out," she mused.  "But in all honesty, I can't feel good about
sending my own kids to do it." Iran is only a part of a much broader debate over
America's role and reputation abroad, and Mr. Reagan clearly profits from the
complaint that this country no longer dominates the world.  "We've lost our
stature in our own eyes, we've lost confidence in ourselves," said a storeowner
in Nashville who backed Mr. Carter last time and now supports his challenger.
This loss of confidence leads to complaints about foreigners who are perceived
as threats: Cuban refugees, Japanese automobile makers, who receive foreign aid.
But the biggest fear that Mr.  Reagan appears to have going for him is fear
about physical survival.  "I'm scared to death," said William Teel, a retired
automobile dealer in Oklahoma City who backs Mr. Reagan."We couldn't whip our
way out of a paper bag unless we used nuclear weapons," But as many Reagan
backers are afraid American cannot win a war, Carter backers often feat that the
country cannot avoid one.  "I don't want the world to blow up," said Paul
Andonian, a rubber worker in Akron.  "This talk about a nuclear arms race
worries me.  Every time we've had an arms race we've had a war."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW DIRECTION FOR THE NEW WAVE'S JEAN-LUC GODARD

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2312 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
Annette Insdorf, who teaches film at Yale University, is currently on leave
through a Rockefeller Foundation Fellowship.

By ANNETTE INSDORF

''Every Man for Himself'' (''Sauve Qui Peut La Vie'') signals a new direction in
Jean-Luc Godard's remarkable career. His latest film - and his first feature in
eight years -opens today at the Cinema Studio after American premieres at the
Telluride and New York Film Festivals.

From his polemical articles as a critic for Cahiers du Cinema, to his
controversial feature films of the 60's like ''Weekend,''(an attack on bourgeois
values in which a weekend drive becomes a violent traffic jam) to his recent
experiments in video, Mr. Godard has remained one of the most original,
uncompromising, and influential of filmmakers. ''Every Man for Himself'' is
continuous with his work - an essai, to use his term - simultaneously an attempt
and an essay, or process and revelation. Last spring, Vincent Canby described
the film as ''both infinitely clear and mysterious'' and ''the most stimulating
and encouraging film at Cannes.''

Beginning with the now-classic ''Breathless'' (1959), about the disjointed
relationship between a Bogart-like thief (Jean-Paul Belmondo) and an American
student (Jean Seberg) in Paris, Mr.  Godard's early work freed film language
from inherited conventions.  Whether it was his jump cuts, fragmented narratives
or his exhibition of playful awareness of filmmaking history through references
to other films and early techniques, he engaged the viewer in a new
relationtship to the screen, namely an intellectual challenge.

Subsequent films, like ''Alphaville,'' ''Pierrot Le Fou'' and ''Two or Three
Things I Know About Her,'' earned him an extraordinary following, for he was
championed by leading critics, filmmakers and scholars as the most provocative
film artist since Eisenstein.

By the late 60's, Mr. Godard was clearly the most radically innovative director
of the French New Wave. However, his increasingly didactic, politicized cinema
began to alienate even his most ardent admirers. Many lost sight of - and
patience with - his use of cinema as an examination of how we are manipulated by
images, film not excepted.

The surprising thing is that although Mr. Godard was a thorny personality who
made vexing, noncommercial films, his eminence in cinema history remained
unquestionable. Even as an outcast - because his films, like ''See You at Mao,''
had become political treatises rather than entertainments -he continued to
influence countless filmmakers around the world.

Like his films, the 50-year-old Mr. Godard is not easily accessible. Whether
it's his tinted glasses, hushed voice, or timid, diminutive frame, he is a man
of distances. But recently, between puffs of an omnipresent little cigar, Mr.
Godard talked in New York about his return to the wide screen, his collaboration
with Francis Coppola, the ideal role of television, and his aborted project
''Bugsy Siegel,'' always reflecting the dialectical sensibility that underlies
''Every Man for Himself.''

''For me, it's not a return but an approach,'' said Mr. Godard about his shift
from the video experimentation that has preoccupied him since 1972 to his new,
comparatively accessible feature, which traces the intertwined lives of three
typically disaffected Godardian characters.

The first part of ''Every Man for Himself,'' titled ''The Imaginary,'' presents
a disgruntled young woman, played by Nathalie Baye, who leaves her television
job and her young man for the simple country life. Jacques Dutronc plays the
abandoned boyfriend, who also works in TV; and in the second section, ''Fear,''
he tries to cope with his ex-wife and daughter, among others, and has a brief
encounter with a prostitute, played by Isabelle Huppert. Her section is called
''Commerce,'' wherein chance brings her to rent Miss Baye's apartment. In the
final section, ''Music,'' the interwoven threads disentangle and the audience
sees musicians playing the film's main theme.

''Maybe in two or 10 years, I will reach the point of making a real feature -
which I have never done,'' said Mr. Godard. ''In 1968, I was obviously incapable
of making a movie, but I didn't want to quit just because of critics' advice or
commercial failure. I had to find out for myself what was going on, just like
America in Vietnam.''

Mr. Godard got out of Paris's film world, feeling he had no place there: ''I was
always banned by theater exhibitors, or television executives, or big companies.
The kind of censorship I got was not, 'You shouldn't show sex' or, like Poland,
'You shouldn't attack the government.' It was, 'This is not a movie.' ''

''So I was obliged as a moviemaker to leave, to volunteer myself for dissidency.
And what helped is that I had a lot of failure and people didn't like me,'' Mr.
Godard admitted. He moved to Grenoble where he made politically provocative
video films, such as ''France - Tour - Detour - Deux Enfants'' - a series of
illuminating interviews with children, probing language as a tool of repression
- and ''Ici et Ailleurs'' (''Here and There''), about the Palestinians.

''It was not from a political point of view, I discover now, but as a moviemaker
that I was for the exiled and oppressed people,'' he proposed heatedly. ''Just
because others said to them, 'You are not people' - like to the blacks in South
Africa, or the Jews in Nazi times, or the Palestinians vis-a-vis the official
Israeli line.  Palestinians were people without territory, like myself without
movie territory. I was not allowed to work.''

Mr. Godard's frustration with the French film industry eventually led him to
Hollywood and he tried to make an American feature: ''Three years ago, when I
intended to make a feature with (Georges) Beauregard, who produced 'Breathless'
(his first film), I was working on a project - a history of the movies on tape -
a series for TV about a real movie story. I was in an airport and saw the book,
'Bugsy Siegel or the Mafia in Hollywood and Las Vegas.' I was interested in the
title.''

The director was susequently shocked to learn that no movies had been made about
Siegel, ''one of the most famous American mobsters, like Lucky Luciano or Meyer
Lansky. Why so many movies about Al Capone, and not about this one? He had lived
in Hollywood a long time and was the author of Las Vegas!

''Since I'm both a moviemaker and an essayist in movies,'' he continued, ''I
said to Beauregard, 'Maybe this can be my return to features.' Everybody was
excited - though no one knew about Bugsy Siegel. I tried to build up a story -
it was not very good - but enough to make a deal,'' he said wryly.

Then began the search for stars: ''We asked Vittorio Gassman. He said yes, no,
yes. Charlotte Rampling said no. When lecturing in Montreal, I asked Tom Luddy
(director of special projects for Francis Coppola and former curator of the
Pacific Film Archive in Berkeley) if he knew Martin Scorsese so I could meet
DeNiro. (I needed a star, so why not go to the biggest?). At the same time, I
asked Diane Keaton. But this was a mistake, because I proposed the same
character to both of them: the first to say yes would get the part. If Keaton
said yes, the character would be female; if DeNiro said yes, the character would
be male!'' Although the film never got made, he said, ''It brought me to
America, to hearing movie sounds again, to some reality.''

The impetus to work again in the movie industry came from Mr.  Coppola:
''Through Tom Luddy,'' Mr. Godard said, ''I met Francis a few times. And I felt
like making a feature. Someone said, 'O.K., but you have to take known actors.'
I said O.K., and in two days it was done.''

Although ''Every Man for Himself'' was made in Switzerland, it is being released
in the United States by Mr. Coppola's Zoetrope organization. ''It went from
esthetics to business and then back to esthetics,'' said Mr. Godard. ''It took
two to three years. For everyone working with Coppola, including himself, it
takes four years to make a picture!'' he said with a rare chuckle. ''I felt
there was a need in the Coppola organization, and he accepted discussion.''

Calling their alliance ''a very open-minded deal,'' Mr. Godard elaborated on how
the distribution of ''Every Man for Himself'' is a ''guarantee'' for their next
project: ''The Story'' (arising out of the Bugsy Siegel venture) still interests
me. It will be a picture of someone trying to make a picture about Bugsy Siegel
and it's not possible,'' he said.

This approach - making a movie about an attempt to make a movie, an evidence of
his awareness of film engendering film - exemplifies Mr.  Godard's theory about
nonverbal screenwriting: ''TV should help you to do scripts - not to write
scripts but to shoot them,'' he said emphatically at the Telluride Film
Festival. ''Then you can look at it and decide not only from words but from the
picture. I think movies are bad because scripts are only written, not
pictured.''

''Every Man for Himself'' is thus an essai of visual research, most palpably
during shots in slow motion (the original English title of the film). For Mr.
Godard literally stops the image, stilling life so that we can better analyze
it. In a manner reminiscent of Etienne Marey's photographic studies of movement,
this film ''composed by Jean-Luc Godard'' is no less an attempt at
decomposition.

The filmmaker said he chose the term composed for the screen credits because ''I
hate the words 'written and directed by,' especially 'written.' And for the next
one, I'll probably say 'painted by.' Or nothing. I also wanted to emphasize the
music, and 'compose' can help the audience to understand.''

''Every Man for Himself'' indeed refuses to take its soundtrack for granted.
Characters are forever asking, ''Where's that music coming from?'' Mr. Godard
elaborated on the subject with the reminder, ''When Scarlett O'Hara is kissing
Rhett Butler and you hear the hundred violins of the Boston Symphony Orchestra,
or when the Russian Army crosses and we hear the hundred violins of the Chicago
Orchestra ... we want to see the music. So we decided the last shot would be of
the orchestra playing the same tune that we hear. It's as if we were on the road
and saw a hitchhiker. We were the car and the music was hiking us. So we picked
it up and it got into the picture.''

Another ''passenger'' picked up by this multi-layered film is ''commerce,''
incarnated by the prostitute, Why have so many of Mr.  Godard's films focused on
this figure, most notably ''Vivre Sa Vie'' and ''Two or Three Things I Know
About Her''? ''It's probably something personal in my difficulty to have both a
love and work relationship with women,'' he confessed.

''If you are in love with someone and you do different work, love doesn't last
very long. A soccer player in love with someone who loves math doesn't have a
big chance to work out that love. Or to love out that work. This is my main
problem: I can't live with someone who is not interested in movies, but why
should I oblige someone I love to be interested in movies? And so, when you go
as a client to see a prostitute, at least love and work are on the same level:
50/50.

''It's rather sad,'' he added quietly. ''Because love goes from zero to 100 and
back, and to stay on the same 50 is always the same.  But it has some truth in
it. You can't say it's not true love or true work ... unless you disdain work,
which I don't. Whether I'm too shy, whether I have a bad character, whether I'm
a male fascist, this is my way.''

Apart from the personal resonance of the prostitute image (and it was Mr. Godard
who said at a Telluride Film Festival panel that ''a camera is a kind of X-ray
machine where you can see your own disease''), this kind of woman seems
appropriate to his cinema because she embodies the provisional and the
contradictory. (In ''Vivre Sa Vie,'' the prostitute is the one who ''sells her
body while retaining her soul.'') In a larger sense, it seems that for Mr.
Godard, life exists as a dialectical process, a struggle against the temptation
to freeze into complacency.

''To me, movies are movement. It's going from the unseen to the seen, and from
the hidden part of the iceberg to the seen part. It's crossing: the screen is a
border between me and the audience.''

As a living example of his theory, Mr. Godard revealed that his American project
coexists with a totally distinct one: he is a consultant for TV development in
Mozambique. ''To me, this is very interesting because it's like the raw material
of the image. People there never see an image, not even a postcard; they have no
code. In California, it's the opposite - the finished product, completely
elaborated and sophisticated - billions of images per second. I'm exactly in
between Mozambique and California, going from raw material to finished
products.''

While the soundless TV continued to emit images beside him, Mr.  Godard
concluded, ''This way, maybe I can approach a feature better.  As a moviemaker,
I'm between Coppola and the Minister of Information in Mozambique.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BIG QUESTIONS HAUNT CHINA'S BIG SHOW TRIAL

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1099 words

DATELINE: PEKING


''Comrade Lin Biao is Comrade Mao Zedong's close comrade in arms and
successor.'' There it was, enshrined in China's 1969 Constitution. Lin Biao,
then the Defense Minister and Mao's chief apostle, hero of battles against the
Japanese, the Kuomintang in Manchuria and the Americans in Korea, was officially
named Mao's successor. It was Comrade Lin who had published the Little Red Book
of Mao's sayings that gained magical properties in the Cultural Revolution, and
who had helped inflate Mao's cult to diety-like proportions. ''Mao Zedong's
thought is an everlasting universal truth,'' he said. ''One single sentence of
his surpasses 10,000 of ours.''

Yet sometime later this month, five of the former Defense Minister's closest
associates, once senior generals in the People's Liberation Army, four of them
members of the Communist Party Politburo, will go on trial for trying to murder
Mao. Mr. Lin, according to the official if still improbable version, died in a
plane crash in Mongolia after his assassination plot was uncovered.  Also on
trial before a special court will be Mao's widow, Jiang Qing, her three radical
cohorts in the so-called Gang of Four, and Mao's longtime political secretary
and intellectual alter ego, Chen Boda.

Some diplomats had expected that if this unlikely collection of defendants were
ever brought to trial it would be a mere formality, like the prosecution last
year of the dissident, Wei Jingsheng. But Chinese officials now say the trial
will last a month, providing ample time to introduce evidence. This is in
keeping with China's current emphasis on improving the legal system. But it also
increases the trial's political risks. Half of China's 38 million Communist
Party members were admitted to the party after the Cultural Revolution began in
1966, and some senior officials, notably party Chairman Hua Guofeng, rose to
power then or during the heyday of the Gang of Four which followed. Can Mr. Hua
and the others escape the implications of the proceedings?

The trial is really an indictment of the whole Cultural Revolution and the
decade from 1966 to 1976. It is also a judgment against the great proponent of
the Cultural Revolution who is not listed as a defendant, Mao himself. Since
Mao's death in 1976, the arrest of the Gang of Four and the reversal of many of
his policies, China has suffered from a credibility gap which has bred cynicism.
Mao was not a demigod, Peking has now admitted. But most of the excesses have
still been blamed on others, the radicals or Mr. Lin.

Mr. Lin's followers and the radicals are to be charged with persecuting large
numbers of officials. But few Chinese have forgotten that it was Mao who first
said the target of the Cultural Revolution was ''those people in authority
within the party who are taking the capitalist road.'' Mao also admitted to his
biographer, Edgar Snow, in 1970, that he fostered his own personality cult to
gain power over the regular party apparatus.

It is tempting to speculate on whether the trial will offer answers to some of
China's modern mysteries, such as what really happened to the ''boundlessly
loyal'' Mr. Lin, a general too skilled to have attempted the naive plot
attributed to him. And how could Mao have been reduced to relying on the
vitriolic Miss Jiang, whom he chastised near the end with the comment, ''Even if
you see me, we have nothing to say to each other''?

What was the real role of the genuinely popular, late Prime Minister, Zhou
Enlai? He is beloved for his supposed influence in moderating the Cultural
Revolution. But at crucial, early Politburo meetings he voted with Mao to
radicalize the movement and to topple Liu Shaoqi, the head of state, and Deng
Xiaoping, now China's paramount leader. Why, did Mao pick Mr. Hua as his
successor? We have only Mr. Hua's word that Mao told him, ''With you in charge,
I'm at ease.'' One of Mao's reasons for picking him, the Chinese press said at
the time, was the good job he did as Minister of Public Security, that is, head
of the police. Officially, he took up the post in 1975, but Chinese say he
actually was given it in 1972 and therefore oversaw the prisons where many of
China's current leaders languished.

Sinologists have never been satisfied with China's authorized account of the Lin
Biao affair, a dossier of letters, confessions and documents intended for
Communist cadres and later published by Taiwan intelligence sources. According
to this file, the thin, retiring Mr. Lin perished in a Chinese Air Force Trident
jet as he fled to the Soviet Union. Mr. Lin was said to have been disappointed
that Mao rejected his proposal to make himself head of state, replacing Mr. Liu
in the summer of 1970. Mr. Lin then authorized his son, Lin Liguo, whom at the
age of 24 he had made deputy commander of operations for the air force, to hatch
the plot.

Mao was code-named B-52, after the American bomber then pulverizing Vietnam, and
the plan itself was labeled 571, homonymns in standard Chinese for ''armed
uprising.'' In one version, the plotters tried to blow up a train in which Mao
was riding from Shanghai to Peking but Mao was tipped off. Undone, Mr. Lin and
his wife, Yeh Chun, herself a general and Politburo member, boarded the jet at
their seaside retreat at Beidaihe. There was a gun battle on the runway, or
aboard the plane, and eventually the aircraft crashed from lack of fuel.  There
is no known proof that Mr. Lin himself instigated the plot.  More likely,
scholars feel, it was the work of the son and his circle of young leftist
officers, and perhaps his ambitious wife, 22 years Mr. Lin's junior. Some
specialists think if there was plotting, it was Mao who first schemed to oust
Mr. Lin. Indeed, the documents show Mao suspicious of Mr. Lin's flattery as
early as 1966 and explain how he rounded up support to eventually purge him.

Mr. Lin was only one of several possible successors the Great Helmsman tired of
and discarded. It was an expensive habit for China. In a memorable conversation
with Mr. Deng, shortly after purging him the first time in 1968, Mao alluded to
his ambivalence toward Mr.  Lin, and possibly to his own role. ''History will
judge whether Lin Biao is correct or not. You don't have to be defiant.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Mao Zedong and Lin Biao

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOLDIER'S HOME;
by Gregory D. Foster

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 831 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va.


More than five years have gone by since the Vietnam War ended, but a state of
mind that accompanied it still remains with us: the fundamental ambivalence of
most Americans toward that conflict.

Together with our inner irresolution, important public issues also remain
unresolved: Should those who served - and even those who refused to serve - be
loved or hated, recognized or ignored?

Americans have a peculiar compulsion to single out for praise (or vilification)
those who have been neglected because of societal apathy, convenience, or
repugnance. Typically, we wait until it is too late, until neglect has festered
and turned gangrenous, only to overreact and, with great remorse and
self-loathing, deify those who have raised the loudest voices of indignation -
not necessarily those who most contributed or suffered. By so doing, we create a
burden of conscience.

Today, there has arisen a hue and cry from an increasingly vocal constituency,
consisting largely of Vietnam veterans, that they have suffered irreparable
psychological wounds, caused as much by societal neglect as by the war itself.
They reason further that society should atone for this neglect with some visible
manifestation of praise and support. Still others have suggested similar
treatment for those who, out of moral commitment, refused to go to Vietnam.

Two dangers suggest themselves. The first is that the views reflected, diverse
and penetrating, may be construed as representative of the whole; they are not.
The second is of far greater potential significance: that out of ignorance,
unconstrained zeal, or contrition, the average citizen will latch bulldog-like
onto the arguments without grasping the deeper underlying meaning. We must
recognize that the deeper problem is the virtual ignominy into which the United
States military has fallen.

What the ''average'' Vietnam veteran needs and wants is neither maudlin sympathy
nor sanctimonious moralizing about his neglect and his damaged psyche.

The vast majority of those who served viewed the experience as merely a
tasteless job that had to be performed, and within limits they recognized the
dangers. Having finished the job, they remained silent, changed uniforms, and
moved on to other careers, neither seeking nor receiving kudos for their
efforts. There was no psychological devastation, no maladjustment, and no
sleepless nights over the cosmic moral consequences of the war. For this
''silent majority'' there was none of that. It was a job - done and relegated to
the dustbin of memories.

To have expected otherwise would have been naive. Even to his family, the G.I.
customarily has been little understood, only somewhat appreciated, and almost
always without open praise.  Furthermore, for him to expect open praise and
adulation would be to overlook the intrinsic value of combat.

No, war is not to be sought, nor to be glorified. It is filthy business, but in
its filthiness it opens to critical inspection the very best and the very worst
in man, it defines a scenario of such devastation and misery that those who have
experienced it will seek to avoid repeating it, and it creates a camaraderie
that only those who have shared danger and the fear of death can know. Therein
lies war's intrinsic value. To expect more is to expect too much.

Therefore, we should seek to create neither heroes nor anti-heroes from our
Vietnam experience. Indeed, the Vietnam veteran is due a large measure of
respect, dignity, and acceptance, but certainly no more - nor less - than other
veterans before and since. Let us recognize that we already have failed in that
regard, let us learn what is to be learned, and then move on. For we have at
hand a more critical problem that both transcends our treatment of the Vietnam
veteran and lies at the root of that situation.

So long as we as a nation expect the ranks of our military to be filled by
volunteers, yet through our neglect make them feel obscure, insignificant, and
generally unwanted, then we shall have only ourselves to blame if war again
confronts us and we find that we cannot depend upon our military services. We
would do well to bear in mind a distant refrain: ''When with pleasure you are
viewing/Any work a man is doing,/And you like him or you love him,/Tell him now
.../If you feel that praise is due him,/Now's the time to tell it to him,/
'Cause a man can't read his tombstone,/When he's dead.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Gregory D. Foster, a 1969 graduate of the United States Military Academy at West
Point and a former company commander in Vietnam who held the rank of captain, is
a national-security analyst for a consulting firm.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE MORTAL SIN OF OUR TIME

BYLINE: By STEPHEN SPENDER; Stephen Spender, the British poet and critic, is the
author of ''Love-Hate Relations: English and American Sensibilities'' and ''The
Thirties and After,'' among many other books.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1077 words


A MODEL CHILDHOOD By Christa Wolf.  Translated by Ursule Molinaro and Hedwig
Rappolt.  407 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $17.50.

CHRISTA WOLF is a novelist who lives and writes in East Germany.  In this book
the narrator - called Nelly - describes her visit, together with her husband
(called H), her brother Lutz and her daughter Lenka to her native town, formerly
Landsberg but today Grozow Wielkopolski in Poland.

The superficial reason for the journey was what is called ''tourism to
home-towns,'' but the deeper motivation for Nelly was to recover for herself and
lay bare to her daughter the past of her childhood in Landsberg under Hitler and
during the war.

Nelly was 4 years old in 1933. ''A German's greeting without fail at all times
should be Hitler Heil,'' she was taught, growing up in a world where a neighbor
dies of a ''heart attack'' after a beating because he does not give up the
Jewish girl he's going out with. She hears the words ''concentration camp'' when
she is 7. Some of her childhood memories are of wild happiness, what she calls
''the bliss of conformity'' when her father, having overcome his own inner
discomfiture, ''opted, as a social being, for the thousands and against
himself.''

The overwhelming feeling of the townspeople of Landsberg in the 1930's was
thankfulness: thankfulness that the nation was united, that the figures of
unemployment went down, that whoever did not conform by birth or opinion to the
screams of the majority over loudspeakers was an exception; and exceptions are
there only to be ironed out because ''community interest comes before
selfinterest.'' The only cause for anxiety was to prove, by documents - papers
-that you yourself were not - by birth, or by misguided earlier sentimental or
political associations - an exception, doomed by your origins or beliefs never
to attain conformity.

Nelly loves her school-teacher, Herr Warsinski, who is ''convinced that Jesus
Christ would be a follower of our Fuhrer were he once again to walk this
earth.'' Here - and not in the general rejoicing in national unity, nor even in
the desire to surrender one's opinion, feelings and scruples to an over-riding
will - the German phenomenon of believing in the Nazis seems to me to begin to
be incomprehensible. It becomes completely so in the last weeks of Hitler's
rule, when vast numbers of Germans continued to believe in his infallibility.

Christa Wolf memorably describes the German retreat and the Russian advance in
the East. As recovery of time lost this book is successful. However, bound up
with the effort of remembering, there is a geat deal else: discourses on the
nature of memory, the writer's self-examination about the book that she is
writing, constant switching in time from 1971 back to the Hitler era, the dumbly
uncomprehending attitude of daughter Lenka to her mother's attempts to explain
how the family could have been Nazis.

Inside all this, there is a message: that despite the total elimination of
Hitler's Reich, as the result of methods he introduced of dictatorship, total
war, mass propaganda, censorship, concentration and extermination camps, we live
today in an era in which every sort of horror enacted by governments is taken
for granted. In a revealing passage Christa Wolf writes that when the Allied
Forces first had news of extermination camps, they did not publish it: ''The
reason: they couldn't believe it. They didn't want to become guilty of spreading
horror propaganda. We, the people of today, don't put anything past anybody. We
think that anything is possible. This may be the most important difference
between our era and preceding ones.''

She means here more than the war in Vietnam, the murder of Allende, the
frightful dictatorship in Chile and other such horrors.  She ironically and
wryly recalls her grandmother reading in 1937 the General Anzeiger with its
bold-type headline ''Bukharin, the Last of Lenin's Old Guard, Arrested by
OGPU''; ''Beginning of the Moscow Trial of Radek and Others''; ''Seventeen death
sentences.'' Then: ''Stalin purges the sciences.'' And she superimposes on this
recollection of a discredited Nazi source of information the image of herself
reading about the same trials in the State Library in Berlin, in the Eastern
zone of the German Democratic Republic, in May 1970.

Christa Wolf writes of her friendship with a professor in Moscow that one of
their main themes of conversation was ''the accursed falsification of history
into a moral tale.'' The professor, who finally died after being moved from
sanatarium to sanatarium, said that he envied her because she would ''live to
see the day when one would be able to speak about everything openly and
freely.'' She does not disguise the irony of this prediction.

In its effort to reconstruct the private lives of people who were dupes, victims
and products of history during and since the Fascist era, ''A Model Childhood''
recalls Elsa Morante's great novel, ''History.'' With both books, one is
convinced by the lives of the ordinary people described, but a bit dubious of
the interpretation of history imposed on them.

This self-questioning book ends with the author asking herself: ''Has memory
done its duty? Or has it proven - by the act of misleading - that it's
impossible to escape the mortal sin of our time: the desire not to come to grips
with oneself.''

East or West, this defines pretty well the mortal sin of our time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHITE HOUSE BEDROOMS

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS VON HOFFMAN; Nicholas von Hoffman is a syndicated columnist.
His latest book is ''Make-Believe Presidents: Illusions of Power From McKinley
to Carter.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1031 words


THE SECOND LADY By Irving Wallace.  372 pp. New York: New American Library.
$11.95.

THE VERY FIRST LADY By Steve Dunleavy.  440 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster.
$13.95.

BOTH these novels have to do with women in the White House, but they hold no
interest for feminists. The female protagonists in them are of the
heavenly-orgasm or exotically-arched-back tradition of fictional ladies. Indeed,
everything goes wrong in the lives of the books' principal characters but the
sex. Reviewers can thank the deity that other bodily functions aren't described
as often or in such vividly poor language.

There is much less horizontal prose in Irving Wallace's ''The Second Lady,''
than in Steve Dunleavy's ''The Very First Lady.'' Mr.  Wallace's adventure story
revolves around the Russian secret service's replacement of the real wife of the
American President with an absolute double. The plot ought to strain credulity,
but given the slight attention some men give their wives, they probably wouldn't
look up if the genuine article were switched with an outwardly identical copy.

Mr. Wallace, however, is very good at what he does, which is to tell an action
story with interest and suspense. If you want character delineation or anything
more than stock dialogue, you won't enjoy this book about love and espionage in
high places. If you don't require such qualities in your fiction, ''The Second
Lady'' will keep you turning pages right down to its action-packed climax - if I
may indulge myself in the style this genre prefers.

The question is whether the genre can be sustained by depending on cliched
characters and language. Through World War II, Korea, the cold war and Vietnam,
the villains have been using the same language that Mr. Wallace's characters use
in telling Yankee heroes who fall into their hands, ''You Americans do not have
our mentality. You are not clever enough for such an undertaking, you are not
audacious enough. Your C.I.A. is clumsy, amateurish, crude. Your supposed
democratic freedom - not real freedom, only license - makes your people soft.''

Skip over those horse chestnuts and you have a decent evening's reading,
something that cannot be said of ''The Very First Lady'' by Steve Dunleavy, a
story about the first female President of this grand nation of ours.

The anti-heroine of this very long book makes Lucrezia Borgia look like Miss
Goodie Two Shoes. She murders her father, her brother, her husband's best friend
and then orders her teen-age son to murder his father and her husband. It is by
this last crime that she is able to step into hubby's shoes and run for
President.  When she's not doing that she's running a blackmail operation with
her lover, a gigolo suffering from terminal satyriasis. Also running amok in the
plot, there is, inter alia, an exiled stock swindler who forces the United
States Ambassador to a small Central American country to confess that he and his
buddies in the Senate actually committed the crime. After securing the
Ambassador's signature on the confession, he has the wretch murdered and returns
home to run successfully for Vice President on the same ticket with The Very
First Lady.

This is a book to put down. Mr. Dunleavy seems to know nothing about good prose,
or simply was not trying; no one could have written the following if he were
concerned about good prose:

''She had the tall, tight, willowy body of the New York highfashion model she
had once been. A luxurious mane of raven-black hair fell silkily around a
perfectly sculptured face, illuminated by eyes the color of the Caribbean and
skin the shade of thick cream.  She threw off her Black Diamond mink and stood
faultless in an oystergray Saint Laurent. ... She was naked in a matter of
seconds, to reveal the body of a beautifully developed teen-ager. Hickey knew
she was forty-three only because he had sneaked a look at her passport.''

When Mr. Dunleavy's characters disrobe, which they do frequently, he describes
what these implausible people are wearing down to the labels in their underwear.
Such detail is apparently necessary to pro-duce a novel of realism. Only the
author's realism is unrealistic.

The big points are wrong. Outside of ''The Godfather,'' gangsters are not dear
old Italian gentlemen who cultivate tomatoes and always keep their word. A novel
of realism that has the votes of millions of people of distant Italian
extraction controlled by a high sign from octogenarian Mafia dons is so drained
of resemblance to fact that even a sensible plot couldn't be sustained.

Being accurate can't save a novel of realism that has nothing else to say for
itself. The last few years have given us any number of more or less accurate
Washington novels written in a kind of Allen Drury journalism - novels, in other
words, that are little more than inventories of fact intercut with bedroom
scenes. They are offered as the inside story that can't be told as nonfiction
for legal reasons.  At best they are political science married to soap opera,
and as such they give the feeling that we're being taken through closed oaken
doors to see what really, really, really goes on. With Mr. Dunleavy's book, the
only place you feel you're being taken is to the cleaners.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEHIND THE BEST SELLERS;
MERLE MILLER

BYLINE: By Edwin McDowell

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 630 words


Merle Miller met Lyndon B. Johnson only once, in the early 1940's, and he was
immediately put off by the Texas Congressman. ''I was a Washington correspondent
for the old Philadelphia Record,'' he recalled recently, ''and Johnson announced
for the Senate from the steps of the White House. I thought his performance was
just horrible; he was so corny.''

If anything, Mr. Miller's opinion of L.B.J. continued to sink even lower,
reaching its nadir during the Vietnam War. No wonder he could hardly believe his
ears when, soon after completing his 1974 best seller, ''Plain Speaking: An Oral
Biography of Harry S. Truman,'' someone suggested that he consider doing a
similar biography of Lyndon Johnson, who died in January 1973. ''I said, 'Oh,
God, no!' '' Mr. Miller remembered. ''I was a stalwart enemy of his Vietnam
policy and I thought he was boring. And that accent of his!''

Yet almost in spite of himself, Mr. Miller began talking to people about Mr.
Johnson and what they said fascinated him. ''Everybody had about 50 stories to
tell, they liked to talk about him even if they hated his guts,'' he said. ''So
I began to think maybe he's not such a bore after all, and I visited the Johnson
Library in Texas, where they had a considerable oral history. I started
listening to the tapes and talking to more people. By then I was hooked, and
afterward I signed a contract and just started interviewing.'' The result is the
current best-selling ''Lyndon: An Oral Biography.''

''The contract said I'd finish the book in one year,'' explained Mr. Miller.
''After two-and-a-half years the publisher would anxiously ask how the book was
coming, and I'd say it was almost finished. Of course they knew it was a lie. It
was like L.B.J. making a deal in the U.S. Senate; both sides have to give a
little and make it look like they're not giving anything away.''

The project eventually took five years, and Mr. Miller thoroughly enjoyed most
of it. ''I love Washington, and I like politics,'' he said, ''and since I
couldn't get elected secretary of my junior class in high school, I had another
reason to be fascinated by Lyndon, by his political skills.'' But, whereas the
earlier biography required Mr. Miller to interview only Mr. Truman, this time he
conducted 180 personal interviews and consulted almost 400 oral histories. One
of his favorite subjects was Lady Bird Johnson, whom he interviewed six times.
''She thinks over every sentence before she utters it,'' he said, ''because she
was brought up in that era where sentences parsed.''

Most Johnson friends and associates were happy to talk with Mr.  Miller,
although many used the occasion to justify their roles. Even Bobby Baker and
Walter Jenkins, former Johnson aides who were involved in scandals, agreed to be
interviewed. But Mr. Miller said that Robert McNamara, William Bundy, Nicholas
Katzenbach and John Connally refused to talk, as did former Supreme Court
Justice Abe Fortas, until Lady Bird Johnson talked him into it.

The book project proved to be a voyage of discovery for the author. ''It didn't
cause me to change my own opposition to Vietnam,'' he said, ''but I found myself
putting myself in Lyndon's place and trying to answer the question none of us
attempted to answer in the 1960's: What should we do? Pull out? The kids called
him a killer, but he certainly wasn't a killer by instinct.''

And Mr. Miller came to appreciate L.B.J.'s parliamentary achievements. ''People
say he was a wheeler-dealer,'' said Mr.  Miller, ''but Lyndon's success in the
Senate was that in order to gain a victory today he never humiliated you,
because he knew he was going to come back to you. And I was wrong about him
being a bore; Lyndon was one of the most complex, fascinating Presidents of all
time.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Merle Miller

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NED CALMER,EX-ANCHORMAN,FINDS TV CREATING POLITICIANS' CHARACTERS

BYLINE: By ESTHER BLAUSTEIN

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 6, Column 3; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1113 words


LAWRENCE LIKE the man high up in the pressbox who observes the action on the
floor from a different perspective, Ned Calmer can view world events from the
vantage point of his 43 years as a newspaperman and radio and television
correspondent. Consequently, he sees parallels between several current
happenings and those he covered during his 33 years with CBS News. These
parallels are especially apparent in the 1980 election campaign.

Today, he said, ''instead of politicians creating the news for television,
television is creating the politicians themselves. It's creating their
characters and their styles and their behavior.''

Mr. Calmer has been off the air for 13 years, and he now writes fiction at his
home here, a former carriage house on the Russell Sage estate where he lives
with his third wife, Gloria Hercik, administrative manager of CBS News
operations. His 12th novel, ''The Winds of Montauk,'' a family saga that begins
with the early eastern Long Island settlers, was published in July by Seaview
Books.

Ten years ago, in his novel ''The Anchorman,'' Mr. Calmer wrote of the influence
that television had come to have. His protagonist, a television anchorman he
called Lloyd Garner, looked down from the broadcasting booth onto the floor of
the 1968 Republican convention and saw the delegates ''as puppets on the
television screen.''

Mr. Calmer wrote: ''It was Lloyd Garner, fount from which all knowledge flowed,
the wisdom fed to him in capsules as occasion required from (a) vast file, the
political record and personal history of every man and woman of interest on that
floor, it was Lloyd Garner who told the only truth of what was happening down
there. For it wasn't so until television told it, unless television wanted it,
and, if it wasn't good enough, until television made it better.''

Mr. Calmer smiled as he listened to what he had published back in 1970. ''It's
truer now,'' he said. ''It's truer in spades. If television don't say it, it
just ain't so.''

He was asked how people ever made up their minds about whom to vote for in the
days before candidates had such exposure. Poker-faced, he answered, ''There was
a lot less to worry about then, because you were being told a lot less.''

His face broke into a smile, and the voice that millions of Americans used to
awaken to for their early-morning news boomed: ''Humor is the last refuge of the
world-weary reporter.''

The newsman, now 74 years old, had also written in ''The Anchorman'' of the 1968
election: ''Attention has been diverted from the political campaign at home, the
whole world is watching Central Europe.'' He was referring to the intervention
in Czechoslovakia by Soviet troops. He again noted the parallel between that
year and the 1980 campaign, going on simultaneously with the conflict in the
Persian Gulf.

''Our attention is diverted by so many things nowadays,'' he said, ''that we
seem to have no single purpose in our Government or in our public opinion.''

Still another parallel can be made between an event of today (the Iranians
asking President Carter to apologize for ''wrongs'' done to Iran) and a passage
on Vietnam in ''The Anchorman.'' Can't we admit we made a mistake? one
correspondent asks another.

''No, because we're perfect,'' his friend answers. ''If we abandoned that
standard, our whole political morality would collapse.''

Mr. Calmer commented: ''That's always the story with politicians.  They don't
tell the truth unless they have to. They don't face the truth.

''I covered Iran in 1950,'' he went on, ''during a struggle over oil. I marveled
then, as I marvel now. I was sitting in the Majlis, the Iranian Parliament, and
watched an ayatollah. He stood by the window to listen to a vote. Outside there
were three or four thousand people in the public square. If the vote didn't go
his way, he'd raise his handkerchief and signal them to demonstrate.

''The one thing any correspondent learns in the Middle East is that from one day
to the next nothing is certain; nothing can be predicted; anything can be
expected. What we call our Western logic is totally buried.''

Gathering this knowledge of the world began for Mr. Calmer, he said, ''when I
was a kid in my teens, when I left the U.S. and went to Paris in 1927. I stayed
for seven years.'' He was a reporter for The Paris Tribune and The Paris Herald,
the European editions of The Chicago Tribune and The New York Herald
respectively.

''I never became a broadcast journalist until 1934,'' he said, and it was in
that same year that his first novel, ''Beyond the Street,'' about his days in
Paris, was published. ''Hemingway lent me the money to come home,'' he said.
''He didn't actually lend me the money; he kind of pushed it across the table.''

Mr. Calmer then went to work to organize the New York office of Agence Havas,
the French news agency. ''I was with them till 1940,'' he said, ''till France
surrendered and the staff all quit.''

Then Edward R. Murrow hired him for CBS. ''He was head of the CBS news
operation,'' Mr. Calmer said. ''Later, as television came in, I did some of the
broadcasts from the old station in Grand Central Station. Later I went abroad
for CBS-TV News and did some of the first overseas television series for Murrow
- the fall of King Farouk of Egypt, the troubles in Trieste and so on.

''In World War II, I went to work for Murrow in London, during the bombings, and
then covered the war front -France, Belgium, Holland, Italy - and then the
founding of the United Nations in San Francisco, Originally, before there was
proper equipment, we flew the film back. Eventually, of course, it was
transmitted by satellite.''

The personnel, as well as equipment, were not sophisticated during television's
early days, he noted. ''Howard Smith and I were doing a story in Sicily and a
dog was in the background.'' he recalled.  ''Just as we were finished and
leaving, the chief of the unit said, 'That dog was sleeping at the beginning of
the shot, but now he's up.'

''We had to lull the dog to sleep again. And Howard said, 'Here we are up to our
knees in Sicilian mud - waiting for a dog to fall asleep!' ''

Mr. Calmer laughed as he told the story. ''Nowadays,'' he concluded, ''somebody
would say, 'We can't start the piece because that dog might get up and walk
away.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ned Calmer photo of Ned Calmer

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POLITICS;
PERPETULAT CANDIDATE SEEKS A CONSTITUENCY

BYLINE: By DIANE HENRY

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 28, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 876 words


NEW HAVEN JOELLE FISHMAN, who is running for the Congressional seat being
vacated by Representative Robert N. Giaimo, has become such a fixture as a
perennial Communist candidate in New Haven area politics that she is invited by
the League of Women Voters to its political debates. About the only organization
sponsoring a debate this year among Congressional candidates that excluded her
was the New Haven Chamber of Commerce.

In her fourth bid for the Congressional seat from the Third District, Miss
Fishman is competing against Joseph I. Lieberman, a Democrat, and Lawrence J.
DeNardis, a Republican.

Having also campaigned twice for the New Haven mayoralty, she has, at 33 years
of age, made a career of running for public office, albeit unsuccessfully. The
last time she ran for Congress, she said in an interview, she garnered about 2
percent of the vote in the district and about 4.6 percent of the votes from New
Haven proper.

As a child in New Jersey, Miss Fishman attended her first public demonstrations,
advocating abolition of nuclear weapons, with her parents and. She graduated
from Douglass College at Rutgers University, where she studied speech pathology,
and moved to New Haven in l968.

After working in the civil rights movement and actively opposing the Vietnam
War, she joined the Communist Party in 1970. Since l974, Miss Fishman, whose
husband, Arthur Perlo, is a computer programmer, has been executive secretary of
the party in the state, a group that she said numbered ''less than 500.''

She said that she had come to have ''great respect for the people in the
Communist Party.'' When asked whom she admired. she said, ''Nobody you ever
heard of. Just people I met. Not nationally known people.''

Like other candidates, Miss Fishman opposes inflation, unemployment, plant
closings and racism. She wants tax relief for middle-income families, more jobs
and a cut in defense spending.

She favors making the Federal Government responsible for keeping industrial
plants open, Miss Fishman said, and she would have opposed the Government loan
guarantee to Chrysler. Instead, to save jobs, she would have the Government turn
the company over to a management of workers and consumers under a special
Government agency. If a lack of demand for automobiles threatened jobs, she
said, the agency would convert the facility to something such as production of
subway cars.

''An employer does not have an unbridled right to close his plant and pick up
and go to Taiwan, Mexico, Louisiana or North Carolina, leaving thousands of
workers jobless and whole communities bereft,'' Miss Fishman said. ''This is no
longer rightfully the individual decision of a small board of directors in a
faraway plush room. It becomes a social question. The community and government
have the right to intervene.''

With a campaign theme of ''People Before Profits,'' Miss Fishman also advocates
public ownership of energy industries, including oil companies and utilities.

And in a state that is heavily dependent on the defense industry, she advocates
reduced defense spending and converting defense plants to peaceful endeavors.
Calling all discussion of first-strike nuclear strategy ''insane,'' she insists
that Soviet military strategy is ''basically defensive.''

''The big lie that the Soviet Union threatens the United States is the ploy of
the multinationals to keep the war budget - and the profits of the military
industry - on the rise,'' she said.

She blames the Administration's foreign policy for the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan, saying the refusal of the United States ''to negotiate on SALT II
contributed'' to events. The Moscow regime, she reasons, feels threatened by the
250 American military bases that surround the Soviet Union.

All racist acts should be prosecuted as criminal offenses, she said, adding that
the Ku Klux Klan and Nazis should ''be outlawed.'' A strong feminist, she
advocates full Federal financing for daycare centers and wants employers
prosecuted for discriminating against women.

The Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration, OSHA, should be
strengthened, she said. She also calls for exempting a family's first $25,000
from taxes and enactment of a six-hour work day, with no cut in pay, to create a
need for more jobs.

To finance all these programs, Miss Fishman would ''take money from the big
profits of the multinationals and close tax loopholes for big business.''

Recalling her entry into politics, Miss Fishman said ''I got talked into it. I
was scared to death my entire first year.'' ''There's a need for independent
expression in the community,'' she continued. She said her campaign adds to the
debate on issues and ''helps dispel those fears of Communism.''

Although she would not concede that her bid for Mr. Giaimo's post was hopeless,
at one point she spoke of how she might some day run for the Board of Aldermen
in New Haven, ''where I could win.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Joelle Fishman

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COLLEGES SAY PLAN EARLY FOR CAREERS

BYLINE: By ANNE R. NOBLE

SECTION: Section 12; Special Section Page 72; Page 72, Column 5; Carreers
Supplement Desk

LENGTH: 1066 words


TWO students recently came to the placement office of the University of Arizona
for help. One had majored in anthropology. The other had just earned a degree in
electrical engineering. They both wanted jobs.

Six months later, the anthroplogy major - who had done volunteer work on digs
throughout college - was working on the site of a ruined Indian village
discovered during a Western irrigation project. The engineering student, plagued
by a poor college record and no related experience, had been unable to find work
and was contemplating going back to school.

Given today's precarious job market, especially so for liberal-arts majors, this
scenario is unusual. It is not unique, however, and it does vividly illustrate
the benefits of following what college placement advisers throughout the United
States consider to be their most important advice: start your career planning
early.

Ten years ago, placement officers had a different kind of problem.  ''In the
Vietnam War era, there were a lot more distractions,'' said the University of
Arizona's placement director, Ronald L. Hummel, who aided the students mentioned
above. ''The War and one's potential role in it hung over everyone's head.''

Today, that threat has been replaced by a series of economic ones: inflation and
the very real possibility of unemployment.  ''College students coming into
freshman year today are much more attuned to the marketplace in terms of
careers,'' said William J.  Brake, director of Emory University's Career
Planning and Placement Center in Atlanta. ''They are seeking advice and we're
trying to respond to their questions and anxieties.''

Middlebury College, for example, has just hired a full-time counselor whose
function, according to Dean Walter A. Moyer, the director of placement, is to
''deal with students who don't have the slightest notion of where they want to
go in terms of their careers.''

Other schools are expanding internship and testing programs and adding career
workshops. They are encouraging students to begin their career planning earlier.
What they are not doing is discouraging students from potentially troubled
career fields or courses of study.

''I don't believe that there is a marketable or unmarketable degree,'' Mr.
Hummel said. ''There are only unmarketable people.'' And that, Mr. Hummel
believes, may be because the student has failed to survey all of his
accomplishments.

''I don't recommend that a student not pursue an area he's really interested
in,'' Mr. Hummel continued, ''just that he do some things along the way so that
when he graduates he has some experience in the area.''

To this end, and also to enable the undecided student to sample job areas in
which he is interested, many colleges are introducing internship programs and
career workshops.

''At Middlebury, we grab at anything that gives us some contact with the real
world,'' Dr. Moyer said. ''Four years ago we started inviting alumni to come in
and talk about their jobs. We started slowly, but are now up to about one a week
during the school year.''

Through the workshops and extensive testing that are part of Harvard
University's eight-year-old multifaceted vocational program, ''we are able to
identify what interests the student and help him to define it,'' said Robert J.
Ginn, director of the Office of Career Services and Off Campus Learning. ''We
don't recommend that a student go into this or not go into that. But we want to
give him a vocabulary with which to make a choice.''

And many more students are choosing to enter technical fields and professional
schools. ''The number of people we're sending to graduate school has not
changed,'' Mr. Ginn said. ''But the percentage going into professional schools
rather than traditional graduate schools has increased.''

While other colleges report a similar trend, they also note that some students
are putting off going to graduate school. Many students at Carleton College in
Minnesota, for instance, ''take jobs with the idea that the company they've
joined will pay for the M.B.A.,'' said Marilyn Hill, associate director of the
school's Career Center. ''The cost of graduate school is very high and students
want to make sure it's what they want.''

Those who postpone or forgo further education are making use of workshops in
resume writing, mock interviews and internships available at their campuses.

''We are using the nearby business community,'' said Mr. Brake of Emory.
''Students go in for a few hours a week as over-the-shoulder observers. It aids
them in making a more informed decision about a particular job.''

The popularity and demand for such detailed career analysis has increased,
according to those in counseling. ''We saw 2,000 students last year,'' said Mr.
Hummel of Arizona. At Harvard, Mr. Ginn said: ''There have been two recognizable
trends among our students. One is the increase in interest in career planning
and exploring career options. The other is a concomitant, but not entirely
related interest in business careers.''

''The students here today are worried about how much money it takes to sustain
themselves,'' said Mrs. Hill, who has been associated with the Carleton
placement department for 17 years. ''They want to be successful both financially
and in terms of personal power. And they see that business careers offer these
things.''

Getting an entry-level job without postgraduate education or specialized
training is the key. College placement officers unanimously noted an increase in
the numbers of students who mix traditional liberal-arts majors with courses in
statistics, computer science and other marketable skills.

And, while there has been a marked increase in the number of companies doing
campus recruiting in the last few years, career counselors reiterate that
hunting for a job is hard work. ''We tell students that they have to be patient,
geographically flexible and willing to take jobs at lower levels than they might
have had to several years ago,'' Miss Hill said, adding: ''Yet, there is always
a place for a person who can do the job well.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 13, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOK REVIEW;
Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 947 words


By John Leonard
UNDER THE SIGN OF SATURN. By Susan Sontag. 204 pages. Farrar Straus Gi- roux.
$10.95.

IN her affectionate memoir of the late Roland Barthes, Suan Sontag observes that
the French critic's ''interest in you tended to be your interest in him.'' He
became, she says, ''the shepherd of the flock of himself.'' The last time she
saw him alive, he greeted her with these words: ''Ah, Susan. Toujours Fidele.''
She tells us: ''I was, I am.''

This is not the tone of voice we heard in Miss Sontag's first two volumes of
essays, ''Against Interpretation'' and ''Styles of Radical Will.'' Her third
time around, she seems better acquainted with love and irony, not as categories
but as personal emotions. Her appreciations in ''Under the Sign of Saturn'' -
Saturn is meant to represent the slow and wayward orbit of the intellectual
around his or her experience of history and art - are allowed to breathe, as
Elias Canetti suggested in his tribute to Hermann Broch that great writers are
supposed to allow their readers to breathe.

On Barthes and Goodman

On Canetti, on Barthes, on Walter Benjamin and on a Paul Goodman who seemed not
to have liked Miss Sontag as much as she admired Mr.  Goodman, she allows us to
breathe, even when the atmosphere is of a rarefied seriousness. She doubts and
occasionally smiles. Of Antonin Artoud, for example, she explains that what he
proposed ''was a theater that Savonarola and Cromwell might well have approved
of,'' a theater he wanted people to attend, ''as they visit the surgeon or the
dentist.''

Not that Miss Sontag, who is a novelist and film maker when she isn't writing
esssays for The New York Review of Books, has gone soft. Her preoccupation with
the extremes of modern culture - silence, failure, discontinuity, suffering,
alienation, prophecy, despair, madness, the inadequacy of language, suicide,
martyrdom and all that is vertiginous and terminal - persists. Holderin, Nerval,
Nietzsche and van Gogh are invoked. Art is hard, especially if it is to dispense
with ''bourgeois banalities.'' A ''master art,'' such as Wagner dreamed of and
Hans-Jurgen Syberberg, perhaps, achieved in ''Hitler, a Film from Germany,'' is
even harder, guilty of association with ''excruciating fluency'' and
''voluptuous anguish.''

Nevertheless, ''Under the Sign of Saturn'' Miss Sontag plays more than she did
in ''Against Interpretation,'' which was poker-faced about ''Camp Taste'' and
''The Artist as Exemplary Sufferer,'' and she is more qualm-ridden about the
current confusion of esthetics and politics than she was in ''Styles of Radical
Will,'' which reviewed the war in Vietnam as though it were a Godard film. The
''Annihilation of Consciousness'' may be a bad idea; ''Historical Perspective''
may be a good idea.

If ''The self is a text - it has to be deciphered,'' the self is also ''a
project, something to be built.'' To be sure, ''whenever behavior becomes
sufficiently individual, it will become objectively antisocial and will seem, to
other people, mad,'' but there is such a thing as real madness, a ''sensory
violence'' that isn't ''a form of embodied intelligence''; it is, instead,
fascism. Maybe all of us, like Canetti should try to be someone we can admire.

Miss Sontag on occasion is too admiring or extravagant. Was Paul Goodman really
''our Sartre, our Cocteau'' and, ''the most important American writer'' in the
last 20 years? Was Artoud, after the migraines, after nine years in the
madhouse, after electric shock, in fact ''the greatest prose poet in the French
language'' since Rimbaud? Are we actually fascinated by Nazism ''in a way other
iconography staked out by the pop sensibility (from Mao Zedong to Marilyn
Monroe)'' fails to fascinate? My own feeling is that Miss Sontag is more
interesting on Syberberg than Syberberg was on Hitler.

But, like Goodman and Artoud and Canetti, Miss Sontag disdains limits and
categories. She will do what she wants to in whatever medium she chooses, ''a
hero of the will.'' She is impatient with a modernism that is ''compatible with
the ethos of an advanced consumer society'' and she is tired of the occult, of
the latest countercultural fashions. She goes so far as to question ''leftwing
pieties,'' although ''Styles of Radical Will'' was full of them. She seeks
texture, and if she is obliged to despair it will be on Canetti's terms: She
will set ''the largest, most edifying standards of despair.''

Irony and Eclecticism

Such irony, humor, breathing, impatience, weariness and eclecticism add up to a
first-rate critic, someone who hasn't gone ''volunteering for madness'' rather
than ''forfeit a certain lucidity.'' Modernist art complains about history, and
certainly the history of the 20th century is evil art; it is about time, though,
for 20th-century history to ask modernist art whether we shouldn't spread around
the guilt.

''The color is black,'' says Miss Sontag, ''the material is leather, the
seduction is beauty, the justification is honesty, the aim is ecstasy, the
fantasy is death.'' She is talking about sadomasochism and a ''fascist
esthetics.'' She is also, suddenly, a moralist. And a fine one, and she is much
more fun than the surgeon or the dentist. Saturn, after all, was the ancient
Roman god of agriculture; Miss Sontag makes thought grow.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. REJECTS BID TO OUST POL POT REGIME

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 838 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 13


The Soviet Union suffered a diplomatic defeat today when the General Assembly
rejected a move to oust the representative of the ousted Government of former
Prime Minister Pol Pot from Cambodia's seat.

A combination of Southeast Asian nations, China and the United States won enough
third-world votes to save the Assembly chair for the regime that was forced out
of Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital, by Vietnam in 1979.

The count was 74 to 35 with 32 abstentions, much like that of a year ago on the
same issue.  The Soviet Union and its ally, Vietnam, had hoped to upset last
year's balloting and simply leave vacant the Cambodian seat. Moscow had
abandoned any hope now of replacing the Pol Pot group with a delegation from the
Government of President Heng Samrin, installed in Phnom Penh by Hanoi. But the
argument that aggression must not be rewarded, at least in Cambodia, was
decisive.

This was the first genuine debate of this year's Assembly and it underlined the
shifting politics at the United Nations. A popular view holds that the body is
dominated by third-world votes aligned with the Soviet Union. But in this case,
and on the issue of Afghanistan, the nations of Asia, Africa and Latin America
divide, with a majority voting as the United States does.

Pol Pot Group Widely Condemned

At issue today was who should represent Cambodia here. Mr. Pol Pot's regime,
widely condemned for its destruction of its own people, was driven from Phnom
Penh in January 1979 and its guerrillas are struggling to survive in the
country's northwest corner near the Thai border. It was forced out by 100,000
Vietnamese troops who installed the Heng Samrin regime in its place. Vietnam now
is estimated to have 200,000 troops in the country fighting the guerrillas.

At the United Nations, the chief strategist for the forces supporting the Pol
Pot group, Tommy T. B. Koh of Singapore, made clear his distaste for his
clients. The ousted regime has ''committed gross and extensive violations of the
human rights of its people,'' Mr. Koh said. But the United Nations, he argued,
cannot selectively and retrospectively remove governments of tyrants and
despots, he said.

In any event, he went on, the Soviet Union and Vietnam are ''shedding crocodile
tears'' over Mr. Pol Pot's excesses. Both countries defended the regime until
the Vietnamese invasion of December 1979, Mr. Koh recalled.

'Nothing More Than a Puppet'

Mr. Heng Samrin's Government ''is nothing more than a puppet, installed by the
Vietnamese and kept in office by 200,000 Vietnamese troops,'' Mr. Koh said. To
remove the Pol Pot group from the Assembly would be ''to punish the victim of
foreign armed aggression by denying the victim the right to represent its
country in the United Nations,'' he said.

If the seat is left vacant, the Singapore delegate argued, this would amount to
a first step toward recognition of a puppet. It would, moreover, remove any
incentive for Vietnam to withdraw its troops and attend a conference aimed at a
free United Nationssupervised election for Cambodia. Such an election is the
political goal of Mr. Koh's country and the others allied with him on the issue.

From the other camp, Ha Van Lau of Vietnam argued that support for Mr. Heng
Samrin was ''realistic.'' The regime in Phnom Penh, Mr. Lau said, has run
Cambodia for 20 months, ''restored a devastated country'' and checked famine,
and is erasing the remnants of the Pol Pot forces.

U.S. and Soviet Play Minor Roles

In contrast, Mr. Lau said, the Pol Pot regime ''killed almost half its people''
and ''cutthroats can't represent their victims.'' All the world condemns Mr. Pol
Pot, he said, and there are divisions only over Mr. Heng Samrin. Therefore, the
Vietnamese representative said, the best solution is to leave the seat here
unfilled.

Both the United States and the Soviet Union played minor roles in the public
debate. For the United States, Donald F. McHenry, the chief delegate, did not
even speak until the vote was over. Then he said that Mr. Heng Samrin could not
make a claim over the Pol Pot regime for the seat since Cambodia's nominal
rulers held power through an invasion and occupation.

Mr. McHenry emphasized, however, that Washington condemned Mr. Pol Pot's
''savage human rights violations.'' The Soviet Union did not even send its top
delegate to the podium.  Instead, Vladimir Petrovsky, a delegation member with
ambassadorial rank, urged unseating of the Pol Pot regime because ''we have
every ground to state that the changes which have taken place in Cambodia are
irreversible.''

Last year, the Assembly voted to keep the seat for the Pol Pot regime by a vote
of 71 to 35, with 34 abstentions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

COLD WARRIOR BRADLEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 241 words


To the Editor:

Senator Bill Bradley has sounded the trumpet of intervention (Op-Ed Oct. 1). He
urges the U.S. to ''provide significant military aid to the Afghan rebels'' and
quickly adds that ''our assistance to them must be limited.'' Our aid must be
''carefully circumscribed.'' Who could be concerned after such impressive
assurances?

Our Vietnam experience is emphasized in the article, but only to imply that we
must ignore its lessons of quagmire entanglement and involuntary escalation. The
Senator's unproven assertion that ''Vietnam is no analogy for Afghanistan'' does
not make it so. We are to ''clearly define our expectations before we act.'' But
what if the Soviets react otherwise than we expect?

Like all cold-warriors, Mr. Bradley hopes to frighten the other superpower - in
this case by delivering ''an unambiguous message to the Russians at this time of
conflict in the Persian Gulf region.'' A superpower cannot be frightened by
hostile messages in a neighbor country. And cold-warriors will learn that
superpower conflict is the greatest threat to world survival.

As usual, the Russians are blamed for whatever we do. Since they ''would
manufacture the excuse of American assistance,'' we may as well intervene, and
the devil take the hindmost. The Bradley thesis is militaristic and
shortsighted, the kind of thinking that one way or another leads to World War
III.
SAMUEL TUCKER, Westfield, N.J., Oct. 2, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MAJOR POWERS TRAVEL ALONG DIVERGENT PATHS TOWARD LIFE IN ORBIT

BYLINE: By JOHN NOBLE WILFORD

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1756 words


SINCE the last American flew in space, back in July 1975, the Soviet Union has
sent three dozen astronauts into Earth orbit, broken all flight endurance
records and encouraged speculation that in a few years it would be operating the
science fiction buff's dream - an orbital station designed for permanent
occupation. At the same time, the United States has concentrated on its reusable
shuttle, which has yet to fly, but will reestablish a frequent American presence
in manned Earth orbital flights.

The two programs point up the divergent paths that the superpowers are taking,
although they share a common goal of achieving everyday life in space near
Earth.

To support their efforts, the Soviet Union has for several years been increasing
its space budgets about 3 to 5 percent a year above inflation, American analysts
estimate. Salyut 6, launched in September 1977, has become the centerpiece of an
active manned space program whose pace, style and apparent priority stand in
sharp contrast to the American program of recent years.

American spending is about half what it was in the late 1960's, and since much
of that has been tied down by development costs of the shuttle, few new projects
have been authorized. The shuttle is expected to cost $6.4 billion in 1971
dollars, or about $9 billion in actual expenditures.

There is evidence, according to American space experts, that the Soviet Union
has resumed efforts to develop a new rocket system more powerful than the Saturn
5 moon rocket and may be building its own reusable space plane, a smaller
version of the American space shuttle that is expected to fly next year. These
could be key elements in plans for an ambitious space station.

For the time being, however, the Soviet Union keeps testing the limits of human
activity in space. Two astronauts returned to Earth on Saturday after spending
185 days in Salyut 6, a durable 21-ton station the size of a small mobile home.
The astronauts, Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin, surpassed the previous endurance
record of 175 days, set last year, and the American record of 84 days in Skylab.

''Their manned program is very impressive,'' said Charles S.  Sheldon 2d, a
specialist on Soviet space activities for the Library of Congress. ''It is
conservative in its technology, but it's ongoing and keeps grinding away in a
number of areas.''

The Soviet Union lost the so-called moon race in the 1960's. Its first attempts
to fly a Saturn 5-class rocket ended in explosive failure. Its most advanced
version of Soyuz, the spacecraft for ferrying astronauts to and from Salyut,
ranks no better than the American Gemini of the mid-1960's. No Soviet spacecraft
has come close to matching the maneuverability and sophistication of Apollo.  No
Soviet spacecraft believed to be on the drawing boards is expected to compare in
versatility and capacity to the American space shuttle.

Even so, while American space budgets dwindled in the post-Apollo 1970's and
technical problems delayed the space shuttle, the Soviet Union moved forward,
steadily and methodically. Soviet astronauts have now logged more than twice as
many hours in space as Americans - some 46,000 against 22,493. The Soviet
launching rate, for both manned and unmanned vehicles, is prodigious - in 1979,
87 against 16, with little change in the ratio this year.

One reason the Soviet program has maintained an apparently higher priority may
be its increasing pursuit of military and political goals. According to Pentagon
officials in Washington, the expanding Soviet space program includes the
development of ''killer'' satellites, designed to seek out and disable other
satellites, as well as particle-beam and laser weapons for possible deployment
in space.

Three of the earlier Salyuts, numbers 2 (which failed), 3 and 5, were primarily
military missions, American experts say, and were operated as reconnaissance
outposts. In reporting Soviet concepts for a future 12-man space station, the
authoritative publication Aviation Week and Space Technology said last June that
military objectives ''are expected to dominate the multidisciplinary station and
could include photo and electronic intelligence and the first large-scale
development of space-based, directed-energy weapons.''

Such a prospect has been cited often in recent months as the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration has begun to seek support for a large
American space station as its next big project and as the Pentagon hints at
further expansion of its growing military space program. The United States has
begun some development work on possible space weaponry, but the Russians are
believed to have a head start.

Dr. Sheldon said in an interview last week that reports of Soviet plans for a
large, permanently manned space station were ''consistent with'' published
statements by Soviet officials over the years and with the evolutionary nature
of the Soviet program. Tass, the official Soviet press agency, said last month
that the three years Salyut 6 has been in orbit ''furnishes a sound foundation
for the development of new improved methods of facilities which are needed for
future flights of still more complex orbital stations and transport craft.''

According to the Aviation Week article, which cited unnamed ''U.S.  analysts,''
the Soviet Union is developing a 110-ton space station to be permanently manned
in the mid-1980's.

The station would be about 30 tons heavier than the three-man Skylab, which the
United States operated in 1973 and 1974. It would be launched by a new rocket
that may have almost twice the initial thrust of the Saturn 5, the article said,
although it would not be able to deliver much more weight into orbit than the
Saturn 5 because of a lack of high-energy upper stages using liquid hydrogen
fuel.  This is presumably similar to the rocket that failed in three tests in
1969, 1971 and 1972.

Soviet efforts to develop a reusable space shuttle are modest compared to the
American program. Defense Secretary Harold Brown told the Senate last February
that there is evidence the Russians are working on a winged reusable spacecraft
similar in size and configuration to a space glider the United States Air Force
abandoned 17 years ago. The Soviet shuttle is expected to be less sophisticated
and smaller than the American shuttle.

But Dr. Sheldon doubts that a Soviet shuttle flight is imminent, noting recent
comments by Lieut. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, head of the Soviet astronaut corps.
General Shatalov told Hungarian journalists in June that, while Soviet engineers
have investigated the possibility of building reusable spacecraft, the current,
well-tested methods of space station supply were adequate for the present.

In the Salyut program, begun in the early 1970's, the space station is launched
unmanned into orbit by a Proton rocket, the largest in the Soviet arsenal.
Astronauts then fly to and from the station in a Soyuz, capable of carrying only
two men.

The station is resupplied through additional Soyuz flights, in which two more
astronauts (including astronauts from East European allies, Vietnam and Cuba)
visit the station for periods of a week or so, and with unmanned Progress craft,
a modified Soyuz for hauling food, fuel and oxygen. About a half-dozen supply
flights, manned and unmanned, were required to support each Salyut endurance
mission.

Last June, the Russians launched their first manned mission in the advanced
Soyuz T spacecraft, incorporating new rocket engines, improved on-board guidance
computers and solar panels.

But subsequent flights to Salyut 6 were made in the old-model Soyuz craft,
leading to speculation that the Soyuz T encountered problems in flight or in
production. American analysts, nevertheless, believe the Soyuz T will serve as
the primary manned vehicle until a reusable winged craft is developed.

The Russians have not said whether they intend to send more crews to operate
Salyut 6. Dr. Sheldon said ''enough things have deteriorated'' on the present
space station that it may soon be abandoned and replaced by a new Salyut,
perhaps one that is somewhat larger and equipped with more than two docking
ports. With additional docking ports, the amount of habitable space in the
station could be expanded through attaching extra modules. As it is, one port is
used by the Soyuz necessary for the crew's return and the other is used by
supply ships.

''It is reasonably clear,'' Dr. Sheldon said, ''that the Russians have not begun
to exhaust the full capability of Salyut-type stations. They have done so well
with Salyut and they are so conservative, I would be surprised if they go
immediately to the large station.''

Instead, some American observers have speculated, the Soviet Union may begin
soon to assemble clusters of Salyuts in orbit, perhaps two joined end to end or
three joined to a central docking module to create a wheel-like structure. Since
the segments could be launched separately by the Proton rocket, such a larger
structure would not be dependent on development of a Saturn 5-class rocket.

In their more expansive moments, Russians speak of their longduration space
station operations as possible precursors to manned interplanetary flight. ''In
the future, and perhaps in the not-toodistant future,'' Soviet officials were
quoted as saying in June, ''such flights will no doubt be accomplished. One can
express a firm conviction that the launching of Salyut 6 station has paved the
way for unmanned flights to other planets of the solar system.''

But a manned planetary mission will be many years away for either the Soviet
Union or the United States. American space experts point out that Soviet flight
systems have not yet demonstrated the reliability necessary for such missions;
Soviet unmanned flights to the planets, except for nearby Venus, have been
generally unsuccessful. And long ago NASA shelved its manned planetary plans for
lack of public support.

Thus, for the rest of this century, it appears that the two major space powers
will be concentrating on near-Earth operations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Leonoid Popov and Valery Ryumin

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

IRANIANS EFFECTIVNESS IN FIGHTING IRAQ IS ASTONISHING U.S. MILITARY ANALYSTS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1182 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 14


The ability of Iran's armed forces - decimated by revolution and demoralized by
political chaos - to fend off the apparently more powerful military forces of
Iraq has astonished American military analysts. But some have cautioned that it
may be only a matter of time before the Iranians fold up.

Several experts attributed the perseverence to what one called ''nationalistic
fervor.'' Some Iranian soldiers have returned to the army, the paramilitary
Islamic Revolutionary Guards have shown that they are fierce fighters,
especially in the cities, and women and children have taken up guns to shoot at
the invaders.

On the ground, the Iranians have had the advantage of being on the defense and
they have made good use of artillery. Further, the Iraqis have been reluctant to
take heavy casualties. But in tactics, the Iranians have been unimaginative.

In the air, American-trained Iranians have outflown the Sovietdrilled Iraqis.
The Iranians have gone up in American-built planes that would have been
classified here as unfit to fly because of inadequate maintenance.

Stockpiles of Arms Aiding Iran

Logistically, the arms and ammunition stockpiled by Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi
have been crucial in sustaining an Iranian military force only slightly
resupplied from North Korea and Libya. Moreover, within recent days the Iranians
have begun to find spare parts stored in warehouses.

Secretary of Defense Harold Brown has asserted that the American connection
fostered by the late Shah has paid off now for the Iranians. In response to a
question after a luncheon speech in El Paso last week, Mr. Brown said: ''What
this says to me is that American military equipment and American training are
pretty good.''

A year ago, analysts here reported that the Iranian armed forces, built up under
the Shah, had been stripped of leadership by executions and exile and weakened
in the ranks by desertions and a collapse of discipline. Thus, when Iraq
attacked, the Iranians were expected to crumble.

Asked why they had not, the analysts put national fervor at the top of the list.
Some noted that nationalism sustained the Vietcong in their fight against the
technically and militarily superior Americans in Vietnam, just as nationalism is
sustaining the Afghans against the Russians today.

'Fighting on Their Own'

Moreover, they noted that the exhortations of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini had
little to do with the morale of the soldiers and people. They said that it was
almost impossible for the Ayatollah's propagnada to get down to the front lines
or into some of the besieged cities. ''They are fighting on their own,'' one
analyst said.

Another suggested that the Iraqis, like some American football teams, had gone
into battle overconfident, expecting the politically troubled Iranians to be
unable to respond. The analyst added that the resistance had surprised the
Iraqis and taken some of the steam out of their drive.

The Iranian Army is being commanded largely by officers who were just captains a
year ago. Most officers above the rank of major were purged after the Shah left
Iran and his Government was replaced. At first, the analysts said, they had
little coordination and the units in the field were left to fight on their own.

New Command Center in Iran

Within the last few days, however, the Iranian Army has been able to establish a
command center, believed to be in Teheran, and to set up a tactical network for
communications.

In the area around the oilfields, a force of about two Iranian divisions has
been able to hold off a considerably larger force of six Iraqi divisions. Credit
for that was attributed principally to skillful use of artillery, much of it
obtained from the Soviet Union. Within recent days, the Iranians have been able
to make use of their American-built antitank weapons. Why they did not before is
a mystery.

But the Iranian tank force of British-built Chieftains and American-supplied
M-60's has been something of a disappointment to the Iranians, largely because
of poor maintenance. The analysts said that the Chieftain is tricky to maintain.
The tanks have thus been reduced to serving as artillery.

The analysts also noted that the Iraqis have maneuvered to keep their losses low
and have not yet plunged into cities such as Dizful, choosing instead to lay
siege to them. The Iraqis have also had trouble moving troops across rivers
which is among the most difficult of ground maneuvers.

The Iranian Air Force was the Shah's pride and its members were recruited from
among the better educated of a people with a higher literacy level than the
Iraqis. An analyst said that Iraqi pilots came almost exclusively from the upper
sectors of society and were undisciplined in the air and on the ground.

Americans Trained Iranians

With some pride, the analysts pointed out that the Iranians had been trained by
Americans who had fought in Vietnam against Soviet planes manned by Vietnamese
pilots trained by Russians. The Americans were able to pass on what they had
learned in tactics.

American pilots, for instance, have taught Iranians that the way to evade
Soviet-built antiaircraft missiles is to dive toward the rising missile and veer
off at the last second. The missile cannot turn fast enought to follow its
target and eventually falls to earth.

The analysts said they had evidence that Iranians were using these tactics.  The
Iranian sortie rate, or number of missions flown each day, started low, then
rose. But it has been declining in the last few days, the analysts said. The
Iranians have kept their F-5's fighters, a relatively light plane, in the air
more than any others and have flown their F-4's regularly.

But they have been unable to keep more than 10 percent of their highly
sophisticated F-14's up because they require skilled maintenance. They have also
kept the F-14's out of combat, using the aircraft's radar, which has a range of
about 100 miles, to help guide and control other aircraft in bombing raids and
ground support missions.

Logistically, the Iranian supply system, particularly the computerized control
of inventories, was rendered useless by the disorders that followed the Islamic
revolution. But analysts here said that within the last few days the Iranians
had been able to make the system work by hand and have been able to find needed
parts and supplies stockpiled in warehouses.

The main shortcoming the analysts foresaw for both sides was a dwindling of
artillery ammunition from the Soviet Union. The Iranians have been able to
obtain some ammunition from North Korea, which also has Soviet-supplied
artillery, and possibly from Libya, the analysts said. But that would not be
enough for sustained firing.

The analysts said they had still not seen any sign of Soviet resupply to either
side. Two Soviet ships were headed for Iraq's port of Basra when the war broke
out but they turned back to the Persian Gulf. Later, they were spotted moving up
the Red Sea toward Jordan's port of Aqaba. They turned back again and were
reported to be back at the port of Aden.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HART IN A STRUGGLE TO KEEP SENATE SEAT;
The Race for Congress

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 944 words

DATELINE: DENVER, Oct. 14


''These are two fightin' ladies,'' Senator John W. Warner of Virginia told a
fund-raising affair at the Cherry Hills Country Club, placing one arm around his
wife, Elizabeth Taylor, the actress, and the other around Mary Estill Buchanan,
Republican candidate for the Senate in Colorado.

Until recently, Mrs. Buchanan's Democratic opponent, Senator Gary Hart, was
considered an easy favorite to win a second term. But that was before ''Fightin'
Mary'' entered the fray, challenged the party organization and litigated her way
onto the primary ballot. She then led a field of four candidates, edging past
Howard Calloway, former Secretary of the Army and former Congressman from
Georgia, who was the runner-up.

Since that victory, Mrs. Buchanan has led a charmed life, virtually immune from
attack, while burnishing an image as a gutsy, come-frombehind fighter. A recent
poll taken by The Denver Post showed that among likely voters she led Mr. Hart
by 15 points, reflecting the momentum of her primary victory.

''It's that Cinderella image,'' said Representative Patricia Schroeder, a
Colorado Democrat, not without envy. ''I've never seen anything like it before.
It doesn't make any difference what Hart says.''

The 45-year-old Mrs. Buchanan, Colorado's Secretary of State and the divorced
mother of six children, often seems ill at ease in the presence of Colorado's
senior Senator, a smooth, assured political professional who managed Senator
George McGovern's Presidential campaign in 1972. But her occasional floundering
and vagueness does not seem to have hurt her campaign.

Unorthodox Strategies

Both candidates are using unorthodox strategies. Mr. Hart, 43, who won the
Senate seat by opposing the Vietnam War, is publicizing testimonials from
Senator Barry Goldwater, William F. Buckley's National Review, and Paul Weyrich,
director of the conservative Committee for the Survival of a Free Congress.
Unlike the usual Democrat, Mr. Hart says little about helping the poor, and he
urges less Federal aid to the cities.

''In the 40's, 50's and 60's, the Federal Government began to pick up a lot of
the bills for rebuilding the cities, and that trend has got to be reversed,''
Mr. Hart said. ''State governments will have to assume more of the
responsibility.''

Mrs. Buchanan, meanwhile, is undoubtedly one of the few Republican candidates to
support federally financed abortions and the proposed equal rights amendment.
She also opposes a tax cut until the Federal budget is balanced, as well as the
allocation of Federal funds to develop synthetic fuels, which she considers
environmentally hazardous.

Nor are there many Republican candidates who would join her in denouncing the
Moral Majority movement as ''a haven of hypocrisy.'' Mr. Hart has had difficulty
developing a campaign strategy against her. Hal Haddon, the Senator's campaign
manager, said that ''the problem with mounting an attack on her is not only that
she won because she was attacked so much, but also because she is vague.''

Hart Enunciates Theme

But in a television debate last weekend, Mr. Hart finally enunciated what he
later said would be a major campaign theme. ''A competent, strong, respected
voice is what Colorado needs in the U.S. Senate, and that's the voice I
represent,'' the Senator said, his handsome, movie-star features looking
directly into the camera.

He portrayed Mrs. Buchanan as inexperienced, especially about national security
and foreign affairs, and charged that she was articulating undigested, position
papers furnished by Republican National Committee - a charge that the committee
would probably find puzzling, given Mrs. Buchanan's stands on a number of
issues.

In the television debate, Mr. Hart repeatedly accused Mrs. Buchanan of
''misstating the facts,'' but she successfully rebutted the Senator's statements
that he favored linking income tax payments to inflation, citing four Senate
votes in which Mr. Hart opposed the proposal. The Senator later said that, at
the time the votes were taken, he had not yet focused on the issue.

For her part, Mrs. Buchanan raises what she calls ''the expediency issue,'' a
charge that Mr. Hart has tailored his positions to suit the campaign. ''Where's
he going to be on issues six years from today?'' she asked. ''He doesn't know.
He'll have to take his polls.''

Mr. Hart responds that the times have changed, rather than his positions. The
Vietnam War is over, and Mr. Hart, who opposed defense expenditures to support
that war, now stresses the need for a strong defense.

Mrs. Buchanan has yet to mend her fences with state Republican officials, who
resented her entry into the campaign, as well as some of her views. This has
created some fund-raising problems in her efforts to match the Senator's
expected $750,000 campaign chest.

Equally divided are Colorado's feminists. Although the National Women's
Political Caucus has endorsed Mrs. Buchanan, on the grounds that she is a
feminist and that there is a need for more women in government, the local
chapter has endorsed both Mrs. Buchanan and Mr. Hart, whom they regard as strong
on women's issues.

The Senator, asked by audiences whether he believes that women are adequately
represented in the Senate, replies that ''I think there ought to be another
woman in the Senate.'' He then pauses and adds, ''That's why I'm supporting Liz
Holtzman in New York.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 15, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CHARGES TAKE A NEW FORM IN L.I. RACE

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words


The Race for Congress

By ROBIN HERMAN

Against a background of music that evokes airport departure lounges, a
mellifluous female voice whispers: ''Copenhagen...Madrid...Brussels...
Tokyo...Hong Kong.''

Then a male voice interrupts the radio commercial: ''Since 1973, Congressman
Wolff took 78 junkets to 42 different countries. The real reason for these trips
has never been ascertained.''

The female voice continues: ''Singapore...Australia...London... New Delhi.''
Finally, the listener is urged to vote for John LeBoutillier, whose only trips
would be ''between New York and Washington.'' Mr. LeBoutillier, a 27-year-old
conservative who says he was shocked by what he called the ''hypocrisy'' and
inferior leadership he encountered while studying at Harvard University and
Harvard Business School, has brought his outrage to the Sixth Congressional
District on Long Island and is directing it at Lester L. Wolff, the four-term
Democratic Representative.

Opponent Called Elitist

Mr. Wolff, in turn, is outraged, calling his opponent on the Republican,
Conservative and Right-to-Life lines ''an elitist'' who is practicing
''born-again McCarthyism'' by implying that there is something wrong with Mr.
Wolff's conduct in office.

''I'd like to send him on a couple of trips that I've been on where I've been
the subject of assassination attempts,'' the 61-yearold Representative said.
''Now I'm being subjected to character assassination.''

In radio and television commercials, paid for by money raised primarily out of
state, Mr. LeBoutillier (pronounced Luh-BOOT-lee-ay) has charged that Mr. Wolff
was a paid agent of the Philippine government when he first ran for office.

The young challenger quotes newspaper accounts to show that Mr.  Wolff kept up
those business interests after he was elected and says that the National
Taxpayers Union has called Mr. Wolff ''one of the worst big spenders in
Congress.''

New Impact for Old Charges

The charges are old. What is new is the visceral impact of the commercials,
which have attracted attention well outside the confines of the district. The
ads were conceived by Elliot Curson, Gov. Ronald Reagan's media adviser.

Mr. Wolff says the LeBoutillier commercials ''tend to libel'' and he has
threatened his opponent with a lawsuit.  The Congressman carries with him a
collection of documents that he calls ''my truth file.'' From it, he draws what
he calls ''the paper to prove it'' each time he rebuts Mr. LeBoutillier's
charges.

Mr. Wolff says that he did register with the Department of Justice when he was
involved in the Philippine tobacco business, but adds that it was a ''commercial
registration'' in October 1961. He notes that he was not elected until 1964.

Bad Reviews Cited

Mr. Wolff's ''truth file'' also contains material that he uses to spear Mr.
LeBoutillier, such as bad reviews of his book, ''Harvard Hates America,'' and
Federal Election Commission records showing that Mr. LeBoutillier applied in
Connecticut a year ago to run against Representative Toby Moffett.

Mr. Wolff details how Mr. LeBoutillier accepted money for this Connecticut
congressional campaign before being welcomed by the Nassau County Republican
organization and settling in Westbury, L.I., where his parents have lived since
he left for prep school and college.

The Congressman pulls out other reference material to buttress his charge that
his opponent's campaign money is derived largely from Texas oil interests and
from what Mr. Wolff calls ''the new radical right.''

Among Mr. LeBoutillier's $1,000 contributors Mr. Wolff finds Lyn Nofziger,
Governor Reagan's press secretary, whom he calls ''one of the architects of the
Nixon dirty tricks, one of the bad news bears.  This is all the old Nixon money
that's coming in here.''

Textile Official Contributes

The Congressman points to another $1,000 contributor, Roger Milliken, the head
of the Deering-Milliken textile firm and leading figure in conservative circles,
and describes him as ''one of the founders of the John Birch Society, one of its
big funders.''

Mr. LeBoutillier said his political education began when he was a Harvard
freshman in 1972, when ''McGovern was the hero of Harvard.  But his supporters
were the biggest hypocrites I ever saw. They'd say, 'We have to do what McGovern
says and redistribute the wealth in America,' then they'd jump in their Mercedes
and drive into Boston.''

He said encounters with what he described as materialistic classmates and
professors, a sprinkling of mindless leftist instructors and drug abusers
shocked him and inspired him to work for a former Vietnam prisoner of war who in
1974 was challenging Senator George McGovern in South Dakota.

According to Mr. LeBoutillier, as a political neophyte he used the hall
telephone in his dormitory to place calls around the country and raised about
$300,000 for the P.O.W.

In 1976, he worked as a New Jersey field coordinator for President Ford. Since
then, he says, he has supported himself as an author and lecturer.

Party Reorganization Urged

''Harvard Hates America'' brought Mr. LeBoutillier wider recognition. In it, he
says the Republican Party has ''lost its soul'' and he calls for a business
takeover of government programs.

He says he does not believe, as other conservatives might, that ''the only good
government is no government.'' He sees a need for Federal involvement in such
things as national health insurance, a student loan program and welfare.

''It's not inherently bad, it's how you do it,'' he said of public assistance.
''The Archie Bunkers shouldn't hate welfare. They should hate the administrators
of welfare. They're the ones who are ripping them off, not the poor and sick
people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of 6th C.D. photo of Lester L. Wolff photo of Jogn
LeBoutillier

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

China-Vietnam Border Clash

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 55 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Oct. 15


China reported that its troops ''annihilated'' Vietnamese soldiers who crossed
the border and attacked a Chinese commune today. The official New China News
Agency reported that the Vietnamese killed or wounded an unspecified number of
soldiers and civilians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT IT TAKES TO BE WINNER OF PEACE PRIZE

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 775 words


What do Fredrik Bajer, Charles Dawes and Sir William Randall Cremer have in
common? Like Adolfo Perez Esquivel, they all won the Nobel Peace Prize, perhaps
the most prestigious and eccentric award given anywhere.

To win the prize, it helps to be a ''white man in his 60's from a country
friendly to Norway,'' or so said Tim Greve, the former director of the Nobel
Institute. In fact, Mr. Perez Esquivel is 48 years old and an Argentine, which
shows that the formula does not always work.

Unlike the prizes for literature or science, which are given by learned
academies in Sweden, peace is strictly a Norwegian affair.  Alfred Nobel, who
made a fortune patenting dynamite and other things, so specified in his will.

The will directs the prize committee to find ''the person who shall have done
the most or the best work for fraternity between peoples, for the abolition or
reduction of standing armies and for the holding and promotion of peace
congresses.''

Form Still Followed

In the early years - the prize has been given since 1901 - Mr.  Nobel's
instructions were followed with some fidelity. But their archaic ring has not
bound modern committees that have chosen men of power, such as Gen. George C.
Marshall, Henry A. Kissinger and Willy Brandt; humanitarians such as Mother
Teresa and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and even organizations. The
International Red Cross has won the prize three times.

Mr. Nobel's will, however, has been faithfully followed for the mechanism to
select winners. It directs the Norwegian Parliament to elect five persons to
form the prize committee. Typically, the five include some former politicians, a
woman and an academic or two.

The current committee fits the model with one historian, an expert on Soviet
affairs; two former politicians; a woman active in women's leagues, and a farmer
with an interest in African matters.

Experts on the prize committee think that its most powerful voice is its
chairman, John Sanness, a historian who runs a one-man foreign-affairs think
tank for Norway's ruling Labor Party. Until last year, he shared influence with
Aase Lionaes, one of six Parliament presidents and an ardent friend of Israel.
She is credited with insisting that President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt share his
prize with the Israeli Prime Minister, Menachem Begin. Mrs. Lionaes, who retired
as chairman last year, is also thought to have blocked a prize for Tito,
refusing to forgive him for breaking relations with Israel in the 1967 war.

Mr. Sanness is not a one-man band, however. His prestige, insiders say, was
damaged by the award to Mr. Kissinger, who is not regarded everywhere as a
peace-pursuing figure. But as Mr. Greve once explained, the Nobel Peace Prize is
a political affair, and the Norwegian Establishment was disturbed by the wave of
anti-Americanism in Scandinavia caused by the war in Vietnam.

The experts suspect that Mr. Perez Esquivel was pushed by two other committee
members, Egil Aarvik, a former Cabinet member from the Christian People's Party,
and Trygve Haugeland, the farmer and African specialist. Both are known to be
sensitive to the cause of human rights.

The Effect of Campaigning

Nominations come to the committee from past members, academics, members of
legislatures and former prizewinners. The latter carry special weight. The two
Ulster ''Peace Women,'' Betty Williams and Mairead Corrigan, winners for 1976,
put up Mr. Perez Esquivel's name.

The nominations are screened at the institute, whose director prepares
biographies of likely choices. In Mr. Greve's era, this gave him considerable
influence in narrowing the field. His successor, Jacob Sverdrup, is said to play
a more modest role.

The Nobel Institute says campaigning for the prize does not work.  But Eisaku
Sato of Japan and Sir Norman Angell of Britain waged expensive and successful
struggles for the award. On the other hand, Mexico's former President, Luis
Echeverria Alvarez, flew Norwegian journalists to a sunnier climate, ordered his
ambassadors to push his candidacy and fell flat.

It is unlikely that Fredrik Bajer, a Danish Member of Parliament and president
of the defunct Permanent International Peace Bureau, lifted a finger in his own
cause. Nor did Sir William Randall Cremer, a British M.P. and secretary of the
International Arbitration League, or Charles Dawes, an American Vice President
credited with a plan for the payment of Germany's post-World War I debt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Nobel prize medal

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ENDING WHITES' MONOPOLY

BYLINE: By Daniel C. Maguire

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 823 words

DATELINE: MILWAUKEE


Affirmative action is being undone by the very agencies of Government assigned
to enforce it. There are five - and, I submit, only five - groups that merit
affirmative-action quotas: blacks, women, American Indians, Mexican Americans,
and Puerto Ricans.

Yet in a self-defeating passion for egalitarianism, Federal agencies list
Hispanics without making distinctions; all Americans of Chinese, Japanese,
Korean, Aleut, and Phillipine descent, and anyone with roots in ''the Far East''
and ''subcontinent India.'' Recent monitoring by Federal grants officers even
includes ''Vietnam era veterans'' and, without specification, ''various
religious/ethnic groups.'' When all are preferred - and the logic of present
practice veers toward that absurdity - none is preferred.

The prime losers here are blacks, the original and most needy recipients of
quota relief. Employers and admissions officers have more and more groups to
choose from to meet their quotas and feel there is a diminishing need to choose
blacks.

The problem is that explicit criteria for eligibility are totally absent in the
operating enforcement programs of affirmative action.  The criteria that I would
suggest that a group must meet to merit preferential relief are these: 1. The
group must have no alternative to enforced preference; voluntary measures and
enforced nondiscrimination must have proved insufficient.

2. The bias against the group must have reached the level of depersonalization
and be entrenched in the distributive systems of the society.

3. The members of the group must be visible and identifiable as such.  Japanese
and Aleut Americans, Roman Catholics and Jews, and new immigrants do meet with
some kinds of discrimination, but not of the sort, under these criteria, that
merits affirmative action. Blacks, American Indians, women, Puerto Ricans, and
Mexican Americans do meet all three criteria. Their plight is one of radical
disempowerment requiring enforced systemic redistribution. Patterned and
systemic injustice requires patterned and systemic redress.

Among these groups, the claims of blacks must be seen as primary.  There is
already evidence that white employers would rather meet quotas with white women
than with blacks. Indeed, if the claims of blacks are not seen as primary and
prior to all others, the other disempowered groups will move upstairs, and
blacks will again watch from the cellar.

Given the horror that greets talk of quotas, one would not suspect that the
United States has been operating under a rigid quota system for 200 years. This
quota system has insisted on and gotten a 90 to 100 percent monopoly for white
males in all the principal centers of power in government, business, the
professions, and in the competition for desirable jobs at every level in church
and state.  From board room to pulpit, from the controllers of wealth to the
writers of history, power has remained white and masculine.

Now with blacks and women at the gates, the arguments against quotas, like bombs
bursting in air, are all about us. Affirmative action is characterized as
''reverse discrimination.'' In fact, it is a reversal of existing discrimination
so as to end the long tenured white male monopolies. The program will not do in
reverse to white males what was done to blacks, for example. It will not put
whites into a position where blacks are now, with a maternal death rate triple
that of whites, an infant death rate twice that of whites, teenage unemployment
triple that of whites. It will not make white children perceive at least by age
8 that the overwhelming dominant society believes them to be inferior, thus
raping their self-confidence and shrinking their inner map of expectations. No
such ''reverse discrimination'' will issue from affirmative action.

There are others who fret lest preferential treatment lead to permanent and
irrecoverable decline in self-respect among blacks and women, and to a lost
sense of self-worth. Fear not, preferred groups, there is good news. An
examination of the case histories of us white males, who were so long awash in
preference, reveals that we have survived with our sense of self-worth
ebulliently intact! There is room to hope that you will bear your temporary
preference with at least equal aplomb.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Daniel C. Maguire is professor of ethics at Marquette University,
president-elect of The Society of Christian Ethics, and author of ''A New
American Justice: Ending the White Male Monopolies.'' there is good news. An
examination of the case histories of us white

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
Carter Against Himself

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 815 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, Del., Oct. 15


Has there ever been a campaign as vacuous, as negative, as whiny? Probably so
-somewhere back in the mists of the American Presidency. But it would take a
good deal of research to come up with anything like Jimmy Carter's performance
in the campaign of 1980.

Measure it in personal terms. How many people do we meet who are enthusiastic
Carter supporters? How many have that light in the eye, that emotional
commitment that practically any serious candidate for President arouses in his
supporters? In my experience, almost none.  People who say they will vote for
Carter tend to say it with resignation or even apology.

Consider where the Carter campaign would be if his opponent were Gerald Ford. Or
put aside the sentiment for good old Jerry and suppose the Republican candidate
were a lesser-known figure with at least a facade of moderation, such as Howard
Baker. Masses of Democrats and independents would be deserting to him.

If Carter's standing in the polls today reflected only the impact of his
campaign - or of his person - I think he would be out of the running. The only
reason he is close is that many voters are rightly scared of his opponent's
extreme and ignorant views on a wide range of issues: among others, an arms
race, the American position in the Persian Gulf, the environment and public
health.

Carter and his people complain that his failure to reach the public with a
positive message on issues is the fault of the press. The press does tend to
focus on techniques in campaigns, on tone instead of substance. And it has been
very quick to criticize Carter - to call him ''mean,'' for example, because he
said that he and Ronald Reagan differed on issues of war and peace, which they
do, profoundly.

But it was Jimmy Carter, not the press, who said a victory for his opponent
could divide this country between black and white, Christian and Jew. It was a
remark almost, if not quite, worthy of Richard Nixon. And all along the
President has acted as if a successful 1980 campaign could consist of nothing
more than horror stories about Ronald Reagan.

Putting delicacy aside - and we should not expect too much of that in politics -
such a campaign design was stupid. It assumed that Ronald Reagan is Barry
Goldwater and that 1980 is 1964, and neither of those assumptions is correct.
Reagan is a nice man, not scary as a person. So Carter had to offer the voters a
different view of the world, a more reasonable and more attractive one.

What was needed was an upbeat message about this country, about where it is and
where it is going in the world. And you know, that would not be so hard to
provide - not fatuous politics but some realistic optimism.

The United States has shown the world in the last few years that it is the most
resilient of countries. We have emerged intact from the political lawlessness of
the Nixon years. We have begun to recover our self-confidence after Vietnam.
Talk of a disabling post-Vietnam fear is silly.

With all the difficulties of inflation and productivity, too, my guess is that
this country is entering a new period of economic inventiveness and development.
The world seems to think that. Most of the shrewd financial people overseas
would bet on the United States as most likely to have the stability and vigor to
survive the world's economic troubles.

All this should be meat for an incumbent running against Ronald Reagan. For
Reagan, with all his personal amiability, takes an essentially gloomy view of
the American situation. We are weak, he says; we are declining economically; the
Russians are trampling over our interests; the world mocks us.

What fun a Franklin Roosevelt would have with that Reagan picture of a pitiful
America. He would tell the voters that the men in the Kremlin have much more
reason for nervousness - in Poland, in Afghanistan, in their own economic
muddle. We have problems, he would say, but we have the will and the ingenuity
to solve them. He would give people dreams. He would inspire.

But there is no fun in Jimmy Carter, and very little of the selfconfidence that
Roosevelt communicated. Carter has acted as if his job were a pious duty. He has
talked to us about malaise. He has uplifted practically no one. He has sent
conflicting signals, to his own people as to the world.

Along with the failures of the last four years, there have been substantial
successes for Jimmy Carter: the first peace agreement between Israel and an Arab
neighbor, the Panama Canal treaties, the rapport with China, effective care for
clean air and water. He is an imperfect man in an impossible job, but what a
difference it would make if he could only give us a vision.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN ENDORSED BY EX-LEADERS OF THREE MAJOR VETERANS' GROUPS

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 485 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 15


Former commanders of three of the nation's largest veterans' organizations
endorsed Ronald Reagan for President today, saying that President Carter's
record on veterans was a ''dismal failure.''

The endorsements came from Frank I. Hamilton of Indianapolis, immediate past
commander of the 2.7-million-member American Legion; Howard Vander Clute of
Montvale, N.J., immediate past commander of the 1.9-million-member Veterans of
Foreign Wars, and Joseph R.  Koralewski of Toledo, Ohio, immediate past
commander of the 150,000-member American Veterans of World War II, Korea and
Vietnam, or AMVETS.

The three men outlined their political stands at a joint news conference at the
National Press Club.  Mr. Vander Clute said his endorsement was both personal
and on behalf of a V.F.W. political action committee. The endorsement marked the
first open support for a Presidential candidate in the organization's 81-year
history.

Speaking for Themselves

Mr. Hamilton and Mr. Koralewski said that they were speaking only for themselves
in endorsing Mr. Reagan, and not on behalf of the American Legion or AMVETS,
which have not endorsed any candidates.  But they predicted that many of their
members would join them in voting for Mr. Reagan.

Mr. Vander Clute, noting that about 22 percent of the electorate were veterans,
said recent public opinion polls indicated that about 48 percent of the nation's
veterans favored Mr. Reagan while only 28 percent supported Mr. Carter.

Both the President and Mr. Reagan are veterans. Mr. Carter, a graduate of the
United States Naval Academy, served in the Navy from 1947 to 1953, rising to the
rank of lieutenant. Mr. Reagan served in the Army from 1942 to 1945, rising to
the rank of captain.

Past Opposition Cited

The veterans' lobby, one of the largest and most active in Washington, has been
critical of the Carter Administration for several years, accusing the President
of trying to wreck the Veterans Administration's huge medical network, of
failing to provide sufficient increases in veterans' benefits, and of trying to
dilute the present law that gives veterans a leg up on other applicants for
Federal jobs.

The Administration has reduced the number of beds in V.A. hospitals by 10,000,
focusing instead on less expensive outpatient care wherever possible. Congress
rejected Mr. Carter's efforts to reduce veterans' preference in hiring.

Mr. Hamilton said today that his support of Mr. Reagan and his running mate,
George Bush, is ''firmly based on my conviction that they, and they alone, have
the abilities and desires to reverse the outrageous and dehumanizing treatment
that has been administered to our veterans'' by the Carter Administration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 382 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 17, 1980 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

O'TOOLE IN 'STUNT MAN'

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 708 words


The gamesmanship of ''The Stunt Man'' is fast and furious, but gamesmanship is
almost all it manages to be. Though Richard Rush's film professes an interest in
lofty questions of illusion and reality, simple trickery remains its prime
concern. Mr. Rush keeps the film moving busily, sometimes entertainingly,
forward. But he seldom offers his audience enough incentive to puzzle through a
wild overabundance of riddles. The film's cleverness is aggressive and cool, and
so its mysteries, though elaborate, remain largely uninviting.

The characteristic touch of ''The Stunt Man,'' which opens today at Loew's New
York I, is one touch too many. When Cameron, the daredevil of the title, enters
the crazily distorted reality of a movie-set world, someone makes a needless
announcement that ''that door is the looking glass, and inside it is
Wonderland.'' When a movie director calls for ''something outrageous,'' and then
decides to have a stunt man dance the Charleston on an airplane's wing, Mr. Rush
isn't content to leave off with the brainstorming session. He proceeds to show a
wing on which an actual Charleston being danced. Aside from giving the audience
too much time to wonder how ''outrageous'' this really is, the extra flourish
goes a long way towards making ''The Stunt Man'' desperately cluttered.

Early in the film, Cameron wanders near a beach and watches a World War I battle
being staged by a movie crew. It all looks harmless enough, but when the
shooting ends the extras have apparently been blown to bits. The crowd that has
been watching the filming is shocked and upset, until the extras toss away their
fake blood, climb out of the pits of sand in which they have been buried, and
reveal that it's all a joke. Very well, but on whom is it a joke? The people
watching the filming cannot have missed the sight of the extras being buried in
sand; therefore, they are faking just as surely as the movie actors are faking.
Only the viewer is in a position to be truly duped. And the viewer, after enough
similar moments, may feel more weary than intrigued.

''The Stunt Man'' begins when Cameron (Steve Railsback), a Vietnam veteran and a
fugitive from the police, wanders into the path of a film being directed by the
supremely arch Eli Cross (Peter O'Toole). A real stuntman, called Bert, is
accidentally killed as a result of Cameron's appearance, and so Eli decrees that
Cameron will be Bert until three days' shooting are through. As Eli directs the
film with the high-handedness of a divinity, he proclaims his independence in
fierce and playful terms. He fears no invervention, he says, ''because they know
that if they touch my film I'll kill them. I'll kill them and I'll eat them.''

Mr. O'Toole delivers lines like this magnificently. And, as Mr. Rush employs
him, he becomes the film's greatest resource, personifying all the wiles the
screenplay has to offer. The movie springs magically to life when Mr. O'Toole
makes his appearance, whether he's striding into the frame or appearing on a
crane, as if from the sky. None of the other principals have anything like his
wit or stature, although Allen Goorwitz, as the earthbound screenwriter for the
film Eli is directing, has a benignness of comparable scale.

Mr. Railsback, who played Charles Manson in the TV movie ''Helter Skelter,'' is
still playing the same sort of character, with clenched teeth and fiery eyes and
a one-note fury that far outreaches the demands of his role. Barbara Hershey, as
the actress Cameron/Bert falls in love with, behaves like an ingenue, though her
character, as written, needs much more authority than that.

The love story Miss Hershey and Mr. Railsback play culminates in something like
a dare. Mr. Railsback's Cameron decides to make his getaway in an old car and
Miss Hershey's Nina announces that, out of love, she will hide in the trunk. The
next day, Cameron drives the car off a bridge and sinks it in a river, as part
of a stunt Eli has goaded him into. Has Nina really hidden in the trunk of the
lost car? ''There's no need to look,'' someone tells Cameron. ''If she loves you
she's still there, and if she doesn't, it really doesn't matter anyway.'' The
sophistry of ''The Stunt Man'' is in imagining that's true.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Photo

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 17, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POL POT SUPPORTERS TO SIGN RIGHTS PACT

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 398 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 16


The Cambodian Government of Pol Pot is due to sign the United Nations covenants
on human rights tomorrow.  While Mr. Pol Pot ruled in Cambodia from 1975 to 1979
he was accused of genocide against his own people. His Government forced
hundreds of thousands of people, including the sick and aged, to leave the
cities and vast numbers died in the countryside. Educated people and others from
the middle class were sometimes beaten to death rather than shot in order to
save bullets. In all, according to one estimate, anywhere between 1.2 million
and 1.8 million people were killed by the authorities.

Ieng Sary, the deputy prime minister and foreign minister of the regime, which
although it was ousted from power by the Vietnamese in 1979 still retains the
Cambodian seat here, is scheduled to perform the signing at the world body.

The Pol Pot forces are trying to maintain their status as Cambodia's legitimate
government. This week they survived a challenge that would have cost them their
United Nations seat. Next week they hope that the General Assembly will approve
a resolution urging Vietnamese troops to withdraw from Cambodia and calling for
an international conference to settle the nation's fate in a vote sponsored by
the world body.

Guerrilla Forces Fight On

The covenants that Mr. Ieng Sary will sign declare, among other things, that
''no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his life'' and that ''no one shall be
subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.''

Although Mr. Pol Pot was driven from power his guerrilla forces, which are
supported by China, are fighting on in northwest Cambodia.  Most of the
countries here that backed the Pol Pot forces in their struggle to retain the
world body seat, including the United States, did so on the ground that
Vietnam's invasion must not be rewarded.

In 1977 President Carter signed the two covenants on civil and political rights
and economic, social and cultural rights. The Senate, however, has not yet
ratified these agreements, which have the force of treaties.

Mr. Ieng Sary intends to go a step further than Mr. Carter. The Cambodian will
also sign a convention for the elimination of discrimination against women.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 17, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

LIMITS OF MILITARY POWER;
by Seymour Melman

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 952 words


Why are promises of United States military superiority and spending applauded by
most of the populace, news media, and political leadership? Such promises deny
reality: Military superiority is meaningless in the age of overkill.

A person or nation can be destroyed only once. No technological breakthrough can
change that limit on military power. The 9,500 nuclear warheads in American
strategic weapons alone can overkill Soviet cities more than 40 times; the
Russians can destroy our cities about 40 times over.

Defense, as a shield, is nullified by the concentrated energy released by
nuclear weapons. Hiroshima was destroyed by the equivalent of 20,000 tons of
TNT. The Titan II whose fuel exploded recently in Arkansas carried a warhead
containing 450 times the power of the Hiroshima explosive.

Still, these false assumptions remain widely accepted articles of faith:
Preparing for nuclear war deters us from having one. Deterrence once meant
reluctance to attack for fear of being unacceptably damaged. Assured
''second-strike'' capability -200 protected nuclear weapons - was considered an
adequate deterrent. But military tradition and nationalist competition require
superiority and winning, not deterring. Thus, an unwinnable race was started for
military advantage, ignoring overkill limits.

Large wars, however regrettable, can be won. The blast, fire, and radiation
damage from major nuclear attacks would immediately destroy more than half the
United States and Soviet populations. Dr. Philip Handler, president of the
National Academy of Sciences, warns that in a major nuclear war, the earth's
ozone layer would be damaged and that this ''would persist for years, resulting
in such intense ultraviolet irradiation of the earth's surface as to cause crop
failure by direct damage to plants and by major alterations of climate, and to
induce intense sunburn in a few minutes and markedly increase the incidence of
skin cancer in those exposed.'' We must thus infer that even if either
superpower could wipe out the opponent's nuclear forces by a flawless first
strike, such success would alter the earth's envelope, making the planet equally
unliveable for the population of the ''successful'' attacker as for the rest of
the human race.

Limited nuclear wars (as envisioned in President Carter's Directive 59) can be
planned and won. In a confrontation between nuclearequipped armies, the side
threatened with loss will bring up morepowerful conventional and nuclear
weapons; then rapid nuclear escalation will occur with loss for all.

Additions to weapons and forces add to military power. Correction of all
recently noted American military deficiencies offers no escape from the limits
of military power. No improvements in number, size, accuracy, reliability or
speed of weapons and forces can break through the overkill limit.

Military command and control can be reliable. Error and failure are unavoidable
both in people and mechanisms, as repeated nuclear false alarms have
illustrated. As powerful weapons are multiplied, no safeguards can preclude
catastrophic accidents.

What military operations can be performed without risking losing while winning?
A superpower can overwhelm a small country (the United States, in the Dominican
Republic, 1965; Soviet Union, in Czechoslovakia, 1968) - except where guerrilla
forces resist (Vietnam, Afghanistan). Also, smaller countries can assault and
exhaust each other if permitted by their weapons suppliers, the superpowers, as
the Iraqi-Iranian war illustrates.

Denial of military reality serves various interests. For Government managers,
the armed forces and a military economy have been mainstays for empire-building
at home and Pax Americana abroad; for corporate managers, a military economy
assures risk-free profit. While the business press assails American managers for
failing the nation by fostering industrial incompetence, appeals to nationalist
nostalgia and primitive ''we'll show 'em'' militarism are welcome diversions.
Many are receptive to hypernationalism because fundamentalist religiosity is
often permeated with worship of the nation-state, a form of idolatry.

However, there is, unattended by Establishment consensus, a military option for
improving security: reversing the arms race by mutual agreement. In 1962, the
superpowers separately detailed plans for agreed, inspected reversal of the arms
race. The proposals were never negotiated. Our Government does not employ a
single person with responsibility for thinking about reversing the arms race.
The Establishment's refusal even to try for this alternative may go down as the
crime of the century - if there is anyone around to know it.

The major candidates hardly differ in their militarism. Jimmy Carter cynically
pursues military superiority and ''limited'' nuclear wars, and Ronald Reagan
speaks for primitive nationalism and nostalgia for a replay of World War II. The
hardline anti-Communism strategists of both parties are ready to destroy the
world ''in order to save it.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Seymour Melman, professor of industrial engineering at Columbia University and
national co-chairman of the peace organization SANE, is author, most recently,
of ''The Permanent War Economy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 18, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

William E. Sauro

BYLINE: The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 106 words


CAMBODIAN SIGNS RIGHTS CHARTER: Ieng Sary, seated, Deputy Prime Minister of the
Pol Pot Government, waits for United Nations officials to give him a covenant
protecting human rights. Philip Giblain, chief of the Treaty Section, is at
left; Erik Suy, legal adviser to the United Nations, is second from right. Chan
Youran, an aide to Mr. Ieng Sary, stands at right. The Pol Pot Government has
been accused of genocide against the Cambodian people. Though driven from power
by Vietnam's Army, it retains a seat at the United Nations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 18, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HOW TO SLIGHT THE PEOPLES AND CULTURES OF SOUTHEAST ASIA

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 486 words


To the Editor:

Having been permitted to play a small part in securing for the American Museum
of Natural History one of the very few Southeast Asian cases in the new Hall of
the Peoples of Asia, may I comment on the subject of Malcolm W. Browne's
excellent, if depressing, article (Oct. 7) on the hall's most patent imbalance?

It is scarcely credible that museum officials should offer as one of the
principal reasons for Southeast Asia's virtual exclusion the supposition that
''the recent Vietnam War is still so fresh in the memory that displays about
Southeast Asia could irritate the political sensitivities of viewers.''
Ignorance about Vietnam, one of that war's prime causes, exists to be addressed
by major cultural institutions, not pandered to. In any event, the Indochina
territories do not constitute the sum of Southeast Asia and its peoples.

The other tendered excuse - that the museum's holdings are poor in Southeast
Asian artifacts - is doubtless well-founded, but exists to be explained.

Why is it that the major Asian ethnographic collections in the United States
fail so signally to record the cultural presence among mankind of Southeast
Asia? It is a failure not, in fact, confined to the Museum of Natural History,
for the magnificent Islamic galleries of the Metropolitan Museum of Art wholly
omit - not simply from the collections but from the very map of ''The World of
Islam'' at the entrance - the largest Moslem population in existence, that of
Indonesia and Malaysia.

And as Malcolm Browne says of the Hall of Asia, even where collections are weak,
one can and should supplement them with paintings, charts, models and dioramas.
Or indeed do vigorously what I was the simple agent for in one instance: seek
exhibits for display from donors in Southeast Asia.

The inferences seem unhappily clear: that, for reasons that can only be
conjectured, the prevailing American intellectual world view - as expressed
through such powerful institutions as those under discussion and through an
old-fashioned literary Orientalism still present in many universities -
allocates cultural, even ethnographic, importance only to the real or supposed
originators of cultural ''great traditions'' and outmodedly conceived
''civilizations.''

This is no longer sufficient. In the present instance, one simply cannot ignore
the 370 million people of Burma, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, Laos, Vietnam
and the Philippines, nor their Angkors, Pagans and Borobudurs, nor their own
vital spiritual, artistic and literary traditions within Islam, Buddhism,
Confucianism and even Christianity. They, too, are among the peoples of Asia,
and it is to be hoped that, as the museum's hall comes to take its place among
New York City's other riches, it will in due course provide recognition of this
and make redress.
WILLIAM R. ROFF, Professor of History, Columbia University, New York, Oct. 10,
1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES STAKE OUT DIVERGENT GROUND ON FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By RICHARD BURT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2156 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 18


In the course of the presidential campaign, President Carter and Ronald Reagan
have managed to stake out widely divergent positions on America's role in the
world and its international priorities in the 1980's.

Foreign policy under President Carter has gradually shifted in his four years in
office to greater emphasis on national security and to countering Soviet
advances. But White House aides said that the President remained committed to
the international goals he enumerated in his 1976 campaign at the head of the
Democratic ticket: negotiating arms limitations, stressing human rights abroad,
supporting political change in the third world and relying on diplomacy rather
than military intervention.

Ronald Reagan, in his campaign appeals, has embraced an approach to foreign
affairs that is more in line with American policy between World War II and the
Vietnam War: containing the expansion of Soviet power and influence, adopting a
''hands off'' attitude toward the domestic policies of pro-Western governments
and resisting radical movements in the third world.

Given Limited Attention

While seeming to agree with Mr. Carter's position on most issues, John B.
Anderson, the independent candidate, contends that he would avoid the indecision
and disunity that he says have characterized American policy in the last four
years.

The differing perspectives have received limited attention during the campaign,
in part because the focus has been on such questions as whether Mr. Carter is
competent to handle international problems and whether Mr. Reagan, as Secretary
of State Edmund S. Muskie has charged, would plunge the nation into ''endless
wars.''

Another factor contributing to the desultory debate on foreign policy is that
Mr. Carter and Mr. Reagan have diluted their stands on several controversial
questions. Mr. Reagan, senior aides acknowledge, has sought in recent weeks to
moderate many of his hardline views. Mr. Carter, meanwhile, has alternated
between liberal and conservative positions.

What follows is a representation of the principal candidates' positions on key
issues of foreign policy.

The Soviet Union
The President and his principal advisers continue to maintain that the United
States must cooperate with as well as compete with the Soviet Union. While Mr.
Carter, in political appearances, has defended his decisions to boycott the
Moscow Olympics and embargo grain shipments in response to the Soviet drive into
Afghanistan, he told a group in Illinois recently: ''My belief is the Soviets
also want peace.''

The desire to put relations with Moscow back on track, as a White House aide put
it, is reflected in Mr. Carter's strong support for arms control. Earlier in the
campaign he said that if the Russians started to pull their forces out of
Afghanistan, he would revive debate in the Senate next year on approval of the
1979 treaty to limit strategic arms. In an apparent shift last week, he
announced that he would seek to complete the treaty in 1981 regardless of the
situation in Afghanistan.

Another sign of Mr. Carter's belief in the importance of arms limitation was the
start of American talks with Soviet diplomats this week in Geneva on a formula
for limiting nuclear missiles deployed in Europe.

Mr. Reagan and his advisers appear to see fewer possibilities for cooperating
with Moscow, at least at present, asserting that strengthened military forces
would be a requisite for better relations. ''When one side relaxes while the
other carries out the greatest military buildup in the history of mankind,'' Mr.
Reagan told the American Legion national convention in August, ''the cause of
peace has not been advanced.''

Similarly, Richard V. Allen, Mr. Reagan's chief foreign policy adviser, has cast
doubt on the success of Washington's pursuit of detente during the 1970's,
suggesting that the Russians took advantage of American diplomatic initiatives
to build up nuclear and conventional power. In a speech last month at Pepperdine
University in Los Angeles, Mr. Allen asserted that rather than reciprocating
Washington's desire for detente, ''the men in the Kremlin chose to capitalize on
our desires for peace for the purpose of maintaining the momentum of their
military drive.''

The Republican candidate, while insisting that he would ''be willing to
negotiate an honest, verifiable reduction in nuclear weapons,'' has reiterated
that as President he would abandon what he has characterized as ''the one-sided
SALT II treaty.''

Whether a Republican administration would move quickly to negotiate a new accord
is unclear. Some Reagan aides said that their candidate would seek early talks
on renegotiation, but in a recent interview William R. Van Cleave, a Reagan
adviser, said that ''it's time to reassess the situation'' in regard to the
limitation of strategic arms.

Skepticism in the Reagan camp on this issue appears to extend to other
negotiations with Moscow. In a new monograph strongly critical of the current
talks in Vienna to reduce Soviet and American forces in Central Europe, Jeffrey
R. Record, another Reagan adviser, asserts that ''reductions are virtually
irrelevant to the goal of a more stable military balance in Europe.''

China
On the question of relations with China, Mr. Carter has said he expects to
broaden those existing, which include the possibility of sales of American
high-technology and military-support equipment. Mr. Reagan, whose position is
more ambiguous, talked earlier this year about restoring ''official'' relations
with the Nationalist Government on Taiwan, but then, in late August, he
announced that he was prepared to accept the current formula, under which
Washington is represented in Taipei by the American Institute in Taiwan while
having full diplomatic relations with Peking. Republican aides have said
recently that Mr. Reagan would be more sympathetic to requests from Taiwan for
military hardware and more wary about establishing military links with China.

The Western Alliance
Mr. Reagan and Mr. Carter, and Mr. Anderson as well, are much closer on the
issue of relations with the Western alliance, with all the candidates stressing
the importance of promoting greater cooperation. Nonetheless, subtle differences
on how to increase cohesion have emerged in the campaign.

Mr. Reagan has asserted that governments in Western Europe ''are confused by the
lack of a coherent, principled policy from the Carter Administration'' and has
contended that forceful leadership and military improvements would bolster
unity. In contrast, David L.  Aaron, Mr. Carter's deputy assistnt for national
security, said in an interview that allied governments were concerned about
American military unilateralism and that close consultation would have priority
in a second Carter administration.

Mr. Anderson, in a lengthy statement of his domestic and foreign policy
positions, goes further, calling for new institutional arrangements to improve
consultations.

Mideast and Persian Gulf
The candidates have carved out roughly similar positions on the Middle East and
the Persian Gulf, advocating an increased military effort to protect Western oil
supplies and staunch diplomatic and military backing for Israel. Mr. Reagan
appears more inclined than Mr. Carter to enter into arrangements with Israel
that would enable American forces to use bases there.

Mr. Carter has called the 1979 Egyptian-Israeli peace accord one of his most
significant achievements in foreign policy, and his aides expect a second
administration to make a concerted push for agreement on a formula for
Palestinian autonomy in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

In a speech to B'nai B'rith last month Mr. Reagan appeared to distance himself
somewhat from the Camp David approach, saying that the question of territory
''must still be decided in accordance'' with United Nations Resolution 242,
which calls on Israel to withdraw from land it occupied after the 1967 war in
return for ''secure boundaries.'' More recently, however, Mr. Allen, the foreign
policy adviser, said in a televised interview that Mr. Reagan, if elected, would
continue the Camp David process and would preside over the Egyptian-Israeli
summit conference arranged by Mr. Carter last month.

The Underdeveloped Nations

There are much greater differences between Mr. Reagan and Mr.  Carter on other
problems in the third world, particularly in the areas of human rights and of
working out a dialogue between the industrialized and the less developed nations
on economic and resources questions. Although the human rights theme does not
occupy the role in Mr. Carter's foreign policy that it did four years ago, White
House and State Department officials report that it is still a factor in setting
policy toward the Soviet Union as well as toward such pro-Western countries as
South Korea and the Philippines.

A White House official commented that the President, despite the lack of
progress in agreeing with poorer countries on international trade and
development projects, wanted to meet third world economic demands as well as to
strengthen international institutions such as the United Nations and its
specialized agencies. Other aides said that while the Administration did not
entirely agree with a report on economic relations between the advanced and
developing countries issued early this year by an international team headed by
Willy Brandt, the former West German Chancellor, there was sympathy for its
proposal for an accord in which the poorer countries would be given access to
markets in the West in return for making raw materials available at stable
long-term prices.

Mr. Reagan has been critical of both the Administration's human rights campaign
and its support for a so-called North-South economic dialogue. Arguing that the
United States must ''accept the world as it is,'' he has asserted that in
practice the Administration has used its human rights policy to weaken
pro-Western governments in the third world.

A Reagan aide said that in a new administration the Republicans would not
abandon the human rights theme but would transform it into an instrument ''to
counter Soviet propaganda.'' Rather than ''harping on the blemishes of other
countries, we want to make a more vigorous case for the United States,'' the
aide added.

Another Reagan adviser, maintaining that ''collective bargaining with the third
world is a mistake,'' said Mr. Reagan wanted more emphasis on dealings with
individual countries. He also indicated that Washington could be most effective
in fostering international development by promoting private investment.

South Africa
On the sensitive question of American policy toward South Africa, Mr. Aaron, the
deputy security adviser, said Mr. Carter wanted to continue to bolster ties with
black African countries and was prepared to apply ''some heat'' on the white
minority Government in Pretoria ''to encourage internal change.''

A Reagan aide said that while a Republican administration would not condone the
apartheid policy and would be ready to use American influence to gain greater
black political participation, it would look for ''subtle ways to use our
influence so as to not frighten those elements that would support constructive
change.''

Latin America
In Central America and the Caribbean, Mr. Aaron said, the goal of a second
Carter administration would be ''to defeat the radicals on the left and the
right.'' He said that Mr. Carter would rely primarily on new aid programs to
foster popular governments.

Acknowledging that Cuban influence in the region was on the rise, particularly
in Nicaragua, he said: ''We are not going to write off these countries. We are
going to stay in there and keep working.'' He added that while Mr. Carter was
determined to resist Cuban gains in the area, a new administration would also
''see if a broad accommodation is possible with the Cubans.''

A senior Reagan foreign policy adviser said a Reagan administration would apply
''greater pressure on Cuba'' and oppose the spread of Marxist-leaning
governments in Central America. ''There is a pretty strong feeling in the Reagan
camp that trying to create popular goverments overnight down there has been
silly,'' he added. ''In the process we have lost a lot of influence.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Carter (page 42) photo of Ronald
Reagan (page 42) photo of John Anderson (page 42)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TACTICS IN GULF WAR;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1098 words


After nearly four weeks of war, tactical patterns, influenced by the use and
availability of weapons, are emerging on both the Iraqi and Iranian sides of the
Persian Gulf fighting.

To some extent the war has been a testing ground for the Soviet weapons used by
the Iraqis and the American arms provided to Iran before the overthrow of the
Shah. Neither side, however, has deployed its sophisticated weaponry to the
maximum.

Iraq, for example, has used its long-range surface-to-surface missiles only
twice. The Iranian Air Force has not used any of the 5,000 units of napalm or
any of the cluster bombs it is reported to have. Some analysts believe both
sides want to avoid long-range exchanges of bombs or missiles that would kill
thousands of civilians. Others find the explanation in the continuing
difficulties both sides have maintaining and repairing sophisticated weapons.

Some Advanced Arms Used

The Iranian Air Force, whose operations are now down to less than 100 sorties a
day, has begun to use some advanced American equipment. A Washington source
confirmed reports that Iran had used the UH-IJ Cobra helicopter armed with TOW
antitank missiles and the Maverick television-guided air-to-surface missiles.

Extended deployment of these weapons could affect the course of the fighting.
Helicopters armed with TOW missiles, which are tubelaunched, optically-tracked
and wire-guided, should be much more effective against Iraqi tanks than
desultory artillery fire. One of the mysteries of a war that has more than its
share is why helicopter-borne TOW's have been used infrequently and only around
Dizful in the northern sector. Analysts believe that the most productive targets
would be the Iraqi armor and guns in the Abadan-Khurramshahr area.

The Maverick, which is mounted on an F-4 Phantom, is certain to increase Iranian
accuracy in attacks on oil refineries and storage tanks. The Maverick, which was
first used by the United States Air Force near the end of the Vietnam War, has
been used against bridges at Basra and oil installations north of Baghdad,
according to one Pentagon source.

Puzzle of High-Level Attacks

For two weeks almost all air attacks on both sides followed a pattern. Iranian
F-4's and Iraqi MIG's came in at low altitude to avoid radar, made one pass or
bombing run and left. The exception was an attack by Iraqi TU-22 bombers, which
were escorted by fighters, on two automobile plants near the Teheran airport.
The attack from about 40,000 feet did extensive damage.

American and European air force analysts cannot understand why the Iraqis have
made only one high-altitude attack.  Iran's dwindling oil reserves are an
important target and the best means of hitting refineries and fuel depots is
high-level bombing.  The two factories near Teheran, it was pointed out, may
have been used for the maintenance and repair of tanks and jeeps. But an attack
on vehicles hundreds of miles from the front would have little effect on the
war.

Both sides are having difficulties with their antiaircraft weapons.  The
Iranians are apparently having trouble maintaining their hundreds of Hawk,
Rapier and Tigercat surface-to-air missiles and their Soviet-built,
radar-controlled ZSU antiaircraft guns.

A Problem of Geography

The Iraqi problem is tactical. The air force is following Soviet air defense
doctrine in which interceptor aircraft are sent to meet incoming bombers as far
as possible from the target, and guns and missiles are used over the target.

Iranian pilots, once they reach the target, have been diving at their
objectives, then turning toward oncoming missiles for evasive action. An air
force officer said the pilots, many schooled in the United States, were using
the tactics of American pilots in Vietnam.

Both defense systems suffer from the war's geography.  Prime targets on both
sides are so close to hostile airfields that the response time for missile or
gun crews is very short. Frequently the attacker, having come in on the deck to
evade radar, is over the target before the defenders can register and fire.

When the Iraqi forces began their invasion of Khuzistan Province, a British
source reported from London, the tanks and infantry were accompanied by an
impressive array of Soviet SA-7 antiaircraft missiles and scores of ZSU guns,
the same Russian guns used by the Iranians. When Iranian air attacks on Basra,
Baghdad, Kirkuk and Mosul began to hurt, the Iraqis thinned out missile strength
with the forward troops and sent weapons back to defend the targets in the rear.
Washington sources have provided a similar picture of Iraqi antiaircraft
problems.

Land Operations Fluctuate Less

The critical question in the air war, as on the ground, is whether the Iranians
will be able to maintain a capacity to attack as their resources dwindle.

The land battle has not shown the fluctuations in tactics evident in the air
war. Iraqi operations continue to follow the cautious pattern set in the first
days of the war. Very heavy artillery shelling, a favorite of Soviet battle
planners, precedes every advance. Tanks and armored personnel carriers move into
the battle zone. The infantry is used sparingly. At both Khurramshahr and Abadan
local commanders have gone around strongly held Iranian positions rather than
assault them.

Neither side has used tanks in mass. The concept of an all-arms attack combining
air-ground support, artillery and tanks, which is favored in American and
Russian doctrine, has not appeared on the battlefield. Had it been used, some
analysts believe, the Iraqis might have taken Khurramshahr before the Iranians
could organize its defense.

On the Iranian side, the puzzle is why they have been unable to mount and
deliver a counterattack. Analysts in Washington and Europe offer a variety of
reasons for this. One is the lack of a command structure able to plan and
coordinate the operation. A second is the inability to identify and concentrate
the high-quality troops needed for the operation. A third and widely accepted
reason is that maintenance of advanced weapons and equipment continues to be
poor and that in consequence the Iranians have no alternative but to dig in and
hold on.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Asian Children of U.S. Servicemen Still Hunt Roots

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 628 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 18


Asia is dotted with children searching for their roots - roots that go back to
the United States, a country they have never seen and where they have fathers
most of them will never know.

The Asian children of American servicemen are growing up, many of them in
poverty and in societies that reject them, and they are asking who they are.

''Only in recent years have I thought about my father,'' said Kim Dae Shik, a
25-year-old South Korean fathered by an American. ''I would like to know what
kind of person he is. I would like to know where I came from.''

''I feel like killing the people who call me names,'' said Tom, the teen-age
child of a Thai woman and an American. He was rejected for military service
because he could not name his parents, he said, adding, ''I have applied to
settle in America because I think I can find more warmth there than here.''

No Name, No Family, No Identity

''I only want to meet my father and talk with him,'' said Koiichi Tokashiki, 30,
the son of an American G.I. once stationed in Okinawa. ''I would like to meet
his family if possible.''

Like many children of racially mixed parentage, Mr. Tokashiki does not know his
father's name; he thinks that it may have been something like Peterson and that
he was a sergeant. ''I would like to meet my father again, for mother is
patiently waiting his return,'' he said.

Unless they can prove their parentage, the interracial people, whose numbers
have been estimated at about 60,000, have no claim to United States citizenship
or aid. Even if they know their fathers' names the American Government will not
help find the fathers.

In Japan the children can claim citizenship under a law allowing them to take
the nationality of their mothers. The law favors those born out of wedlock; the
minority whose fathers married their mothers are neither Japanese nor American
if they were born here.

Prejudice Has Subsided

The number of such children born in Japan since World War II is not readily
available, but the newspaper Asahi says 3,500 live on Okinawa alone. Prejudice
against them in Japanese society, which emphasizes racial and cultural
homogeneity, has subsided since the days when ''occupation babies'' were
shameful proof that Japan lost the war.

In South Korea, it is estimated, 3,000 to 8,000 children of Korean and American
parentage have been born since the Korean War began in 1950. They are denied
full citizenship, excluded from the military and rejected by society. A bill
before the United States Congress would give them higher priority for visas.

In Thailand many of the children, estimated to number 4,500, became stateless
under a decree denying citizenship to children of foreign fathers. A 7-year-old
was recently ruled an illegal alien, denied schooling and threatened with
deportation, according to Robert Hearn, a representative of the Pearl S. Buck
Foundation, which works with children of mixed background and is appealing the
case. If the ruling stands the child will have no homeland and no place to go,
he said.

French Example Urged on U.S.

He suggested that the United States follow the French example and grant
citizenship to a child born of a French parent. In most cases in Thailand, he
concedes, this would be meaningless because the children consider themselves
Thai.

Reports conflict as to the fate of the thousands of children born to South
Vietnamese women and American servicemen. Although there appears to be no
official policy of discrimination in Vietnam under the Communists, many such
children appear to be ostracized and some are denied schooling.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Garwood's Court-Martial Delayed For Completion of Mental Tests

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 55, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 184 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Oct. 18


The court-martial of Pfc.  Robert R. Garwood of the Marine Corps on charges of
desertion and collaboration with the enemy in Vietnam has been delayed again.

Private Garwood, 34 years old, was in Pensacola, Fla., this week, undergoing
psychiatric evaluation requested by the prosecution.  Court-martial proceedings
were to resume Monday and there was a possibility that opening statements in the
case could begin then.

But Col. R.E. Switzer, the presiding judge, said Thursday that he had been
notified that military psychiatrists would not finish their tests until sometime
next week.

''I don't know now exactly when we will be able to get under way,'' Colonel
Switzer said.  Private Garwood, from Adams, Ind., underwent a separate military
psychiatric evaluation earlier this year.  He returned to the United States last
year after spending nearly 14 years in Vietnam. Former American prisoners of war
contended that he had joined forces with the North Vietnamese.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Perrin Moorhead, A Lawyer, Is Bride Of B.H. Grayson Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 64, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 264 words


Emmanuel Episcopal Church in Middleburg, Va., was the setting yesterday for the
marriage of Perrin Galpin Moorhead, a counsel for Time Life Films Inc. in New
York, to Bruns Holland Grayson Jr., an associate with McKinsey & Company, a New
York management consulting concern. The Rev. S. Neale Morgan performed the
ceremony.

The bride is a daughter of Representative William S. Moorhead, Democrat of
Pennsylvania, and Mrs. Moorhead, of Pittsburgh, Washington and The Plains, Va.
Her father is serving his 11th term is chairman of the Economic Stabilization
Subcommittee of the House Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs Committee. Her
mother, Lucy Moorhead, is a writer.

Mr. Grayson is a son of Mr. and Mrs. Grayson of Alameda, Calif., where his
father is in the car-rental business.  Ellen Rouse Conrad attended the bride and
Peter Sims Lowe served as best man.  The bride, who will kekep her maiden name,
was graduated magna cum laude from Radcliffe College and received a degree from
the University of Virginia School of Law in 1976. She was a member of the 1968
New York Junior Assemblies.

Mr. Grayson, who served as an Army captain in Vietnam, graduated from Harvard
College. A Rhodes Scholar, he was graduated from University College, Oxford
University, in England in 1976 and from the University of Virginia School of Law
last June. He is a member of the Council on Foreign Relations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEY'RE FIGHTING THE 'LIVING ROOM WAR'

BYLINE: By DAVID A. ANDELMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 35, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1795 words


The Vietnam War is being re-fought daily on its latest battleground: a small,
sparsely furnished seminar room in an annex to Boston's public-broadcasting
station, WGBH. The participants are a multinational team of filmmakers intent on
producing a documentary history of what was known as the ''living-room war.''

The questions they are dealing with are deep. Who killed Ngo Dinh Diem? Was the
Tet offensive an unqualified military success? What specific roles were played
by ''the best and the brightest'' of American leaders? What led to the
successive defeat of Western interests, from the days of French Colonial
Indochina to the final hours of helicopter evacuations from the roof of the
United States Embassy in Saigon? And above all, what did the war mean for
American power, prestige and the entire fabric of American society over the past
four decades?

Two years from now, in autumn 1982, if all goes according to plan, the best
answers WGBH has been able to come up with will emerge as a 13-part series of
hour-long programs - one of the most ambitious public-affairs projects in the
history of public television.

This week, the project - still slightly short of its full funding - goes into
its formal production phase as its producers begin calling in film and videotape
from archives around the world and laying plans for detailed interviews with
scores of political and military figures who played a central or even a
supporting role in the Vietnam era at home and abroad, including North
Vietnamese leaders. None so far has refused to cooperate. Ambassador Ellsworth
Bunker; General William Westmoreland; former South Vietnamese leader Nguyen Cao
Ky, and a succession of State Department and White House aides are all on the
agenda.

Both the chief correspondent for the series, Stanley Karnow, contributing editor
of Newsweek International and a syndicated columnist who covered much of the war
for Time and The Washington Post, and executive producer, L. Richard Ellison,
former director of current-affairs programming on PBS and a producer with the
news departments of NBC-TV and CBS-TV, are aware they have embarked on an
enormous, indeed Solomonic, task. Their chief British collaborator, Martin
Smith, whose last major project, the 26-part ''The World at War'' series, was no
small undertaking, conceded that even that pales by comparison with the horrors
and controversies surrounding the Vietnam War they are now attempting to
chronicle.

''World War II was straightforward,'' Mr. Smith explained recently. ''There were
'the goodies' and 'the baddies.' Vietnam is far more difficult to analyze,
although from the British viewpoint, it is possible to be somewhat
dispassionate. It was, after all, somebody else's problem.''

Indeed, one of the key dilemmas confronting the producers of The Vietnam Project
- a cooperative effort among American, British, French and Swedish television -
is: How do you go about compiling a film history of a war as long and as complex
as the one in Vietnam?  And, equally important, how do you go about satisfying
the various conflicting viewpoints and interpretations at home and abroad and
presenting the result to audiences with disparate perceptions in four different
countries? How does an American-British team present Swedish antipathy for the
Amerian war and support for the Communists in Hanoi? How does it deal with the
French viewpoint, for a French audience, of a futile, neo-colonial war that
France had long ago decided it had lost?

''What we will be touching on is not so much the Vietnam War, but the Vietnam
experience,'' said Mr. Karnow, who is also writing a history of the war that
will be published in conjunction with the debut of the television series in the
fall of 1982. ''What I want most to convey is that we are dealing with Asia
where confusion is itself a reality -where there is no truth, just a lot of
different perceptions.''

The series will be funded and produced by PBS in the United States; Associated
Television Ltd., one of Britain's ITV group; Antenne Deux, a division of the
French government-owned television system; and Swedish television. The cost is
estimated at $4.1 million, of which $2.5 million must be raised in this country.
The National Endowment for the Humanities has provided $1.2 million, PBS
$300,000, WGBH $150,000 and $100,000 from the George D. Smith Fund, a small
private foundation in San Francisco.

The American Broadcasting Company has provided $60,000 in seedmoney as well as
access to its entire film archive of the Vietnam era in return for an option to
use between an hour and an hour-and-ahalf of the Project's material for an
ABC-produced documentary on Vietnam.

French television has reserved the right to rewrite the script to the entire
series and to re-edit it into six one-hour programs.  Swedish television will
dub all 13 parts into its native language.

About $700,000 remains to be raised. The producers said that if the additional
funding is not raised by next year, the project might be scaled down by ''two or
three segments,'' but this will only involve some compression.

The team of project advisors reads like a who's who of the academic world that
concerns itself with Southeast Asia, including Harvard's Charles Benoit;
Columbia's Telford Taylor; Richard Betts of the Brookings Institute; historians
Joseph Buttinger, Philippe Devillers and Jean Lacouture; writers Frances
FitzGerald and Jeffrey Race; Indochina experts Douglas Pike of the State
Department, David Elliott of Pomona College and George Kahin of Cornell. There
are as well scores of former South Vietnamese military leaders, including former
South Vietnamese president Nguyen Cao Ky, and other senior officials scattered
throughout the United States whom the producers hope to interview.

All those involved in the production are convinced that this is the proper time
and television the proper medium to deal with the profound issues posed by
Vietnam. Most of the principals are still alive; enough time has elapsed so that
some of the passions have cooled and curiosity has been aroused. The sudden
spurt of fictionalized treatments of the war would also seem to indicate that
the time is right. But the producers of The Vietnam Project believe that this
was one war that fiction can never adequately represent.

'' 'Apocalypse Now' expanded the war to dimensions that were unreal,'' Mr.
Karnow said. ''The helicopter scene looked like the battle of Waterloo. But the
war itself was a war of squatters and sitting in perimeters.''

The project's film researchers have already tracked down Soviet and East
European-made footage in the Bundesarchiv in East Berlin, including Russian-made
film of the French defeat at Dien Bien Phu in 1954; footage shot during the
French Colonial era was unearthed in the French Army Archives. They have also
come upon some extraordinary film dating from 1898 photographed by the Lumiere
brothers. Access to Hanoi's film archives is still being sought.

It would take a month to go through the card catalogue of film of that era in
the Marine Corps archives alone, said one film researcher. All film of the
commercial networks' news departments has been catalogued and computerized by
Lawrence W. Lichty of the University of Wisconsin; a veteran's organization in
Washington has compiled a catalogue of 8-mm. film shot by American soldiers. All
of these film sources are expected to be made use of.

The first priority of the team has been to videotape interviews with those key
principals who were advancing in age and who, it was feared, might not survive
the two or three years of production. These included Ambassador Henry Cabot
Lodge, General Maxwell Taylor, Ambassador Eldridge Dubrow, General Edward
Lansdale and Governor Averell Harriman.

They talked about the war, their perceptions of American successes and failures
in diplomatic and strategic terms, about specific events such as the coup that
toppled Ngo Dinh Diem and led to his assassination. ''I was horrified,'' said
Mr. Lodge, former ambassador in Saigon, recalling the moment he first heard of
the death of President Diem. ''I was absolutely horrified. It's a very shocking
thing to have been talking with a man on one day and the next day he's been shot
to death. Terrible. Particulary as I had friendly feelings toward him.''

Some of the answers likely to find their way into the series are already
beginning to emerge. The coup in which President Diem was murdered took place,
the preliminary program outline affirms, ''with the full knowledge if not the
active support of the U.S.  government.'' The Tet offensive ''was a military
vitctory for the south.'' But ''Tet shocked Americans who had been told the war
was being won.'' ''If the war was viewed as a test of resolve, there were danger
signs among the U.S. troops.'' And, finally, ''the process of forgetting Vietnam
started very quickly.''

Some of the interviews have had their lighter aspects. There was, for instance,
Mr. Lodge, distinguished, graying elder statesman, in the livingroom of his
North Shore Massachusetts home, recalling his first meeting with President Diem,
who, in order to cause the new ambassador discomfort, had spiked his tea with a
''diuretic.'' ''I never took another cup of tea in his palace again,'' Mr. Lodge
said.

And there's Jim Thomson, now curator of the Nieman Fellowships at Harvard, but
in the Johnson White House a dedicated dove on the hawkish National Security
Council, being asked by the President ''how we can get back in touch with that
nice little Prince'' Sihanouk of Cambodia.

''It's horrible, reliving history,'' Mr. Thomson said privately after he
recounted to the PBS production team his problems in the Johnson White House.
''But we need a dispassionate, analytic examination of the entire theme for us
and for those to come. If we don't learn the lessons from Vietnam, it would be
even more of a catastrophe.''

And, when it's all finished, the program's producers plan to leave a perhaps
even more important legacy: Their entire project files, tape and film will be
deposited for future historians to consult in a still undetermined library - the
collection of The Vietnam Project.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Richard Ellison, Martin Smith, Stanley Karnow

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
ON TV, ILLNESS IS AN EPIDEMIC

BYLINE: By John J. O'Connor

SECTION: Section 2; Page 35, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1504 words


Diseases, disabilities and touchy social issues have been tripping prominently,
if not merrily, across the television screen for decades. Not without reason are
the daytime soap operas traditionally cluttered with doctors, hospitals and
psychoanalysts.  Audiences apparently enjoy an endless fascination with other
people's problems - and how comforting it must be when they are resolved tidily,
with the self-sacrificing support of assorted loved ones.

Now, however, sicknesses and handicaps are on the rampage throughout the
television schedule. Hardly a week goes by without a television movie dissecting
at least one ''sensitive'' problem. And the apparent demand for such material is
generating its own curious trends. There are more and more productions based on
true stories, usually adapted from a published book. And, undoubtedly reflecting
television's new preoccupation with ''reality'' programming (''Real People,''
''That's Incredible!'' and so forth), the key characters are increasingly being
portrayed not by professional actors but by actually handicapped persons, who
sometimes are playing themselves.  There is, for instance, this week's
''Lefty,'' being presented Wednesday on NBC at 9 P.M. (unless the World Series
goes to the full seven games) - but more about that below.

If nothing else, the genre of ''Disease of the Week'' or ''Problem of the Day''
works at being diversified. Recently, for instance, viewers were offered plots
dealing with aplastic anemia (''A Perfect Match''), teen-age prostitution
(''Minnesota Strip'') and therapy programs for rapists (''Rage''). And then
there are the adaptations of true stories, a form that traces its strength at
least as far back as ''Brian's Song,'' depicting the warm friendship between two
professional football players - the black Gayle Sayres and the white and dying
Brian Piccolo. Since then, there have been, among countless others, ''First You
Cry,'' describing how Betty Rollins, the television newscaster, coped with a
mastectomy, and ''Sun-Rise,'' the story of how a determined mother and father
helped their autistic child.

More recently, ''A Private Battle'' recounted how Cornelius Ryan, the writer,
struggled with prostate cancer, and ''The Children of An Lac'' described how Ina
Balin, the actress, struggled to save Vietnamese orphans, some of them afflicted
with brain damage and congenital problems, some of mixed blood, which evidently
isn't appreciated in Vietnam. Miss Balin played herself. Tomorrow evening at 9
on NBC, ''A Cry for Love,'' which tells of the affair between an amphetamine
addict and an alcoholic, was ''inspired'' by ''Bedtime Story,'' Jill Schary
Robinson's autobiographical book. The epidemic of such treatments - or
exploitations -shows no signs of abating.

Meanwhile, there is the phenomenon of enlisting the services of ''real people''
for certain projects. It is not, certainly, that actors are incapable of
portraying many handicaps. One merely has to remember Marlon Brando's
parapalegic veteran in ''The Men'' or Jane Wyman's blind woman in ''Johnny
Belinda'' or the several actors who have played the title role in the current
Broadway production of ''The Elephant Man.'' Yet, there are certain physical
conditions that cannot be duplicated by an actor. A stunning example was
provided in the BBC's ''On Giant's Shoulders,'' the story of what happened to
one seriously deformed ''thalidomide baby'' who was adopted by a middle-aged
couple. Born without arms or legs, blind in one eye and with two flippers at the
bottom of his torso, teen-aged Terry Wiles could only be played by Terry Wiles.
As it happened, his brightness and spirited personality flowed effortlessly
through the television screen, making this one of last season's more powerful
public-television presentations.

There is nothing terribly new about the handicapped appearing on screen. The
film classic ''The Best Years of Our Lives'' featured Harold Russell, a war
veteran who had lost both of his hands in battle. But this kind of casting was
relatively isolated. Television, on the other hand, has long been offering
close-ups of the physically handicapped and the mentally retarded in such areas
as documentaries and fund-raising telethons. Going from these to dramatic
vehicles was perhaps an inevitable step for a medium that prides itself on
''actualities.'' For just one example, a television movie has been constructed
around the ''Special Olympics'' that each year promote the participation of
mentally retarded youngsters. And this week's ''Lefty,'' produced by James
Thompson and Gina Rester, uses the documentary-like techniques to dramatize
several months in the life of Carol Johnston, a one-armed gymnast. Carol, born
with a shortened stump as her right arm, portrays herself. In fact, there are no
professional actors in this one-hour program, but all the participants are
''acting'' in an effort to capture moments from Carol's past. Once again in the
land of television, the line between fact and fiction is quite intentionally
blurred.

The producers had first seen Carol on an NBC sports show a couple of years ago.
They were impressed with her determination. When asked in an interview if there
was anything she couldn't do, the diminutive young woman, then about 20,
answered, ''No, but if I ever find anything, I'll just work at it until I can do
it.'' When Thompson and Rester made an educational film about her, an executive
for Walt Disney Productions commissioned a more ''in-depth'' portrait. As it
happened, on the first day of shooting, Carol seriously injured her knee coming
off the uneven bars. The accident was incorporated into the middle of this new
film, which in the process acquired an unanticipated ending. In effect, Carol
became doubly handicapped.  Curiously enough, the knee injury becomes so crucial
to her story that her original handicap becomes almost invisible and
insignificant. Meanwhile, always spunky, Carol is followed in close-up -
inspiring her fellow gymnasts, teaching younger aspirants and, in the most
''dramatized'' segments of this film, being courted by a young tennis player who
is also attending California State University at Fullerton. Carol Johnston's
effervescent personality and unwaivering dedication make matters terribly easy
for the producers.

Where do we go from here? Well, next month NBC-TV will be presenting
''Skyward,'' described as a ''deeply moving film dramatizing the experiences of
a disabled youngster and her ambition to fly.'' The script is based on a story
by Anson Williams. The cast includes Bette Davis, Howard Hesseman and, in the
role of Julie, the young paraplegic heroine, 14-year-old Suzy Gilstrap, herself
a paraplegic. Mr. Williams has said, ''NBC's support of our efforts to find a
disabled youngster to play the role of Julie was virtually uncompromising,
almost relentless.'' The beginning of filming in June coincided with the
national conference of more than 100 organizations representing the disabled and
concerned with their human and legal rights. An NBC executive was quick to send
the convention a telegram emphasizing the network's commitment to the disabled
whenever possible. It was noted that ''Miss Gilstrap is a paraplegic and we
beleive that when NBC televises the movie in the fall, the whole country will
find her an inspiration - and indeed an example of 'the right to employment and
the right to live with dignity.' '' It was recently announced that the young
woman will also be appearing on a segment of NBC's ''Little House on the
Prairie.''

At this point, the television faithful might expect to hear a heavenly choir
sing lustily on some background soundtrack as praises are heaped on the ''new
enlightenment'' of the programmers. But veterans of the broadcasting scene may
be forgiven a few notes of skepticism. Of course, it is nice to see the disabled
getting some recognition. But that does not negate the fact that television is
in the business of entertainment and that, for this season at least, diseases
and disabilites happen to be in vogue. When the saturation point is reached,
when the ratings for ''inspirational'' stories begin to plummet, the disabled
will be dropped as quickly as ''The Lawrence Welk Show,'' which had the
misfortune to appeal primarily to the elderly, who are not among your biggest
spenders, consumer-wise.

In the meantime, the sickness and disability marathons will continue to reach
for extremes, much as the medical-medicine show has evolved from helpful tips to
gory close-ups of complicated operatiions. A climax of some sort is reached in
the BBC series ''The Body in Question'' currently being telecast on Channel 13.
The final episode will show Jonathan Miller, the writer and narrator, performing
a post-mortem dissection of a mortuary cadaver. Chalk it up to the human
animal's infinite capacity for morbid curiousity. Or, as with the example of the
disabled, attribute it to television's endlessly desperate quest to expand the
borders of show business.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Powers Booth and Susan Blakely

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMICS;
MR. KLEIN'S MODEL ECONOMY

SECTION: Section 3; Page 19, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1366 words


Lawrence R. Klein, of the University of Pennsylvania, won the Nobel Memorial
Prize in Economic Science last week for his innovations in the field of
econometrics.

More than any other economist, he is credited with development of the computer
models that attempt to forecast the direction of national economies and to show
how they might be affected by changes in public policy.

The ninth American to win the prize, Mr. Klein has now and then helped formulate
public policy himself - most recently in the early days of the Carter
Administration. Three years ago, when he was installed as president of the
American Economic Association, Mr.  Klein offered his views of the American
economy. What follows is an excerpt from the address.

W E are searching at this time for a theory of economic policy that is
appropriate for the 1970's and 80's in much the same way that Keynesian
economics was a product of the times in the 1920's and 30's.

That range of policies survived many shocks from stirring events.  It brought
the economies of the West through the Marshall Plan for the reconstruction of
Europe, the Korean war, Sputnik, Middle East wars, the closing of Suez and many
lesser disturbances.

International trade policy was largely governed by the Bretton Woods agreement
and its system of fixed exchange rates. This bit of very Keynesian stabilization
policy, like its domestic counterparts, also lasted for almost three decades.

Now that we have moved to an international floating-rate system, we treat
international economic policy differently and must include a new dimension
together with taxes, expenditures, income securityautomatic stabilizers,
egalitarian measures and monetary policy as the main avenues of economic
stabilization on the side of demand management.

The use of policy instruments from the above list reached its high point in the
Kennedy-Johnson era.  The tax incentives for capital formation in 1962 and the
income tax cut of 1964 worked like Econ.-1 examples or examination questions.
They gave rise to somewhat exaggerated hopes that fine-tuning was possible and
quite reliable - even, in some quarters, that the cycle has been abolished.

But the inadequacy of this approach, by itself, to economic management showed up
clearly during the escalation of the Vietnam war. That experience proved to be
too much for Keynesian economic policy in its pure form.

Partly, it was a matter of social and political turmoil caused by an unpopular
war, but fundamentally it was a case of an oversized burden for the United
States.

Economic advisers to President Johnson recommended a tax increase as early as
1966, but retrospective analysis of that episode indicates that even a speeding
up of the 1968 surcharge to as early as 1966 would not have avoided simultaneous
recession and inflation.  It would have moderated the twin evils, but not really
prevented the economic dislocations of the 1970's.

Vietnam was the start of the inflationary surge.  Basically it resulted in
large-scale outlays that brought forth no lasting productive capital that might
have provided a future stream of goods.

Had the same resources been devoted to the provision of productive capital
formation, there would have been much less inflationary pressure. As it turned
out, inflation broke out, the Bretton Woods system came apart and a whole new
series of economic ailments that had been building up revealed themselves in
full force. To add to these difficulties, a number of serious shocks hit the
world.

The new problems that economic policy must face up to are: 1. Materials
shortages-cum-speculative waves (especially like those in 1973-74).  2. OPEC
pricing and energy shortfalls.  3. Environmental deterioration and quality of
life.  4. Existence of large-scale, structural unemployment.  5. Grain failures
and population growth.  These are not exhaustive, but they are certainly major
among the economic problems that now face us and are likely to be present for
some time to come. In one way or another, they all lead to substantial
inflationary pressure because they cost money or resources to overcome, although
they are genuine problems apart from the inflationary aspect.

T HESE are the economic issues that we have to meet in the years ahead, but it
is not at all clear how they will be affected by macroeconomic policies of
demand management.

Having adequate effective demand is probably a necessary ingredient in their
treatment, but it is surely not sufficient. The New New Economics must extend
the broad ''macro'' considerations of Keynesian policy prescriptions to deal
with issues like these.

It is my opinion that the market mechanism, if left to its own free play, will
not deal appropriately with these issues. They will not be handled in a fair and
just way in terms of social equity, and they will not be handled in a stable
way, if left to market forces either totally or primarily.

It is noteworthy that the last recession was not only worldwide in scope but
larger in amplitude, domestically, than any of its postwar precessors. There is
just a hint that the new problems of the 1970's and 80's may be introducing
unstable dynamic processes into economic adjustments. There is too much at stake
to be doctrinaire about the hypothetical efficacy of pure market forces in
achieving economic equilibrium.

But I am an optimist. I do belive that a solution exists. A set of policies that
would deal with each of these problems, individually and all together, can be
devised.

A suggested policy approach consists of: 1. Buffer stocks to deal with material
shortages.  2. Policies of conservation, extended use of coal, research into
synthetic fuels, fuel stockpiling and use of price incentives to improve the
supply/demand balance in energy.

3. Recognition of economic costs of protecting the environment and slowing of
growth as conventionally measured.  4. The initiation of extensive programs in
manpower training and reform of labor market conditions to deal more effectively
with structural unemployment.

5. The stimulation of larger food supplies through use of acreage allocations
and improved practices to increase yields.  These are specific policies
attacking, one-on-one, the list of problem areas cited above.  In addition,
there must be an overall attack on inflation. This may be approached through
attempts to raise the total productivity and probably through the eventual
institution of an incomes policy.

Some of the specific measures will contribute to productivity, but a primary
contribution should come through higher overall investment activity.

This means that general ''macro'' policies, together with specific policies,
should be geared toward increasing savings-cum-capital formation relative to
consumption.

There should be investment on an expanded scale in both fixed and human capital.
...  I look at the problems of the 1970's and 80's and say to myself, they are
formidable economic problems, but there is a way out.  Hard decisions about
energy, other shortages, possibly slower growth will have to be made. These
decisions will draw upon unconventional economic thinking in national
policy-making that is just beginning to take shape. ...

If these adjustments can be made, I see no reason to feel that the coming
economic problems cannot be solved.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of Lawrence P. Klein and Sonya Klein

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CANDIDATES VS.REPORTERS:OLD BATTLE,SHARPER EDGE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1177 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Like every Presidential election, the race between Ronald Reagan and President
Carter is not simply a contest between two candidates. It is also a contest
between two agendas - which set of issues should voters view as the most
pressing. But they are presented to the potential voter not by the candidates
directly, but through the filter of the press, which has its own agenda - news.
This year, as usual, the candidates' staffs are frustrated by what they perceive
to be television and newspaper correspondents' priorities.

Mr. Carter's campaign advisers complain that the President's ''meanness'' in his
attacks on the former California Governor was a contrived issue. For several
days, following his warning of divisions between Christians and Jews if the
Republican were elected, Mr.  Carter found himself forced to discuss whether his
attacks had been overly personal. His exasperated strategists struggled
unsuccessfully to turn the coverage to other attacks, principally those that
raise the war and peace questions.

Meanwhile, Mr. Reagan's people were sidetracked by the focus on air pollution.
Particularly in California, where Los Angeles had been choking under a bad siege
of smog, Mr. Reagan's comment that the pollution problem had become
''substantially controlled'' got headlines daily. The campaign was hard pressed
to return to its principal subject, the economy.

And so, last week again, Representative John B. Anderson was besieged by
questions about why he is remaining in the race. His own priorities have become
submerged in the issue of whether he is a political spoiler.

This year's complaints about the press have a particularly sharp edge. They are
that it has dwelt too much on the strictly political aspects of the race, on the
horse-race, and that it has tended to highlight the candidate's personal
characteristics. Mr. Reagan's gaffes make news while Mr. Carter's do not; Mr.
Carter's slashing personal attacks on Mr. Reagan get attention while Mr.
Reagan's tone is less remarked upon.

At the center of the discontent is the basic axiom of news coverage - focus on
what's new. Generally, candidates find this more of an advantage than a
disadvantage. But this year, both Mr. Reagan and Mr. Carter are trying to win
support within the abnormally large undecided bloc. The Undecideds are less
likely to be aware of the issues. Thus the need to sound familiar themes, over
and over, is paramount. Reporters covering the candidates, however, are looking
for what is fresh that day, even if it is only that the candidate has repeated
himself in a new way.

Aides to both Mr. Carter and Mr. Reagan complain that reporters have, at
different times in the campaign, looked for new ways in which the candidate
reinforced a stereotype of himself -often, in their view, a stereotype held more
by the press than the public.

Early on in the campaign, Mr. Reagan's controversial ad libs about the Ku Klux
Klan and about the Vietnam War being a ''noble cause'' created a firestorm of
criticism. The Vietnam War comment was the very definition of old news. Mr.
Reagan has said the same thing for years. But at the time he repeated it, the
Carter campaign was charging that he was overly inclined to make rash
statements. Mr.  Reagan accused reporters of going off ''halfcocked,'' looking
for ways to create credibility problems for him.

Mr. Carter expressed the same sort of exasperation, more recently, about the
''meanness'' charge. ''The press seems to be obsessed with this issue,'' he said
as reporters at a news conference asked again and again about his suggestion
that Mr. Reagan's use of ''code words'' had been racist.

A couple of days after Mr. Carter conceded that he had ''overstated'' things a
bit and promised to get himself ''back on track,'' he was asked what kind of
President he thought Mr. Reagan would make. His reply listed several
disagreements, and closed with the statement that his rival would not be ''a
good man to trust with the affairs of this nation in the future.'' Shortly
afterward, White House press secretary Jody Powell charged that only in a
climate of oversensitivity to the ''meanness'' issue could that statement be
characterized as the ''strongest personal attack'' yet, as a United Press
International story put it.

''News coverage of Presidential candidates often has a selfreinforcing,
reflexive aspect to it,'' says political scientist James David Barber. ''A lot
of times the stories are really about the observations of the journalists,
reifying them as if they were real phenomena. Maybe that's happening because the
race is so boring this year. It's like George Burns said when he had his first
plate of eggs after going on a salt-free diet, that they tasted like the hens
hadn't been paid that day.''

The candidates' planners can hardly claim that they are unfamiliar with how the
system works, or that they don't know how to turn it to their advantage.

In the last couple of weeks, for instance, Mr. Carter got publicity for signing
an agreement with Israel on oil supplies, and used the occasion of the war
between Iraq and Iran to reiterate his positions on helping Israel. Mr. Reagan
has traveled to automobile factories, steel mills and construction sites to
pound away at his appeals for blue-collar support. Each time the coverage
focused on the new setting and slightly different emphasis.

One way all the campaigns get around the priorieties of the socalled national
press - the major networks, newspapers and news magazines - is simply to aim for
local coverage in those areas where the candidate appears. Mr. Carter's
hour-long town meeting in Yatesville, Pa., last week, was covered live on three
local television stations. Lately, the Carter campaign has taken to calling in
reporters from the Washington bureaus of middle- and small-sized newspapers for
fullscale reviews of the issues it feels are not being adequately discussed.

Although several Carter officials have contended recently that the press is
''setting the agenda'' of the campaign outright, many in the press don't agree.
''By itself, the media can't see the agenda,'' said Julius Duscha, director of
the Washington Journalism Center.  ''The coverage in the end depends on what is
picked up from the candidates. In campaigns I've covered, the reporters have
heard the set speeches so long that they look for these other things,
particularly when there doesn't seem to be much excitement to the campaign.''

''The Reagan gaffes,'' he continued, ''tell us something about what sort of a
person he is, and Carter's 'mean streak' gives us insight into his personality.
These things get to some of the main problems that people have with the
candidates to begin with.'' end

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

On the Side of the Angels;
SUNDAY OBSERVER

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 685 words


I went to the reverend precinct clubhouse for political guidance.  This is a
custom cultivated during the Vietnam War when I was shocked to discover that I
was at odds with God's policy on that conflict.

I had been supporting the war with the usual religious fervor for the American
side when one day I noticed that the reverend political clergy had started to
oppose it. At the reverend precinct clubhouse the awakening was cruel.

As a student of World War I and a veteran of World War II, I had been taught to
support American wars because God was on our side.  Now apparently the political
parsonage had inquired about the Almighty's war policy and there had been a
shift. God wanted peace.

It seemed that a voter could get into really serious long-range problems such as
having his credentials closely audited at the Pearly Gates if he failed to keep
in touch with the folks who kept in touch with divine political policy.

So I went to the clubhouse to find out whether it was still all right to vote
for candidates who favored racial desegregation, which, according to the men of
the political cloth, had become the godly way to vote during the 1960's, or
whether they had detected a change of signals from Heaven.

There had been a change of signals all right. The clubhouse was occupied by a
new set of parsons whose interest in racial desegregation was minimal, to say
the most. Their conversation left little doubt that they were privy to inside
information that God had become a Republican.

Maybe I got the wrong impression, but when I inquired about which politicians to
vote against if I wanted a warm welcome in Paradise, all the people they warned
against seemed to be Democrats. Charts were produced -earthly charts,
admittedly, but nevertheless charts compiled by men who trod the pulpit with
confidence. These charts showed which politicians were against the family, which
in favor of the equal-rights amendment, which favored letting homosexuals enjoy
constitutional rights and so forth, and all these villains were Democrats.

If the reverend political clergy could be believed, God had spent a lot of time
considering American domestic policy, concluded that it was a mess and decided
that this was the Democrats' fault. The question was whether the parsons were
accurately representing the Almighty's cogitations on American domestic policy
or whether there had been a communications breakdown.

There was no doubt among the clerics. They were sincere men, just as the
clergymen who used to say that God was on our side in war were sincere, just as
the clergymen who later said that God was not on our side were sincere.

Nor could you say for certain that they had gotten God's message all garbled up,
although this conclusion was mighty tempting in view of the fact that there are
so many people in the world who get God's message only to start quarreling among
themselves about what it says.

All these people who get God's message, with the exception of certain mercenary
frauds, are so absolutely certain they have heard it right that their habit of
quarreling with each other about what it said makes you pause and wonder whether
God isn't up to something more subtle than they are able to understand -like,
for example, trying to teach them humility.

A proper respect for God might start with the assumption that He is a power
surpassing all understanding and that to profess to grasp any message emanating
from such a source is, at best, to give yourself airs about your own superiority
and, at worst, an act of arrogance which calls for the corrective medicine of
humility. I hesitate to commit such foolishness by stating flatly that God sends
mortals so many contradictory messages to teach them how inadequate their
auditory equipment is. In view of the low quality of our mortal talent for
humility, such a lesson would probably be wasted on us anyhow.

Trying to teach humility to a race capable of treating God as if He were a ward
heeler would be a divine waste of time, though whether God might, nevertheless,
think it amusing to try, I will not presume to guess.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

By Henery Scott Stokes;
CRACKING DOWN IN KOREA

SECTION: Section 6; Page 110, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3359 words


hen Chun Doo Hwan assumed the presidency of South Korea at the end of August,
culminating a quick and spectacular rise from anonymity, the former general
declared that ''all the elements that have stood in the way of national
development should be mercilessly eradicated.''

There was little doubt what he had in mind. In the months since the
assassination of President Park Chung Hee, on Oct. 26, 1979, Chun had
single-mindedly cleared the way for his ascent with a combination of reforms,
purges, arrests and ''purification'' campaigns.

He had cleansed the Korean Central Intelligence Agency, whose chief was
convicted of Park's murder, of corrupt officers, some of whom happened to be
supporters of one of his opponents. He had staged a putsch in his own military
hierarchy, defiantly calling up soldiers who were under American jurisdiction to
help him cashier 40 officers. When students and dissidents demonstrated against
a new wave of authoritarianism, a violent clash with troops left scores dead.
The nine-day riot in the city of Kwangju coincided with the arrest of hundreds
of university professors, liberals and politicians, including Chun's most
serious political opponent, Kim Dae Jung. Kim has since been sentenced to death
by hanging on charges of sedition.

Some 37,000 people have been rounded up as part of a purification campaign to
combat impure thoughts, hooliganism and decadent games like golf. Following
local tradition, Chun has elevated to the highest ranks in the army his friends
and classmates from the military academy.

This is not unfamiliar in South Korea. Two decades ago, strongman Syngman Rhee
resigned under pressure from student demonstrations. A year later, the military
installed Gen. Park Chung Hee, dissolved the National Assembly and suspended
political rights. Now, a year after General Park's assassination, similar
patterns are appearing.  General Park's repressive Emergency Decree 9 has been
replaced by General Chun's Martial Law Decree. Criticism of the Government is
again a crime. The press is censored.

The rise of Chun has dismayed those who had hoped the political vacuum created
by Park's assassination would lead to the development of democratic institutions
and an end to military rule. Others regard Chun's stern measures as necessary to
stabilize and control the economy, which, for the first time in two decades, is
in decline.  They also believe in the importance of maintaining a strong front
against possible incursions from the Communist North.

The United States, with strong strategic and economic interests in the country,
is undergoing an erosion of influence, which the State Department's helplessness
at the plight of Kim underscores. After a referendum on a new constitution is
passed this month and approved by the rubber-stamp electoral council, Chun has
promised to hold elections. Having eliminated all opposition in advance, it is
hard to imagine what could prevent him from winning a seven-year term.

Chun came to his present eminence with the help of what are, in Korea, important
accidents of birth. He was born 49 years ago, the sixth of seven children of a
poor farming family, in Hapchon in the South Kyongsang Province.

Regionalism is a powerful force in Korea, and Kyongsang, a harsh, beautiful
mountain region, has bred fierce, exclusive loyalty in its people. They look on
those from outside the province with almost fanatical disdain.

Park Chung Hee also came from a poor Kyongsang family. During Park's 18-year
rule - from 1961 to 1979 - virtually all his trusted top officials came from the
province, and businessmen from the region received special treatment. Kyongsang
was jocularly referred to in Seoul as the source of 90 percent of the generals
and 60 percent of the businessmen.

Because of his poverty, and with Park's support, Chun enrolled in the free
Korean Military Academy rather than in one of the many private universities in
the country - another lucky disadvantage. He became a member of the most
celebrated class in the school's history, the ''11th class,'' which graduated in
1955. (He also married the academy superintendent's daughter, Lee Sun Ja.)

Chun's class is powerful partly because it was the first to spend a full four
years at the academy. In the early days of the Korean War, young men spent as
little as a month there. Chun's class, which entered in 1951, while the conflict
was going on, was inspired by the patriotic drive of a generation facing war.
''The 11th class was fired by a powerful brand of nationalism,'' said Lee Kon
Hee, a Seoul businessman, ''a burning desire to serve their country.''

A similar dream inspired the predecessors of the 11th class, but they did not
serve long enough at the academy to develop the solidarity that carried Chun's
group to power in the chaotic months after the assassination of Park one year
ago. An absolute loyalty of staff officers to their commanders was built up in
the academy. The men in the 11th class have now known each other intimately for
nearly 30 years, and class reputations were sealed by the mid-1950's within the
elite of the military.

The 11th class did not see action in the Korean War; battles took place
exclusively on the soccer field, where Chun showed the physical strength and
courage that made him team captain and a leader of his class, although he was
not outstanding at schoolwork. Now he is running the country, and he has
gathered his top aides from his home province and his class.

The No. 2 man in the hierarchy is Lieut. Gen. Roh Tae Woo, a Kyongsang man and a
classmate, who is considered by many to be the brains of the junta. Chun
appointed him to be his successor as head of the Defense Security Command, a
military intelligence group that is the nerve center of the armed forces. It was
set up by Park to monitor the loyalty of generals and key officers and to
balance the excessive power of the vast Korean Central Intelligence Agency.

Third in the chain of command is Maj. Gen. Chung Ho Yong, also an 11th-class
cadet. He commands the Special Forces Paratroop unit - 12,000 strong - which is
called for crisis control in the streets along with a second unit, the Capital
Garrison Command, an armored group that Roh used to command. These were vital
units under Park, intended to block any coup or threat by commanders outside
Seoul and to stop student demonstrators. Under Chun, their primary function is
to protect the head of state; the commanders are thought to be the most loyal in
the land.

One of the most significant relationships in South Korea is the one between the
head of state and the American commander of the Combined Forces stationed there.
Since the Korean War, when Americans fought in the trenches alongside South
Korean soldiers, a camaraderie has existed between the two countries that is
beginning to show signs of strain.

Currently, there are some 40,000 American servicemen in South Korea, the only
American troops on the Asian mainland. Like China, Japan and the Soviet Union,
the United States regards the Korean peninsula as a strategic area, comparable
to the Middle East in importance. The South Koreans get several hundred million
dollars' worth of new American weapons each year. In the past, this was a
guarantee of the occasional diplomatic favor. Recently, however, observers have
noted a change. A new generation of hawkish Korean officers remembers American
soldiers from Vietnam, and their defeat at the hands of Communists, rather than
from the Korean War. And they are no longer so solicitous of American requests.

Gen. John A. Wickham Jr., who has been the commander of Combined Forces since
1978, had his first run-in with Chun last December.  Chun, then a major-general,
audaciously requisitioned army units under the command of General Wickham to
stage a coup within the South Korean army that resulted in the removal of some
40 top generals and aides. It was the worst breach of discipline since Park had
seized control of Seoul 18 years earlier without United States permission to
deploy South Korean units. Chun flouted the rules of an elaborate structure,
created two years ago, which made General Wickham the commander of almost all
South Korean units in the 600,000-man force.

In his office following the December incident, the nearly bald major-general
defended his action simply: It was necessary to use the troops to apprehend a
suspect in the Park assassination. No apologies were offered, and a visitor
noticed a calligraphy on the door of his office that read: ''Strong army, rich
country.''

By August, General Wickham and General Chun were making news again. An interview
appeared in the American press in which an unnamed ''top (U.S.) military
official'' predicted that Chun would make a bid for the presidency and seemed to
express support for him.  At the time, Choi Kyu Hah, the former diplomat who had
succeeded Park as president, was still in power.

In the course of a two-hour interview after the story appeared, Chun was asked
if he intended to take the presidency from the weak Choi. Chun replied calmly,
seeming to reflect on his timing - to wrestle with the decision right there in
his cane chair. It was a critical moment for him, which he did not attempt to
disguise.

Thinking aloud, through Michael Kim, his interpreter then and now his
presidential protocol chief, Chun said, ''I can tell you this with certainty. I
have no political interest as such. The president, Choi Kyu Hah, His Excellency,
is here.''

He looked at the rack of evening papers carrying the interview, and said: ''This
kind of headline is rather embarrassing for both of us.  I have been invited to
dinner by His Excellency tonight. I and the principal commanders of military
units have been invited to dine...  It's rather awkward. I am rather surprised
you should mention it.'' He picked up the papers again, glancing once more at
the headlines.

Chun talked about the need for ''a new generation of leaders,'' a reference to
the emergence of Kim Jong Il, son of North Korean leader Kim Il Sung, in North
Korea. ''Kim Jong Il ... 39, much younger than I.'' It was clear the way his
mind was moving as he said: ''It does seem to me to jump to a conclusion. His
Excellency the president is still in his office. What the newspaper said is 'top
(U.S.) military official supports' me. That's very flattering. I can use support
any time. It could also mean that I'm a little more liked, more popular - that's
pleasing. But now rules will have to be obeyed. To make a long story short, this
does seem to me a bit early and disrespectful to the president.''

Chun looked across his desk calmly. ''Wouldn't that be viewed as a blooper?
Won't General Wickham be recalled?'' He had casually identified the source of
the blind quote, which eventually caused the State Department to issue a rash of
disclaimers and position papers.

Chun's face knotted as the reply to his question - yes, General Wickham's
indiscretion might get him into trouble - was translated for him. The corners of
his mouth dropped. His brow furrowed.  Evidently, his anger was caused by the
suggestion that American support for him might not be 100 percent at that
crucial moment.  Another correspondent leaped into the breach: ''No, I don't
think Wickham's in trouble.''

He proved right and Chun is now president, perhaps six months earlier than he
would have been if the news story had not encouraged him to believe he had
American support.

General Wickham's assessment of Chun today is not entirely optimistic. ''He may
be a little brighter, a little savvier than Park was at the beginning,'' he said
recently, ''but I'm sure he's terribly unsophisticated about the difficulties of
running Korea in the 1980's. I just don't believe that these young generals have
any more conception of how to run the country than I do. They are relatively
myopic.''

It is not yet clear what kind of support Chun has among the Korean people. Polls
show that many Koreans favor democracy. A high percentage feels that
reunification is a priority, and many say democratization is lagging. But
farmers in the countryside tend to be conservative. In any case, there is no
opposition candidate in sight and the political parties have been paralyzed
under full martial law since May 17.

Three professional politicians were expected to run for president in 1981: Kim
Young Sam, head of the ruling Democratic Republican Party; Kim Jong Pil, former
head of the party, and Kim Dae Jung.  Following his arrest in May, along with 23
others, Kim Dae Jung was charged, in a 145-page indictment, with leading a
pro-Communist group in the 1940's, collaborating with a North Korean to oppose
Park in the 1971 presidential election and organizing student uprisings in Seoul
and Kwangju last spring. He was sentenced to death, but no date has been set. As
one Westerner put it, ''Running for president is not usually a capital
offense.''

The feud between Kim and the South Korean leadership has gone on for two
decades. In 1971, he came close to defeating Park, which prompted the president
to prepare a constitution declaring himself president for life.

Kim's imprisonment has alarmed human-rights advocates around the world, and a
number of groups are mounting campaigns on his behalf.  These international
protests
are not usually reported in the South Korean press, and many in the country
believe the charges and favor execution. Kim's case will now go to appeal, a
process likely to last past the American elections in November. Still, after his
own upcoming election, Chun may choose to commute Kim's sentence.

Chun wants to hold power for at least one seven-year presidential term. If he
were then succeeded by one of his generals - Roh, for example - the 11th class
would be in control until 1995. A ''democratic welfare state'' is their populist
ideal, which means, in practice, a strong leadership by Chun, with the armed
forces behind him, and a market economy in which the state controls some 50
percent of investment funds, channeled through state banks. It is a
nationalistic blueprint, resembling President Park's, with an emphasis on
discipline on the campuses, tougher controls on the press and martial law,
actual or potential. ''The real difficulty in dealing with the military is that
they are simple and straight; they have no policies but they have weapons in
their hands and are very dangerous to confront,'' says a Catholic priest who was
detained by military investigators and then released.  The common rationale for
hard-line policies or political tumult in South Korea is the ''threat of
invasion from the north'' and the necessity to contain ''Communist dissidents.''
General Wickham has characterized the virulent anti-Communism of the south as
''paranoia.''

Though both North and South Korea frequently call, on separate days, for
reunification talks, high-level discussions between north and south have never
been held, and reprisals are severe if citizens have dealings with the other
side. Even the receipt of a letter could draw a death penalty.

There is occasional guerrilla infiltration from the north, but the number of men
involved is small, a handful each year. Nevertheless, there are, in all, about
1.3 million men in armed forces on the peninsula. According to Lieut. Gen. Roh
Tae Woo, South Korea's second in command, ''We are the same people, with the
same patterns of life, the same historical heritage. In such conditions, I don't
think North Korea will launch an all-out offensive.'' But this is not a
universally accepted view, and preparedness is stressed.

Chun is fascinated by North Korea. ''We watched them across the DMZ,'' he said,
''and it's always the same, year in year out. The same tasks. The same faces.
The same routines on the farm. That is how it is in North Korea. Everyone is
controlled. They can't move around the way we can. They are told where they
work. They can't change jobs or residence like us. Everyone has an allotted
task. For example, the ones on the DMZ are chosen for maximum political
reliability. They are the ones who would never betray the north. They have
medals. They all have medals. They are hand-picked. This shows how the society
is run. People are graded according to reliability.  So the ones who repatriated
from Japan would never be sent to the DMZ area. They go up to the northern areas
along the borders (with China), to the coal-mine areas,'' Chun said. ''There
they kill people without trial. They don't have a press, newspapers. Not
difficult to run a country like that,'' he said.  Businessmen appear ready to
support Chun. The last thing they want is more labor unrest. Lee Kon Hee, vice
chairman of the Samsung Group, a conglomerate with 70,000 employees, allows no
unions in his organization. The right to strike does not exist under martial
law.  Businesses are run along paternalistic lines. Samsung spokesmen say their
company spent $4.3 million on a club where their workers can relax and that 60
percent of 22,000 blue-collar workers at 53 plants are housed by the company.

The alliance between big business and the army is strengthened by the same
connections that bind the military men. ''Seven or eight years ago, when I
needed talented managers, I found the available pool was tiny,'' said Lee
recently. ''I started looking around for suitable people, and if I was told they
came from the 11th class, they were accepted without question. They proved to be
superb.  Hyundai (another large industrial group) followed my example and also
hired army officers. Now, under Chun, the Government took some of my executives
back, one as a vice minister.''

According to Nam Duck Woo, Chun's first prime minister, ''Without the political
stability and discipline that the military brought to the country, our
modernization would not have occurred.''

American business also has a big stake in South Korea. The United States
invested some $13 billion in official grants and loans since the Korean War to
prop up the South. The Export-Import Bank has its highest exposure worldwide in
South Korea, with $3 billion in support of American business. Forty-seven
foreign banks have been permitted to open here since 1967, earning net profits
at high interest rates with a virtually guaranteed return of $40 million in
1979.

The use of American-made M-47 tanks and troops armed with M-16's against rioting
civilians at Kwangju in May -which resulted in hundreds of casualties - may
disturb American public opinion, but Chun is not impressed. Defense and State
Department officials in Washington, who claim the United States has no leverage
with Chun, appear to be correct, as long as America's highest priority is
security and the Export-Import Bank continues lending money for nuclear-power
plants and other big projects that furnish huge export orders for the United
States.

Chun remains indifferent to requests for clemency for Kim Dae Jung. For his
part, Kim made the following statement last December, after he was freed from 33
months of detention under Park: ''My message to the United States now is this.
Please side with the majority aspirations around the world. Please learn some
lessons from Vietnam, from Iran.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE PARADOXES OF PRESIDENTIAL POWER

BYLINE: By THOMAS E. CRONIN; Thomas E. Cronin, professor of political science at
the University of Delaware, is currently on leave as a visiting professor at
Colorado College. He is the author most recently of ''The State of the
Presidency'' and co-author of the forthcoming text ''Government by the People.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1724 words


JUST a few years ago, many students of the American Presidency, myself included,
used to ask: Wouldn't it be nice if we had a President who could keep us out of
war, who did not have an enemies list, who was honest and decent rather than
arrogant and imperial, who was not an intimidating wheeler-dealer and misuser of
the intelligence agencies but, rather, a believer in a relatively open
Presidency, who would select an able Vice President and use him effectively and
humanely, who would strive to reconnect the Presidency with average American
families, who would listen and consult widely, and who belonged to the same
party as most of Congress, so that they might work together to get things
passed?

Jimmy Carter and much of his Presidency come pretty close to those old wishes,
but we are just as dissatisfied as ever. Perhaps even more so. Some people are
ready to trade decency for decisiveness.  Some are even calling for a retreat to
the ''good old days'' of the imperial Presidency. What has gone wrong?  Parts of
the puzzle are better understood after reading these timely and helpful books.
Both Thomas A. Bailey and Godfrey Hodgson recognize the cycles, dilemmas and
paradoxes of Presidential power.  Both recognize, although Mr. Bailey more so,
how much the individual shapes the office. Otherwise the two books are
dissimilar in purpose and conclusion. While Mr.
Bailey concentrates on imperial tendencies, Mr. Hodgson is concerned with the
seemingly imperiled character of the modern Presidency.

* In an ambitious sweep through American military and political history, Mr.
Bailey writes about how each of our Presidents handled war, interventions and
threats of war. Mr. Bailey, 77, is himself an institution in the field of
history and at Stanford University, where 10 years ago, after teaching for 42
years, he retired to emeritus status. He has written about 20 books on
Presidents, diplomatic history and related topics - many of them best-selling
textbooks. He is a gifted writer, and almost all his books, including this one,
are filled with puns, light asides and other ''Bailey-isms.''

Neither a revisionist nor an apologist, Mr. Bailey is a stickler for the facts.
He treats all Presidents, not just those who presided over major wars, and finds
considerable pugnaciousness, even when we might least expect it. Ever the
realist, he writes: ''Nations, including the United States, do not ordinarily go
to war unless they feel that they have at least a long-shot chance of winning.
Then their honor becomes highly sensitive.''

Some readers will doubtless be surprised at the near-continuous character of our
warring activity - much of it of a highly imperialistic kind. The war power has
been exercised by our Presidents on hundreds of occasions, even though only five
or six wars have been formally declared by Congress. And perhaps on only one
occasion (the war of 1812) did the members of Congress actually debate the
merits of involving us in serious hostilities.

The United States at one time or another has fought just about every other great
nation, save France, although we were unofficially at war even with France
during the John Adams Administration.

Mr. Bailey deflates countless myths. Many of the generals who became chief
executives, for instance, are given relatively high marks as peace Presidents.
The two West Pointers, Ulysses S. Grant and Dwight D. Eisenhower provoked no
wars and did pretty well at keeping the peace. Two of our most combative,
pugnacious personalities in the White House, Andrew Jackson and Theodore
Roosevelt, turned out to have been discreet - or lucky - enough to stay out of a
major war. Many of the peace lovers (William McKinley and Woodrow Wilson) became
militant and martial. Wilson, for example, presided over some 15 armed
interventions during his terms of office.

No President or political party, writes Mr. Bailey, can be characterized as
hellbent on war. ''The party out of power normally blasts the President for
having got into war (as the Federalists did Madison),'' he writes, ''or for not
fighting it with both fists (as right-wing Republicans did the Democratic
Johnson in the 1960's).'' Yet nearly all of our pugnacious Presidents enjoyed
public support at the outset; Americans like a fighting President - for a while.
Opposition grows as the going gets tougher, the victories are fewer, and the
opposition party lusts in its heart for a chance to win the White House.

Mr. Bailey concludes that most of our Presidents, even including James Polk and
Abraham Lincoln, genuinely preferred peace and only involved us in war when they
judged that the country's welfare would not be as well served by turning the
other cheek. On balance, Presidents have not stirred up foreign wars to divert
attention from domestic problems.

There is praise for Presidents such as George Washington, who acted with
restraint and courage and kept us out of wars that could only have been
disastrous for the country. There is praise for Presidents such as Lincoln and
Franklin D. Roosevelt, who fought wars they could not avoid and did what had to
be done. But the Polks and the McKinleys and the several Presidents who got us
involved in the Vietnam War are lambasted for their reckless and unnecessary
pugnacity.

Perhaps the weakest aspect of ''The Pugnacious Presidents'' is the minimal
attention paid to the economic origins of American wars.  Though Mr. Bailey
treats the ''manifest destiny'' and ''merchants of death'' themes on occasion,
he concentrates on individual Presidents and their character, to the exclusion
of our national yearnings, needs and habits. Perhaps, too, a more refined
analysis of the question of just versus unjust wars might have strengthened the
book. Overall, however, Mr. Bailey has written a valuable and provocative
treatise on a topic of extraordinary importance to us all.

* Godfrey Hodgson, the veteran British journalist and broadcaster, writes about
the constraints on the Presidency. His theme of paradox is familiar: Presidents
have considerable power, yet they are seldom able to do what they want and have
pledged to do. Two questions guide his analysis: How much power does the
President have? How much power should he have?

Mr. Hodgson plainly thinks Presidents today have too little usable power, too
few resources and friends, too much to do with too little help. Presidents, he
says, should have more power.

But the theme of ''All Things to All Men'' is overstated. Mr.  Hodgson leaves us
with the view that Presidents can do little. Yes, the constraints on the
Presidency are substantial. Parties are weaker. Power in Congress is less
concentrated than ever before.  Television can overexpose and level. Vietnam and
Watergate engendered widespread public skepticism. Yet could it be that we just
haven't had effective Presidents lately?

The American Presidency still has enormous power to shape the nation's agenda,
to clarify policy options and to bring out the best in us. Our problems today
are many, but hardly so overwhelming as in the 1860's or the 1930's and early
1940's.

Mr. Hodgson is persuasive in asserting that we expect too much of our
Presidents. But he is insufficiently aware of Tocqueville's observation that
Americans want both to be nagged and left alone.  Further, Mr. Hodgson gives
little or no attention to the fact that our system prizes private power over
public power.

Leading journalists who have covered the White House (as Mr.  Hodgson has)
persist in saying that only the President can solve our problems, only the
President can serve to set our national purpose.  This too easily demotes
Congress and too glibly ignores much of our creative leadership that comes from
outside of Washington. My own view is that we need all the leadership we can get
from Presidents, but we are even more in need of a nation of leaders, say
500,000 or even 5 million, in business, local government, unions, universities
and elsewhere who will serve as policy clarifiers, agenda setters and renewers
of the national purpose. A sign of a democratic society's maturity is that it
recognizes that a vital private sector must share in policy innovation and
leadership responsibilities.

Mr. Hodgson seems to be aware of much of this, but his exclusive focus on the
modern Presidency may mislead some readers. His careful analysis leads him to
conclude that the Presidency is in deep trouble. Electing better individuals and
lowering our expectations are not enough, he tells us. He thinks we should try
the national primary. He urges party renewal and stronger links between
Presidents and Congress. With admirable restraint for an Englishman, he eschews
visiting a Parliamentary system on us but he does think we would benefit from
some elements of it. Thus he writes, ''One idea that seems to me to have
attractive advantages (as well as awkward disadvantages) would be for the
President to be advised by a 'super Cabinet' or Council ... composed of leading
figures in the Congress.''

Mr. Hodgson writes well, grasps most of the complexi-ties of our complicated
political system and gives us a lot to think about. But there are enough missed
points and enough misplacement of emphasis that the reader should be advised to
consider this merely one of several recent good books on the subject.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKENDS;
BRADBURY AND BERENSON

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 7; Page 63, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 905 words


There are a hundred stories in ''The Stories of Ray Bradbury,'' coming from
Knopf on Oct. 31. The popular novelist and sciencefiction writer was in town
from Los Angeles the other day, talking about himself and his work before taking
the train home. He doesn't fly but moves about by train, ship and bicycle.

Speaking of novels and science fiction, he said: ''Everything comes as a
surprise to me, and I don't draw big distinctions between one form of writing
and another. I write poetry every morning of my life. If it's good, it remains a
poem. But sometimes it turns into a play or a script or a short story or novel.
I'm not in charge. I let my subconscious do the whole thing.''

The prolific author's projects include a mystery that he describes as ''indirect
homage'' to Dashiell Hammett, Raymond Chandler and James M. Cain, a screenplay
of his novel, ''Something Wicked This Way Comes'' and a one-hour television show
on the history of the Smithsonian Institution. It describes a mysterious visit
there by youngsters on Halloween - his favorite holiday.

Stranger still is the story Mr. Bradbury told us of his friendship with Bernard
Berenson, the late art historian. After he wrote a piece in The Nation in 1953
defending his own work as a science-fiction writer, Mr. Bradbury received a fan
letter from Berenson saying how much he admired the writer's declaration that
artists needed not only to exert themselves in the service of their work but to
see it ''as a lark.''

Later, Mr. Bradbury visited Berenson in Italy, where they talked about
everything from science fiction to the paintings at the Pitti Palace. ''He was a
Renaissance man in every way, and became like a second father to me. We all need
the approval of someone wiser to tell us that we're not crazy following our own
stars. He tried to steer me into other fields of writing, and he even gave me
ideas for plots.''

Bradbury and Berenson? Now that's science fiction.

Index

Under its new editor, Hugh Lunghi, a scholar who once served as an interpreter
for Winston Churchill, the London-based Index on Censorship continues to
disclose outrages against writers and the imprisonment of ideas and words around
the world. Inevitably, most of the cases involve Soviet, Eastern European, South
American, African and certain dictator-run nations in the third world, where
books are government-controlled and often considered enemies of the state.

The October issue of the bimonthly is unusual because it features cases of
human-rights viola-
tions in the United States and West Germany. The magazine points out that
''self-censorship is an essential intellectual problem in West Germany today.''
The section on the United States includes examples of foreign writers who have
been unable to obtain visas to come here or have received them only after
protests by fellow writers and publishers. The Mexican novelist Carlos Fuentes
has in the past been harassed as an ''undesirable alien'' by the United States
Immigration Service because of his political writings, and has often had
difficulty obtaining a visa when he visited this country; so have such other
major Latin American writers as Julio Cortazar and Gabriel Garcia Marquez. Last
January, the Japanese novelist Yotaro Konaka was denied a visa to participate in
the judging of a literary award program at the University of Oklahoma because 10
years ago he had written against the Vietnam war. Last May, Italian playwright
Dario Fo and actress Franca Rame, who had been invited to attend a festival
sponsored by the Italian Cultural Institute and New York University, were denied
entrance to the country because of their donations to unpopular civil liberties
groups in their own country that provided legal aid to individuals accused of
terrorist activities.

''The denial of visas to Dario Fo and Franca Rame is a denial of the opportunity
to enrich the intellectual and artistic life of our country,'' commented
novelist Bernard Malamud, president of the American Center of P.E.N. Thus far,
efforts in Congress to amend the McCarran-Walter Act of 1952, the immigration
law that still inhibits intellectual and artistic exchange, have been
unsuccessful. But writers' and civil liberties organizations continue to lobby
for freedom of travel and expression.

The magazine's editorial board includes such distinguished British writers as
Stephen Spender, Edward Crankshaw and Stuart Hampshire; among its American
supporters are John Updike and Kurt Vonnegut Jr.  Index on Censorship is
distributed in Europe by Oxford University Press and in the United States,
Canada and Mexico by Random House.

Editor to Novelist

Ann Arensberg, the author of ''Sister Wolf,'' a first novel about sexual
jealousy coming out this month, worked as an editor at The Viking Press for six
years, handling fiction and poetry, until she left to do-it-herself. ''Editing
and writing at the same time are incompatible,'' she said. ''Editing? You have
to get inside another person's imagination. Writing? Well, it's like squeezing
the bottom out of a toothpaste tube. Still, editinghelped me to self-edit
myself.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ART;
PHOTOJOURNALISTS DRAMATIZE SOCIAL CHANGE

BYLINE: By VIVIEN RAYNOR

SECTION: Section 11; Westchester; Page 14, Column 1; Weschester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1087 words

DATELINE: HASTINGS


ON-HUDSON WHEN The Gallery at Hastings on Hudson opened in 1976, its plans
included an exhibition of photographs by Lewis Hine, who lived here from 1918
until his death in 1940. The show has now materialized, but with Hine
accompanied by two living county photographers, Tony Vaccaro and Santi Visalli
(through Nov. 2).

As an educational and esthetic event, the Hine prints would have sufficed.  They
were lent, incidentally, by Walter Rosenblum - a friend and former pupil of the
master - and his wife, Naomi. Leading authorities on Hine, the Rosenblums played
a large part in the organization and documentation of his 1977 retrospective at
the Brooklyn Museum that eventually toured China.

Hine was not the first to train a camera on the poor, but he did so with
unprecedented grace and disinterest, and he remains, in this opinion, the
greatest of the social realists. Nevertheless, contrasting him with other, later
reporters turns out to have been a very good idea.

Under the title of ''American Scrap Book,'' the three men, each represented by
about 30 prints, pretty well cover the century up till now - Hine, 1905-40; Mr.
Vaccaro, 1940-60, and Mr. Visalli 1960-80.  Together, they record
photojournalism becoming a genre with its own rules and mannerisms while, at the
same time, dramatizing the way Americans have changed -not only in appearance
and behavior but also in spirit and expectations.

Supported by state and county arts councils, its ''Friends'' and, on this
occasion, Citibank, the Gallery has staged an allegory of more than neighborhood
significance. Claire Lee and Regina Rachmuth, two members of the Gallery's
board, are the show's curators.

Among the more familiar Hine prints, some of which are originals, is that of a
woman in an apron striding along a New York street, her head and shoulders
obscured by the huge wooden crate she is carrying. Probably the box went for
firewood in a Lower East Side tenement; today, it would more likely be turned
into furniture by young people playing at subsistence in the same area, having
fled parental affluence in, say, Westchester.

As usual, the photographer is at his best in the pictures documenting the open
season on cheap labor in the century's first two decades. By the 30's, Hine's
people had either lost their verve or he himself had become demoralized, for his
work was by then considered old-fashioned. This may have impelled him to take a
drier, more modernistic approach. But whatever the reason, his ironworkers on
the Empire State Building seem listless when compared with the small girls who
presided like queens over acres of textile machinery or the exotic families at
Ellis Island on their way to a scarcely less huddled existence turning out
piecework.

However thin and prematurely aged Hine's earlier subjects were, he presented
them as personalities without self-pity. A conscience pricked by the picture of
a grave black child poised on legs deformed by malnutrition would not have been
soothed by the mere writing of checks.

It is a confident and a much better-fed America that Mr. Vaccaro depicts, saving
Europe in World War II. With a flair for the significant gesture, the
photographer was on hand to catch General Patton, looking like a diva in
jodhpurs, at an Army athletic event in the Hitler Stadium in Nuremburg (quaintly
spelled Neurenberg in the caption).

His most affecting prints are of the dead and displaced, including that of a
captured German boy soldier who could be brother to Hine's adolescent drawing
water from a communal tap in a filthy tenement passage. Best of all is a blurred
shot of a presumably German infantryman, caught midair by camera and bullet
simultaneously.  However, the picture that won Mr. Vaccaro a prize and led to a
distinguished career working for both Life and Look and that today seems
standard war schmalz is of a G.I. kneeling to kiss a liberated French child.

Mr. Vaccaro's section also includes distinguished peacetime portraits. The young
John F. Kennedy stands straight and slim in a dark suit. The old, but no less
photogenic Frank Lloyd Wright sits in Taliesin, his arms extended as if
conducting an orchestra. And, in color, Georgia O'Keeffe displays a painting
outdoors at high noon in New Mexico. There are also a few pictorial anecdotes
about political conventions, an aspect of American life that seems never to
change, as Mr. Visalli's impressions of convention clowns taken a generation
later indicate.

A friend of Mr. Vaccaro, Mr. Visalli arrived in the United States from Italy in
1959, eventually becoming the New York representative of Publifoto, an Italian
news agency, and, later, starting the international agency, Photographers Inc. A
freelance since 1977, Mr.  Visalli has notably contributed covers to Newsweek
and is about to publish a 96-page portrait of New York, which, to judge from his
work in the show, will not lack Fellini-esque touches.

Mr. Visalli took the conventional approach to the 1960's. His hard hats are
paunchy and bad, his hippies, whether conducting marijuana seances or
demonstrating against the Vietnam War, are slender and good. Even Peter Max,
reclining with a paper flower in a room filled with mandalas, posters and
decorated pottery, some of it displayed on an American flag, appears more the
Oriental saint than the enormously successful designer. From the Beatles, the
Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Timothy Leary, to Richard M. Nixon,
marveling at a shower of Presidential balloons, and a toothy Edward M. Kennedy
at a Robert F. Kennedy tennis tournament - most of the key figures of the last
20 years are here.

Still, the best pictures are two that intimate that though the celebrities come
and go, issues go on forever unresolved. Both in color, one is of two young slum
warriors in a playground, which Ben Shahn might have painted, except that the
wall for stickball is covered by a defaced mural. The other, ''Ellis Island, the
Way I Saw It,'' (1978) brings the exhibition full circle. It is of a derelict
room lighted by a dirty window overgrown by a creeper. Leaning against one of
the peeling walls is a pair of crutches.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo by Lewis Hine

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SUPPORT OF THE TWO-PARTY SYSTEM

BYLINE: By STEPHEN MINOT

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 20, Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1189 words


IT is almost impossible for John B. Anderson to win Connecticut, but his
campaign is affecting the state. Not only will he influence the Presidential
vote, his campaign will be a hidden factor in senatorial and Congressional races
as well. The presence of a thirdparty candidate is a wild card in this election.

I have a particular interest in third-party movements. In 1966 I ran for
Congress from the Sixth District - Connecticut's northwest corner as a
third-party candidate. The issue was the Vietnam War.  Neither the Democratic
incumbent, Bernard Grabowski, nor the Republican challenger, Thomas Meskill,
would discuss Vietnam. Many voters from both parties felt that the war was the
major issue of the decade - politically, economically and morally. We felt
utterly disfranchised.

We weren't concerned with party politics; we were concerned with issues. But
after Tom Meskill won we had to face some bitter partisan complaints. Many loyal
Democrats felt that our efforts had cut short Bernie Grabowski's career in
Congress. Liberal Republicans saw our efforts as the springboard for Tom
Meskill, who won that election narrowly and went on to the governorship.

But neither I nor anyone else involved in that intense amateur campaign have
ever had any regrets. The policies we were attacking will be remembered long
after those two politicians and I have been forgotten. Those were nightmare
years with horrendous issues involving the economy of this nation, its
definition of itself and the lives of tens of thousands of its citizens.

Today, 14 years later, many of my old friends assume that because of my
involvement as a third-party candidate I would now be supporting John Anderson
or at least would be standing on the sidelines, disdainful of both major-party
candidates. Neither is true. In fact, I am astonished that anyone could find a
parallel between the ''peace candidates'' of the 60's and Mr. Anderson. And I am
alarmed at otherwise mature voters saying that this year's election is
meaningless.

It's not that I see anything sacred in the two-party system.  Britain has three
parties and the Dutch manage to work with dozens.  In our own history, however,
two is par and when serious third parties or candidates emerge on any level they
do so to rectify a special situation.

Our system makes winning just about impossible for an independent Presidential
candidate. Not one in this century came close. The most successful, Theodore
Roosevelt, won less than 17 percent of the electoral votes. George Wallace at
his peak gathered only 8.5 percent, and the much-admired Robert La Follette
never received more than 2 percent. Henry Wallace, with wide national
recognition, could not win a single electoral vote.

But serious independent candidates for President do have an impact. And it is
felt by Senate and House candidates as well. The time and the money invested in
third-party efforts are drawn largely from major-party sources. Those who do the
legwork for an independent candidate are not ringing doorbells for Republicans
or Democrats on any level.

In our own relatively modest campaign in 1966 the drain on active party workers
was such that on Election Day the Democratic Party was not represented outside a
number of polling places and the Republicans had to hire workers. John
Anderson's campaign in Connecticut may well have the same effect on a statewide
basis. They are now manning 10 regional offices and five storefront centers and
have a band of over 1,200 volunteers, evenly divided between adults and
students. This dedicated work force is clearly a drain on regular-party
volunteers for candidates running for seats in Congress.

If third-party candidates have such a disrupting effect on the political scene,
when are they justified? To my mind there are three factors, all of which have
to apply before we offer time, money and our vote to an independent candidate.

First, there must be no significant difference between the positions of the two
major-party candidates. Second, both major-party candidates must be avoiding a
number of serious issues that have broad, national implications. And third, the
independent candidate must have some specific solutions that make sense.

What bothers me about John Anderson is that he decided to run even though not
one of these conditions applied.  First, President Carter and former Governor
Reagan are not in fundamental agreement. They are unmistakably divided on the
equal rights amendment, our China policy, our initial handling of the Iranian
crisis, the teaching of religious beliefs in school, abortion and our handling
of inflation and employment. What's left?

Second, no matter what we feel about Mr. Carter and Mr. Reagan, we cannot charge
that they are avoiding any of the major issues or agreeing not to disagree -
with the single and understandable exception of how to handle the hostage
situation. Their debate on the major issues may not be stirring, but it is not a
fraud.

Third, nothing that Mr. Anderson has proposed is fundamentally a new approach.
Recommending a 50-cent-a-gallon tax on gasoline as opposed to one of 10 cents is
not a political philosophy. As The Associated Press put it, he ''charts a middle
course between those produced by the Republican and Democratic conventions.'' In
short, John Anderson is not a new approach to our national problems, he is just
a new face.

That's exactly how his supporters put it: ''We need a new face.'' One would
think that visual monotony was our most pressing national problem.

The great weapon held by John Anderson is a phenomenon known as ''nostalgia for
peace politics.'' It is apt to break out wherever people worked for Eugene
McCarthy and the Congressional ''peace candidates'' of the 60's. I can testify
to the fact that it is rampant in Connecticut and incurable, but with
understanding it is controllable.

I feel compelled to remind my Anderson-supporting friends - most of whom are
Democrats - that the money they are raising is coming increasingly from
Democratic sources, the time they are spending could be used by the Democratic
candidates on all levels, and the vote they cast may give this state to Mr.
Reagan.

Only once in a lifetime is an amateur, independent campaign justified to counter
some great aberration of public policy. The rest of the time we owe it to the
country and to our children to enter the gritty reality of the two-party system.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
Stephen Minot, formerly a professor at Trinity College and a member of the
Simsbury Democratic Town Committee, is now a novelist and freelance writer
living in Simsbury.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 20, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MOVES TO LIMIT ENFORCEMENT ALARM CIVIL RIGHTS OFFICIALS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1070 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 19


Civil rights officials from around the country, meeting here last week,
expressed alarm at what they see as growing public hostility to vigorous
enforcement of civil rights laws.

The United States Commission on Civil Rights, which sponsored the conference,
charged that eight restrictive amendments attached to money bills pending in
Congress would virtually cripple civil rights enforcement by the Federal
Government. The bipartisan, six-member commission deplored what they called
''this back-door method.''

''Nobody would introduce a bill to repeal the Civil Rights Act of 1964,'' said
Arthur S. Flemming, the 75-year-old chairman of the commission, which has no
enforcement authority but regards itself as the ''conscience of the country.''
He continued, ''The strategy now is to put riders on appropriation bills which,
when added together, can lead to virtual repeal of the Civil Rights Act.''

Flemming Lists Amendments

Mr. Flemming said that the amendments, already approved in the House, would
prevent the Education and Justice Departments from doing anything to require
school busing; prevent Federal spending on programs that use numerical goals for
hiring women and minorities; restrict spending for bilingual education;
frustrate enforcement of rules guaranteeing women equal opportunity in school
sports, and prevent the Internal Revenue Service from revoking the tax-exempt
status of private schools that discriminate against minorities.

Mr. Flemming said that ''the device of an appropriation rider is a very
insidious way of trying to effect a change in policy'' because there are usually
no committee hearings and little floor debate.  Those who use the tactic know
that Congress does not want to jeopardize the funds for an entire agency by
extended debate on controversial amendments, he added.

Liberals have also used the device, as a restraint on Presidential power in
conducting the Vietnam War, for example.  Civil rights and civil liberties
groups say they now find themselves on the defensive, fighting just to save the
ground they have won. Accordingly, the mood of the officials meeting here this
week was one of pessimism bordering on despair.

Edward E. Elson, chairman of the commission's advisory panel in Georgia, said
that ''the mood of people toward civil rights now is: 'Enough!' ''

Role of Advisory Panels

The advisory panels are appointed by the Civil Rights Commission and create a
Federal presence in every state, monitoring events that might jeopardize civil
rights.

The vice chairman of the panel in New York State, Antonio M.  Stevens-Arroyo,
professor of Puerto Rican Studies at Brooklyn College, took a similarly
pessimistic view. ''We are seen as the enemy,'' he said. ''We stand for
compliance with Federal regulations. We are the ones talking about law
enforcement. We are not saying there is a conspiracy, we haven't even used the
term New Right, but there definitely has been regression.''

The local officials who met last week with the Civil Rights Commission, though
generally suporters of President Carter, said that the election of Ronald Reagan
might do much to reinvigorate the civil rights movement by highlighting the
activities of such New Right groups as the Moral Majority, the lobbying and
political action group.

The Rev. William W. Finlator, chairman of the commission's advisory panel in
North Carolina, favors Mr. Carter but said that the election of his Republican
opponent ''would tend to unify the civil rights movement, which is now in
disarray, because we would watch Reagan more closely than we have watched
Carter.''

Reasons for 'Regression'

Civil rights advocates, groping for a way to recover the offensive, suggested
three reasons for the ''regression.'' First, they said, today's civil rights
problems have become more complex and the struggle less dramatic than in the
1960's, when Gov.  George C. Wallace of Alabama stood in the schoolhouse door to
oppose integration.

Second, they said, at a time of high inflation and unemployment, when people
feel insecure about their jobs and foreign affairs, Americans feel less generous
toward minorities.

Finally, according to the civil rights leaders, the restrictive amendments
advancing through Congress reflect the general determination of many legislators
to check the power of bureaucracies and to stop all types of what they see as
overregulation by Government. Congress's more and more frequent use of the
''legislative veto'' to block rules promulgated by executive agencies reflects
the same trend, the rights advocates contend.

The desire to limit what is seen as improper use of governmental power is the
motive most frequently given by the sponsors of the disputed legislation.

For example, Representative Ronald M. Mottl, Democrat of Ohio, who has
repeatedly proposed a constitutional amendment to prohibit courtordered school
busing to achieve racial balance, said in an interview that ''the time has come
for Congress to reassert its authority over bureaucrats who would set a public
policy of social engineering.''

Representative John M. Ashbrook, Republican of Ohio, said that his amendment to
limit spending on bilingual education was ''intended to put a stop to one of the
most outrageous and ill-considered power grabs ever attempted by Federal
education officials.''

'A Meanness of Spirit'

And Representative Steven D. Symms, Republican of Idaho, said that the Internal
Revenue Service, in its policy toward private schools, was trying to ''legislate
a decision which should be decided by the judicial or legislative branch.''

The American Civil Liberties Union, in a report released yesterday, found ''a
meanness of spirit in the 96th Congress on matters of human rights.'' The civil
liberties group, like many lobbies, rates members of Congress according to how
often they agree with its positions.

''The sad truth is that members of Congress who got low ratings from us are very
likely to win,'' said John H.F. Shattuck, director of the group's Washington
office.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Laos Reports Uncovering A Plot Against Regime

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 134 words

DATELINE: VIENTIANE, Laos, Oct. 20


A senior Laotian official said today that the pro-Vietnamese Communist regime
here had uncovered an anti-Government plot by alleged Chinese sympathizers.

The official, Sone Khamvanevongsa, the Deputy Information Minister, said that
arrests of alleged conspirators began Oct. 9. He said he did not know how many
people had been detained.

Official sources said that about 500 people had been held, including Government
officials, army officers, students and returned officials of the rightest regime
overthrown by the Communist Pathet Lao movement nearly five years ago.

Laos last year clearly took Vietnam's side in Hanoi's dispute with China over a
Vietnamese-led invasion of Cambodia that overthrew the pro-Chinese regime of
Prime Minister Pol Pot there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Laos Reports Uncovering A Plot Against Regime

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 134 words

DATELINE: VIENTIANE, Laos, Oct. 20


A senior Laotian official said today that the pro-Vietnamese Communist regime
here had uncovered an anti-Government plot by alleged Chinese sympathizers.

The official, Sone Khamvanevongsa, the Deputy Information Minister, said that
arrests of alleged conspirators began Oct. 9. He said he did not know how many
people had been detained.

Official sources said that about 500 people had been held, including Government
officials, army officers, students and returned officials of the rightest regime
overthrown by the Communist Pathet Lao movement nearly five years ago.

Laos last year clearly took Vietnam's side in Hanoi's dispute with China over a
Vietnamese-led invasion of Cambodia that overthrew the pro-Chinese regime of
Prime Minister Pol Pot there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
California Man Is Sought In Threat to Nevada Casino

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 217 words

DATELINE: STATELINE, Nev., Oct. 20


The authorities sought a California man for questioning today in a reported
attempt to extort $10 million from a Lake Tahoe casino by threatening to poison
its water supply with pesticides.

The extortionist said the water at Caesar's Tahoe Casino would be poisoned

National news appears on pages A14-17; political news

on pages B6-11.
with the deadly pesticide 2-4-D, a component of Agent Orange, a defoliant used
in the Vietnam War, unless the cash is paid by Nov. 3.

Notes demanding the cash from Caesar's Tahoe were found late yesterday at that
casino and at the Sahara Tahoe, each less than 100 yards from Harvey's Wagon
Wheel casino, which was rocked Aug. 27 by an extortionist's bomb.

Sheriff's officers said they were seeking Harry Leach, 32 years old, of San
Jose. Mr. Leach, a Vietnam War veteran, was arrested in San Jose last year for
allegedly poisoning a pond of fish with a herbicide similar to Agent Orange. A
similar substance was also dropped in a swimming pool at a large San Jose
apartment complex where he lived.

Mr. Leach was acquitted of the fish-poisoning charge, but official sources said
the notes found yesterday at the casinos made reference to the San Jose
incidents.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CARTER'S FOREIGN POLICY MIXTURE

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 286 words


To the Editor:

Prof. W. Scott Thompson claims to have predicted in 1975-76 that the Soviets
would invade Afghanistan, drive a wedge between us and our European allies and
commit client aggression around the globe. He sees all this as stemming from the
Carter Administration's ''weakening'' of the U.S. military posture. (''What
Carter Has Done to the U.S. Defense Posture,'' letter Oct. 10.)

I wonder if he also predicted the development of a U.S.-Egyptian alliance and
the end to armed hostility between Egypt and Israel, or the growing movement of
China toward the West, or the transition of Zimbabwe-Rhodesia to pro-Western
majority rule, or the conclusion of a SALT II which in the judgment of our
military leaders is strongly favorable to our side.

I also wonder if he predicted the accelerating disintegration of the Soviet
bloc, with one satellite re-fusing to participate in joint military maneuvers
and another establishing independent labor unions, with the Soviet Union
standing by and doing nothing.

Now, apparently, he would like to see a Reagan administration restore U.S.
military supremacy - like in the good old days when Eastern Europe fell behind
the Iron Curtain, China went Communist and we began our glorious adventure in
Vietnam.

National security requires military strength. Carter has given us that, and
would continue to do it. Reagan probably would too, although with more dogma and
less efficiency. But national security also requires a foreign policy mixture of
firmness and restraint.

Carter, with all his defects, has demonstrated that he can give us that. Reagan,
with all his public statements, has demonstrated that he cannot.
ROBERT SHERMAN, Bethesda, Md., Oct. 13, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN AND CARTER ATTACK EACH OTHER OVER THE HOSTAGES

BYLINE: By TERENCE SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words

DATELINE: ORLANDO, Fla., Oct. 21


President Carter today accused Ronald Reagan of making a ''political football''
of the continued detention of American hostages in Iran and said he regretted
that his Republican challenger had ''broken his pledge'' not to inject the issue
into the campaign.

''The fate of the hostages is too important to the hostages, their families and
to our country to make it a political football,'' the President told reporters
on arrival here on the second stop of a twoday campaign swing through the South.

Hours earlier, while campaigning in Kentucky and Illinois, Mr.  Reagan described
the continuing hostage crisis as

Teheran radio says Iran will not negotiate the release of American hostages with
the United States. Page A25.
''a humiliation and a disgrace for this country,'' and criticized the
President's handling of it. Obviously primed to respond to the charge, Mr.
Carter departed from usual practice and stepped up to a bank of microphones and
cameras waiting for him on the runway when Air Force One set down here.

'He Has Broken His Pledge'

''On Sept. 13, Governor Reagan pledged to the American people that he would not
inject the negotiation for the hostages into the political campaign,'' the
President said. ''I regret that he has broken his pledge, but I am not going to
depart from the past commitment that we have made to continue to do everything
we could to preserve the lives and safety of the hostages.''

Vice President Mondale sounded a similar theme today as he campaigned in the
Middle West. He said in Joliet, Ill., that if Mr.  Reagan had a plan to obtain
release of the hostages, he should disclose it immediately and not exploit the
issue for political gain.

''If Mr. Reagan has an idea that he thinks can help, he should tell us at this
moment what it is,'' the Vice President said. ''This Administration has done
everything it can.''

Wary of 'Secret Plans'

Later in the day, in Kalamazoo, Mich., Mr. Mondale said voters were wary of
''secret plans'' because they had heard such proposals before. Referring to the
plan that Richard M. Nixon offered to end the Vietnam War when he was running
for President in 1968, Mr.  Mondale said, ''It turns out his plan was four more
years of war.''

Mr. Carter renewed his attack on Mr. Reagan earlier today, calling him a
prisoner of his own 3-by-5 cards and teleprompter. The President also repeated
his previous criticisms of evangelical groups supporting Mr. Reagan and called
for ''the rooting out of religious discrimination, which we now see raising its
ugly head on the horizons in this country.''

Mr. Carter urged Florida Democrats to make ''an extra sacrificial commitment''
to defeat Mr. Reagan. Recalling the election of 1968 when, he said, ''Democrats
put Richard Nixon in the White House,'' Mr. Carter warned that ''there is a
parallel this year.'' He conceded that public opinion polls and his own campaign
staff's analysis indicated that the drive for Florida's 17 electoral votes ''is
close, really close.''

Mr. Carter's gibes about his rival's speaking style came at the start of a
''town meeting'' at Edison High School in Miami. He acknowledged that Mr. Reagan
was a better public speaker than he, but said that that was not enough.

'Can't Read From a Teleprompter'

''When you're sitting across the negotiating table with President Brezhnev
trying to guarantee the future of our nation and the peace of the world,'' he
said in an opening statement to an audience of 1,200 people in the school
gymnasium, ''you can't rely on 3-by-5 cards and you can't read from a
teleprompter.''

At town meetings and news conferences, Mr. Carter said, ''I'm prepared to meet
those issues, think on my feet, make proper responses. That hasn't been the case
in the other camp.''

Fielding questions from the predominantly white audience, Mr.  Carter repeatedly
defended his Administration's handling of the influx of Cuban refugees to
Florida and other states earlier this year. When this drew some boos, Mr. Carter
stared at one heckler, a young white man in the bleachers, and said with heavy
sarcasm: ''I presume your families didn't immigrate to this country. You must be
a native American Indian. The rest of us have all come here later.'' This
brought a round of cheers and applause.

The long-distance exchange with Mr. Reagan over the hostage issue was the first
time in months that the Iranian crisis has been grist for public charge and
countercharge in the campaign. Senator Edward M. Kennedy raised the issue in the
primaries but it backfired on him, and Mr. Reagan has been guarded in his
comments about it ever since.

Reagan Criticism Welcomed

But Mr. Carter's political aides have been expecting it to come up with the
approach of Nov. 4, which is both Election Day and the first anniversary of the
takeover of the United States Embassy in Teheran. They welcomed the criticism
today because they said they were convinced that it would ultimately work in Mr.
Carter's favor.

''Unless Reagan can propose a solution we've overlooked,'' one Carter aide said,
''the public is going to back the President. It's one of those issues that you
can only win by taking the high road.''

Mr. Carter's campaign swing is scheduled to carry him from Florida and Louisiana
to Texas - all crucial states in his drive to retain his political grip on his
native South. Public opinion polls show Mr. Reagan leading in Florida and Texas
and roughly even with Mr. Carter in Louisiana.

But Representative Claude Pepper, the 80-year-old Democrat who represents the
Miami area and who campaigned alongside Mr. Carter here today, said he believes
that the President was gaining ground and could carry Florida.

''If we can get the black voters to come out and the Jewish voters in Dade
County to come out - despite their discomfiture over his Middle East policy - we
can win it,'' Mr. Pepper said. ''Floridians still have a neighborly feeling
about Jimmy Carter.''

In New Orleans, where he arrived this evening and was scheduled to spend the
night, Mr. Carter encountered the first substantial crowd of pro-Reagan
demonstrators of the day. About a hundred people in a crowd of several thousand
gathered in Jackson Square for a Carter rally, waved Republican posters and
chanted, ''We want Reagan!''

Despite a reported threatening telephone call received by a local television
station, the President climbed onto the roof of his limousine and waved to the
crowd in the square. Secret Service agents became visibly nervous when the
floodlights suddenly went out while Mr. Carter was speaking, but an electrician
discovered that it was caused by a faulty fuse and the power was quickly
restored.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

3 Soviet Naval Vessels Reported To Be Heading South Off Japan

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 82 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Oct. 21


Three Soviet naval ships, including a 2,850-ton missile destroyer and a
6,800-ton submarine tender, were moving south in the Sea of Japan off Tsushima
Island today, the Japanese Navy said.

Earlier, Japanese planes spotted a 4,500-ton floating dock of the Soviet Pacific
fleet in the East China Sea. The dock was heading south, navy officials said.
They speculated that the four Soviet ships were heading toward Vietnam from
Vladivostok.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 22, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Laos Arrests 500 as Conspirators;
500 in Laotian Regime Arrested as Conspirators

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 177 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 21


The pro-Vietnamese Government of Laos has arrested about 500 civil servants and
Lao People's Revolutionary Party members in an apparent purge of Chinese-leaning
officials, Western diplomats said today.

The diplomats said they were skeptical of Laotian explanations that they had
uncovered a plot by ''Chinese sympathizers'' to overthrow the Communist regime
of Prime Minister Kaysone Phomvihan.

A Ministry of Information official reached by telephone in Vientiane denied any
plot to stage a coup but confirmed that ''a group tried to form against the
Government and we tried to stop them.''

One diplomat said: ''This crackdown on people with any Chinese association has
been going on for more than a year -since China attacked Vietnam's northern
provinces in retaliation for the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia. But what we
have now seems to be a real roundup of persons suspected of harboring any ideas
of opposition.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

The Candidates

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 90 words


President Carter, in Texas and Arkansas, ridiculed Ronald Reagan's ''secret
plans'' to solve the hostage crisis, likening them to Richard Nixon's plan on
Vietnam. Page B12.

Ronald Reagan, in Louisiana and Mississippi, repeated his pledge to increase
military spending and termed a trade quarantine a ''viable option'' in dealing
with Moscow. Page B12.

John B. Anderson told a Washington audience the Carter Adminstration had failed
to take ''elementary precautions'' that might have thwarted the seizure of
hostages in Iran. Page B13.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GISCARD IS HOME AFTER POLITE CHINA TRIP

BYLINE: By RICHARD EDER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 605 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Oct. 22


President Valery Giscard d'Estaing returned today from a visit to China that,
though friendly, was marked by differences of opinion on several issues.

The four-day official visit - two more days were spent on vacation in Tibet -was
the first by a French head of state to China since the late Georges Pompidou's
visit in 1973, which was marked by considerable warmth. Relations have cooled
since, principally because of China's hostility toward the Soviet Union.

France's emphasis on detente and insistence on independence from the military
arrangements of the NATO alliance are regarded by the Chinese as ill-advised and
dangerous.

There were occasional evidences of these divergences during the visit, although
both sides stressed as much as possible the areas on which they agreed. There
was a pointed reference by Deng Xiaoping, a deputy chairman of the Communist
Party who is considered the most powerful man in China, to the fact that the
visit had not come sooner. It has been discussed for several years, and the
Chinese apparently believe that it was held up by a French desire not to offend
the Russians.

Different Views of Talks

There was no communique at the end of the visit. Mr. Giscard d'Estaing told
reporters that the two main political themes of the talks were the need for a
multipolar rather than a bipolar world and the importance of having a strong and
independent Europe that is able to deal with the United States on an equal
footing.

Declarations by the Chinese did not mention these points, speaking more vaguely
of the ''similarity and convergence'' of views of world problems.

Several areas of agreement were laid out during Mr. Giscard d'Estaing's visit,
in which he met with Mr. Deng, Hua Guofeng, the party chairman, and Prime
Minister Zhao Ziyang. He also attended several banquets and saw a performance of
the ballet ''Sylvia'' by Delibes in which, the French press noted, the dancers'
costumes were unusually revealing for China.

On Cambodia, there has been disagreement between the French and Chinese, with
France condemning both the current regime, which was imposed by Vietnam, and the
regime of Pol Pot, which Hanoi ousted, while China backs the Pol Pot forces.
Understanding seems to have increased because there was a joint mention of the
possibility of including Prince Sihanouk, who lives in Peking, in a settlement.

Nuclear Reactor Sale Approved

Both countries agreed on the Middle East and in remaining neutral in the
fighting between Iraq and Iran. Only the French, however, explicitly mentioned
the need to keep the Persian Gulf open.

The most conspicuous agreement was the announcement that China would buy an
1,800-megawatt nuclear power plant from France. The cost is estimated at $1.5
billion to $1.75 billion. If the deal is completed - credit terms remain to be
worked out - it will considerably help France's export position with China.
France ranks seventh among China's trading partners.

No other trade deals were announced, although others were presumably discussed.
Mr. Giscard d'Estaing did not discuss arms sales, according to official French
sources, but according to press reports his aides may have done so.

China has wanted to buy French antitank missiles and has expressed interest in
French warplanes. The French, aware of Soviet sensitivities, have shown less
energy in pursuing these signs than they have displayed elsewhere.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. RENEWS CALL FOR HANOITO PULL OUT OF CAMBODIA

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 22


The General Assembly renewed its demand today for the withdrawal of Vietnamese
troops from Cambodia and called on the Cambodian people to decide their own
political future through elections supervised by the United Nations.

The resolution was approved 97 to 23 with 22 abstentions.  The outcome was
considered by diplomats here to be a defeat for the Soviet Union and Vietnam.
Moscow and Hanoi insist that the Heng Samrin Government, which Vietnamese troops
installed in Phnom Penh last year, can neither be negotiated nor reversed.

In a similar vote last week a bid to eject the ousted Pol Pot group from
Cambodia's Assembly seat was defeated by a 2-to-1 margin.

Odd Alliance on Resolution

Again today, an odd alliance of conservative Southeast Asian nations, third
world countries, the United States and China supported the resolution.

But whether the ballot here will affect the situation in Cambodia is questioned
by many diplomats. Some Asian nations, notably China, believe that if Pol Pot's
guerrillas, still struggling in northwest Cambodia, can keep fighting Vietnam's
200,000 troops, Hanoi will be driven to the solution called for in today's
resolution.

The resolution calls for an international conference bringing together the
groups involved in the conflict. Presumably this would include representatives
from the Heng Samrin and Pol Pot forces, Vietnam, China, Thailand, Singapore,
the United States and the Soviet Union.

The conference would set a deadline for the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops;
insure that no outside forces would interfere in Cambodia's internal affairs;
hold elections for a new government under the auspices of the United Nations,
and, a critical point for Vietnam and Thailand, insure that the new Cambodia
would not threaten its neighbors.

Singapore Delegate Presents Case

The burden of the argument for the resolution was carried by T.T.B. Koh of
Singapore. He conceded that Vietnam had a legitimate fear of China but contended
that relations between the two nations were good until Hanoi moved in on
Cambodia. It was the overthrow of the Pol Pot regime and the imposition of ''a
puppet regime,'' Mr. Koh asserted, that led to Peking's threat to Hanoi.

Mr. Koh said the current state of affairs was not irreversible ''because the
world will not accept the fait accompli which Vietnam has perpetrated by
military force.'' Vietnam is isolated and its economy undermined by the war, he
said.

For Vietnam, Ha Van Lau charged that the root of the problem was China's
aggressive designs on his country. He said Thailand was collaborating with
Peking by giving aid to Pol Pot's forces. China, he said, seeks to ''undermine
peace and stability in Southeast Asia to pursue its expansionist policy in that
region.''

Vietnam Defends Situation

Now, Mr. Lau said, ''the situation in Cambodia has stabilized'' and the
resolution would upset this stability. It could be maintained if Thailand would
agree to a demilitarized zone on the Thai-Cambodian border.

The United States and the Soviet Union played the low-key roles in the debate
that they have assumed for the two years the Cambodian issue has been before the
Assembly. William J. vanden Heuvel, the deputy American delegate, warned that
the ''buildup of Vietnamese troops'' near the Thai border ''increases the risk
of further violence and raises serious questions about Vietnam's intentions.''

The Soviet delegate, Oleg A. Troyanovsky, argued that the Heng Samrin forces are
''in effective control of the situation throughout the country.'' If Thailand
and Vietnam could agree to bring peace to the Thai-Cambodian border, Vietnam
would talk about pulling back some of its troops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EDITORIAL NOTEBOOK;
THE UNKNOWEN LIPPMANN

BYLINE: By Karl E. Meyer

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 723 words


It is now 13 years since Walter Lippmann wrote his final ''Today and Tomorrow''
column, ending a run of more than three decades. To anyone who has since come of
age, Lippmann's awesome reputation may well be something of a mystery - a
mystery scarcely resolved by the many reviews of Ronald Steel's absorbing new
biography, ''Walter Lippmann and the American Century.''

Not that the reviews were unfavorable; most were not. But their focus has been
on its disclosure of a Lippmann unknown to most of his readers. Behind the mask
of his assured style was a complex and not always admirable man. Auden was
right: ''Private faces in public places/ Are wiser and nicer/ Than public faces
in private places.''

It was the brilliance of Lippmann's work - his public face - that made him a
legend for half a century. Yet the private self has been recalled to life, and
his writing forgotten. As he once said of his trade, a political writer is
''just a puzzled man making notes ...  drawing sketches in the sand which the
sea will wash away.'' What has been lost is the memory of how good those
sketches were.

Lippmann could err, grievously, on day-to-day politics. But he was almost
clairvoyant about the hidden tides. In 1915, for example, the 26-year-old
Lippmann challenged the belief that only Europe and America really mattered on
the global stage.

Boldly, he anticipated crises like the present one in the Persian Gulf:

What's Forgotten Now Is His Writing, His Public Face

''The chief, the overwhelming problem of diplomacy seems to be the weak state -
the Balkans, the African sultanates, Turkey, China, and Latin America, with the
possible exception of Argentina, Chile, and Brazil. These states are 'weak'
because they are industrially backward and at present politically incompetent.
They are rich in resources and cheap labor, poor in capital, poor in political
experience, poor in the power of defense. The government of these states is the
supreme problem of diplomacy.''

His remedy may seem over-simple: he argued that trade and flag should be kept
apart, and that foreign investment in weak states should be channeled through
international commissions established for the purpose. But his diagnosis was
sound, and in the same early book, ''The Stakes of Diplomacy,'' he peels again
and again through the seemingly obvious to reveal the unexpected.

Consider his analysis of open diplomacy, a subject that was to preoccupy him
until his death in 1974: ''The great healing effect of publicity is that by
revealing men's motives it civilizes them. If people have to declare publicly
what they want and why they want it, they cannot be altogether ruthless.  It
takes more courage than most men have to be openly selfish and regardless of the
judgments of their fellows. A special interest openly avowed is no terror to
democracy. It is neutralized by publicity.''

And he continues: ''The great virtue of democracy - in fact its supreme virtue -
is that it supplies a method for dragging the realities into light, of summoning
our rulers to declare themselves and submit to judgment.''

The virtues he claimed for democracy distinguished his work. In the late 1960's
he broke with the Johnson Administration over its failure to avow and define
realistic terms for ending the Vietnam War. It was his final battle, vainly and
gallantly fought by an agnostic who deplored the use of noble words to conceal
poverty of thought.

Lippmann's journalism was distinctive; his frailties were not. He deserves to be
judged in the same spirit that prompted this opening sentence in his first book,
''A Preface to Politics,'' in 1913:

''Politics does not exist for the sake of demonstrating the superior
righteousness of anybody. It is not a competition in deportment. In fact, before
you can begin to think about politics at all you have to abandon the notion that
there is a war between good men and bad men. That is one of the great American
superstitions.'' KARL E. MEYER

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

A STORY OF TWO BELGRADES;
by Leonard R. Sussman

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 882 words


I have just visited two Belgrades -the unreal, where Unesco delegates from 153
nations, mostly authoritarian, have been debating the ''democratization'' of
information; the real, the closely watched home of the writer Milovan Djilas.

Mr. Djilas, who had fought beside Tito and who had served as Vice President, was
imprisoned for nine years after having criticized Communist tyranny. He is still
attacked by state journalists and made a pariah whom few but informers will
visit. He is, he says, ''a nonperson.''

The personages at the other Belgrade spoke endlessly of governments'
''balancing'' the world's news flow, and freeing developing countries from
Western news ''monopolies'' that serve the military-industrial complex.

After pleading for press freedom at the general conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, where the third world and its
Communist supporters were calling for a ''new world information order,'' I
walked to Mr. Djilas's apartment. The city's grayness contrasted with the
colorful conference center, its acres of comfortable discussion space and
advanced systems for processing words. That talk factory transformed the good
words (freedom, democracy, free flow of information) into their opposites
(guided freedom, responsive democracy, balanced flow). In Mr. Djilas's apartment
one sees the consequence: Perversion of the language of liberty leads to the
loss of physical freedom.

At the conference, the Yugoslav delegate said that news ''must be put to the
service of men and women.'' State intervention thus is needed, the Algerian
elborated, but denied that it meant a loss of freedom. Only the state by
affecting the ''intent and nature'' of information can balance news reports,
declared the East German, while the Tanzanian said his country's press mobilized
the people for economic development. Vietnam, restricting ''useless and
harmful'' information, expects journalists to protect the ''sovereign rights''
of the countries. Cuba called the ''First Amendment argument'' used by the
United States press ''arrogant nonsense.''

Mr. Djilas bears witness to such distortions. He is oppressed, though he would
not replace the Communist structure of his country forcibly; rather, he wants
Yugoslavia's to evolve into a freer society. He has written about the foibles
and failures of Stalin and Tito, but his words are banned inside Yugoslavia, his
books published abroad are confiscated at the border.

Until dissent from official views is printed and spoken, there can be no free
flow of ideas in Yugoslavia. For such speech, more than 200 people were jailed
last year, Mr. Djilas says. Ninety percent of the 600 political prisoners are
punished for ''verbal crimes.'' Speaking to two or three persons can lead to a
12-year term; often one listener turns informer. Thus, few risk speaking to Mr.
Djilas.

Years ago, he was propaganda minister. ''I sought an open society, personal
freedom,'' and pluralism. He opposed censorship and advocated broader coverage
of foreign news. The press still reports Hollywood gossip but only Western
political views that do not undercut a Yugoslav position. Three foreign
correspondents were recently detained and expelled. Like other authoritarian
governments, Yugoslavia's buys Western press reports, selects news deemed
suitable for the public, and passes the rest only to the elite. The people
receive mainly ''good'' news about politically friendly states and ''bad'' news
about the unfriendly. ''We must wait until an Idi Amin goes before we learn the
truth,'' says Mr. Djilas.

By November, Unesco will probably create a program to transfer communications
technology to developing countries. Certainly the democratic West should help
politically free third-world nations and those moving toward broader freedoms.
They need better domestic communications and improved coverage of development
news for audiences everywhere. Yet, the Soviet delegate said, ''technology is
not neutral - it always brings a certain ideology.'' Clearly, the Soviet Union
so conceives its technology transfers. A new program should not move ideology
with technology.

The depersonalization of a Djilas could occur in many countries that plead for
better communications. Their governments guide, harass, censor, jail, expel, and
occasionally kill journalists.

Stefania Djilas, his wife, showed me a wall displaying precious reminders: a
memorial to Mr. Djilas's family killed in World War II, some photos, a plaque
presented to him in New York in 1968 that read: ''Heroic leader and rebel - his
reason and conscience turned him against tyranny.'' In these 12 years, he has
earned the award many times over. He could easily have crossed the river into
that other Belgrade and mouthed the ''democratic'' litany of the authoritarian
elites.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Leonard R. Sussman is executive director of Freedom House, which monitors
political rights and civil liberties around the world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 23, 1980

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 948 words


Persian Gulf Conflict
New signals on the American hostages were sent by Iranian leaders indicating
that they were moving closer to a decision on what conditions to set for the
release of the captives. Administration officials said they were seeking to
appear as approachable as possible, but they cautioned that they were still
unable to establish a channel for direct talks and could not be sure how long
the crisis might be prolonged by internal feuding in Iran. (Page A1, Column 6.)
A U.S. plan to halt the fighting between Iran and Iraq was presented at a closed
meeting of the United Nations Security Council, American officials said. The
plan calls for the creation of a negotiating forum to settle the grievances of
both sides. Delegates reacted to the proposal with a mixture of interest and
skepticism. (A14:1-2.)
Iraq reported new militay advances, saying that its forces had severed the oil
province of Khuzistan from the rest of Iran. Baghdad also said that its planes
had set afire oil depots northeast of the provincial capital of Ahwaz and that
its troops had advanced to within three miles of the city. (A1:6.)
International
A U.S.-China grain accord was signed, committing Peking to buy from six million
to eight million metric tons of American wheat and corn annually for the next
four years. Agriculture Secretary Bob Bergland said the amounts, about the same
as China is buying this year, would have no immediate effect on American bread
prices. (A1:1-2.)
A partial victory for open information was cited by the Western countries. After
nearly five weeks of debate at a conference in Belgrade, the 154 member nations
of Unesco agreed to postpone plans to restructure world communications that were
opposed by the West on the ground that they would threaten freedom of the press.
(A1:1.)
The Times of London may be closed. The owners of the newspaper and The Sunday
Times, citing years of costly labor problems, announced that the two were being
offered for sale and said that if they were not sold by next March they would
shut down. The 195-year-old paper has been a symbol of journalistic excellence.
(A3:1-3.)
The dispute over Canada's constitution intensified. Prime Minister Pierre
Elliott Trudeau began a campaign to win over public opinion against efforts by
at least six of the 10 provinces to block his plan to obtain a new charter fully
independent of Britain. (A10:3-4.)
A Canadian forced Moscow to pay a bill for a $26,000 printing job he did in 1967
for the Soviet Embassy in Ottawa. The persistent businessman battled Canadian
bureaucrats and filed a series of legal appeals over 13 years, finally gaining
custody of a $13 million Soviet freighter in Toronto and prompting the Soviet
Union to pay him the debt - plus $10,000 in interest. (A1:2-4.)
National
A very close Presidential election was projected in a new national poll by The
New York Times and CBS News. It showed that President Carter had advanced to an
essentially even position with Ronald Reagan in the last month by gains among
independents and wavering Democrats. The poll showed the President with 39
percent of the probable votes to 38 percent for Mr. Reagan, 9 percent for John
B.  Anderson and 13 percent undecided. The survey also found the probable
electorate favoring Democrats in Congressional races by 54-to-46 percent,
similar to the 1978 elections. (A1:4-5.)
The President derided Mr. Reagan for having said he had ''some ideas'' for
winning the release of the American hostages, but that they should not be
discussed in public. At a raucous rally in Waco, Tex., Mr. Carter likened Mr.
Reagan's ''secret plan'' to Richard M.  Nixon's publicized ''secret plan'' to
win the Vietnam War that became an issue in the 1968 campaign. (B12:1-2.)
Edward Kennedy buoyed the campaign for President Carter in three Texas cities.
In San Antonio the Senator was cheered wildly by perhaps 2,000 Mexican-Americans
as he dedicated a high school named for his brother - 17 years after President
Kennedy, the day before he was slain, made a promise there to dedicate it
himself. (B12:1-4.)
Mr. Reagan pressed military spending, pledging again to increase it, and
asserted that a total trade embargo was ''a very viable option'' in dealing with
Moscow. His remarks reflected the conflict between his national and regional
strategies as he campaigned in Florida, Mississippi and Louisiana, where his
advisers believe he can defeat the President. (B12:1-3.)
John Anderson discussed the hostages. The independent Presidential candidate
suggested that the Carter Administration ''failed to take the elementary
precautions that might have thwarted and frustrated'' the seizure of the 52
Americans in Iran. (B13:3-6.)
Acquittals in alleged corruption were handed up by a jury in Houston. Billy
Clayton, the Speaker of the Texas House, and two lawyers from Austin were found
not guilty of all charges arising from the F.B.I.'s undercover investigation of
an alleged scheme to buy the Speaker's influence. (A16:1.)
Metropolitan
A gain for New York on the census was achieved. A Federal judge made a ruling
that officials said virtually guaranteed the state and city a victory in their
suit seeking a revision to make up for an alleged undercount of up to 800,000
city residents and 500,000 other New Yorkers. The judge in effect required the
Census Bureau to concede the key claims made by New York. (A1:3.)

Business Digest, Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NUCLEAR POWER FOES GO ON BUT THE RANKS ARE THINNER

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1238 words

DATELINE: SMITHTOWN, L.I.


Whenever Philip Leven hears about an antinuclear demonstration, he goes to it.
Afterward, he says, he always finds that he has been discharged from whatever
job he left behind.

''It's hard to remember how many jobs I've had,'' the 25-year-old Mr. Leven said
recently. ''I've been to so many demonstrations.'' He say he is still
enthusiastic about the antinuclear cause although the price is high.  While
protesters may have risked jobs, and spent their savings on travel expenses or
bail, none of the demonstrations has stopped the development of a single nuclear
power plant. And last month, a referendum on the closing of a nuclear power
plant in Maine failed by a margin of more than 70,000 votes.

In the 18 months since the accident at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania, the
antinuclear movement appears to have thinned out in the New York City
metropolitan area as well as around the nation, according to activists. Crowds
at demonstrations have been smaller than last year.

Reasons Offered for Decline

Some activists say this is because there has been nothing like Three Mile Island
this year, no event to bolster the ranks of demonstrators.  But other activists
say the antinuclear movement is diffuse to the point of disorganization and
lacks both central leadership and a consensus on tactics for the future.

The protesters include middle-aged middle-income residents from Westchester
County concerned about the safety of Con Edison's nuclear generators at Indian
Point and students from the State University at Stony Brook who see the nuclear
plant being built at Shoreham by the Long Island Lighting Company as a threat to
the environment.

Still others are musicians and postal clerks from Manhattan who travel to
nuclear power stations in the suburbs because they object strongly to the idea
that nuclear wastes might someday be trucked through the region.

A Belief They Can Be Mobilized

''Those who've dropped away haven't lost sight of the issue,'' said Connie
Hogarth, the director of WESPAC, (Westchester People's Action Coalition) an
antinuclear group in Westchester County. ''They know about nuclear power and if
necessary, I think they could be mobilized. Those of us who are hard-core are in
for the long fight.  Much of it is in legal and rather traditional fashion of
speaking to school groups and Rotaries.''

But if WESPAC is firm in its agenda of lobbying and demonstrating, other groups
are not. Some members of the Shad Alliance, a loosely organized group whose name
stands for Sound-Hudson Against Atomic Development, are concerned that its
activities are increasingly ''dispersed and ineffective.''

Others say Shad's main shortcoming is that it is protest-oriented, and does not
adequately promote alternatives to nuclear power, such as solar energy. Still
others contend that the group should tackle other issues, such as racism and
sexism.

Spawned From Seabrook

The Shad Alliance and others like it were formed after the 1977 protest at the
construction site in Seabrook, N.H.  Shad and the other antinuclear groups say
they have small ''core'' memberships and keep no formal tally. They say members
belong to small local ''affinity groups'' that generally contain no more than a
dozen people. The Lafayette Street office in downtown Manhattan says the mailing
list for its newsletter contains about 4,000 names.

''The rallies are getting smaller and people feel like the cause is hopeless,''
said a Manhattan member who would identify himself only as Ken. ''One reason the
numbers are getting smaller is that people are becoming more local. People don't
come from all over the country to protest at Shoreham. I guess some of them
think they're too busy at Indian Point in Westchester or Rocky Flats in Colorado
or wherever.''

Using First Names Only

He and his colleagues in the alliance no longer use their last names around the
group's one-room office on Lafayette Street, down the hall from the War
Resisters' League and other groups that were born in the anti-Vietnam War
protests of a decade ago.

They go by first names, he said, in the belief that employees of utility
companies have infiltrated the group and have taken membership lists so that
temporary injunctions can be obtained barring those named on the lists from
taking part in demonstrations.  The protesters say that the utilities cannot
press legal actions unless they know the last names.

Lilco named 54 groups in a petition for an injunction barring members of the
groups from demonstrating at Shoreham. Judge Henry Bramwell of Federal District
Court granted the order before the demonstration late in September.

Judith Brabham, a Lilco spokesman, said the membership list had been compiled
from letters to the editors of local newspapers and other public sources. She
denied that Lilco employees had joined any antinuclear groups for the purpose of
spying on their activities.

Members Chip In on Costs

While some groups affiliated with the Shad Alliance try to finance their
activities through grants from foundations, grants have also been solicited by
the alliance as a whole. There are no dues or membership fees, and many members
chip in to cover the costs of printing fliers and leaflets.

In many ways, the demonstrators said, the antinuclear protests had their roots
in the antiwar movement and other social struggles of the 1960's.

For some antinuclear demonstrators, including a 17-year-old who said her name
was Rachel, the demonstration at Shoreham marked the first time they had been
arrested.

''My mother called the school and said I wasn't going to be there that day,''
Rachel said as she sat in the alliance office, wearing blue jeans with a peace
symbol stenciled on one leg, and ''no nukes'' on the other. ''She thought it was
nice I believed in something enough to demonstrate, but she was surprised I got
arrested. And afterward, talking to people, they said it was just a media event.
I didn't think of that.''

A Musician's Problems

John Cino, a musician who says he earns less than $100 a week, borrowed $1,500
to pay for the taping and pressing of a recording of his music. But he said his
involvement with the Shoreham protest had kept him from approving a crucial test
pressing. The production of the recording is behind schedule, he said, and he
may not be able to meet the loan payments.

And then there is Mr. Leven, who is looking for another job, his last one having
lasted three weeks. It was a $175-a-week position as an order taker for a
wholesale paper company in Manhattan. In the demonstration at Shoreham, he was
one of 156 protesters arrested, and when he was released from jail a week later,
he said, he learned that he had been discharged.

Before that, he was a busboy in Vermont, until he quit to participate in a mass
protest that failed to achieve its goal of halting the construction of a nuclear
plant in Seabrook. After that, he was a security guard on Long Island for five
weeks.

''That's about my limit,'' he said. ''It's been a busy year.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CARTER RIDICULES REAGAN OVER 'PLANS' FOR HOSTAGES

BYLINE: By TERENCE SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 692 words

DATELINE: TEXARKANA, Ark., Oct. 22


President Carter today derided the notion that Ronald Reagan had a ''secret
plan'' to solve the Iranian hostage crisis and charged that ''Republicans have a
habit of spreading a lot of horse manure around right before an election.''

''And lately, it's getting pretty deep all over this country,'' Mr. Carter said
amid the cheers and applause of several thousand Texans in Waco, at a raucus
Democratic rally at the airport, before flying here for the final stop on a
two-day campaign swing.

Wearing a pair of red, hand-tooled cowboy boots given to him this morning in
Beaufort, Tex., Mr. Carter cast off his customary, subdued campaign style and
ripped into his Republican opponent with heavy sarcasm. With the audience
cheering him on, he mocked Mr. Reagan's statement yesterday that he had ''some
ideas'' on how to win the release of the American hostages but felt they should
not be discussed in public.

Recalling Richard M. Nixon's promises in the 1968 Presidential campaign to end
the Vietnam War, Mr. Carter said he had read in the newspapers that Mr. Reagan
had a ''secret plan to get the hostages back.''

Playing to the Crowd

''Here it is 12 years later and we still don't know what Mr.  Nixon's plan
was,'' the President shouted, obviously enjoying himself. ''Now, do many of you
Texans with sound judgment, familiar with history, believe that Ronald Reagan
has a secret plan to get the hostages back?''

''No!'' shouted most of the audience, all but drowning out the boos of a group
of about 100 Reagan supporters who heckled Mr. Carter throughout his speech.

Noting that Mr. Reagan ''has done pretty well in keeping his plan secret,'' the
President launched into a listing of other ''secret plans'' he ascribed to Mr.
Reagan.

''He's got a secret plan for providing for the well-being of retired Americans
by calling four times to make Social Security voluntary.''

'Secret Plan' on Pollution

''He has a secret plan for providing good health care for senior citizens by
being against Medicare. He has another secret plan for helping working families
by being against minimum wage.''

''He has already revealed one of his secret plans for curing pollution,'' Mr.
Carter continued. ''He wants to cut down all the trees in the United States - he
said that's where the pollution comes from.''

The President also said he had seen, in a recent news account, that Mr. Nixon,
''one of the great Republican Presidents, you know,'' had been writing campaign
advisory memorandums for Mr. Reagan.

''When I saw where Ronald Reagan was getting his advice,'' Mr.  Carter said
sarcastically, ''I began to understand a few of the things he'd been saying.''

Reagan Supporters Bitter

The audience and the guests on the platform, who included Lady Bird Johnson, the
former First Lady, loved the remarks, but some Reagan supporters were bitter.

''Carter has some nerve complaining about Reagan's mud-slinging,'' said Patsy
Hamilton, a registered nurse from Waco who was perched on an oil barrel at the
edge of the crowd wearing a blue Reagan T-shirt. ''That's a case of the kettle
calling the pot black.''

The Waco rally came in the middle of a tightly scheduled day as the President
pursued Texas's 25 electoral votes. Mr. Carter, who carried the state in 1976
over President Ford, is trailing Mr. Reagan in recent polls.

Nonetheless, the President's political advisers believe the state can be won and
they have tentatively scheduled him for another visit here, Mr. Carter's fourth
since the Democratic Convention, before Election Day.

The highlight of the President's Texas campaign swing, judging from his
expression today, came in Beaumont, where Representative Jack Brooks presented
Mr. Carter with the boots. In Waco a few hours later, Mr. Carter proudly held up
one leg to display his new boots to the audience.

''I grew up on a farm and I know you need hightop boots for things besides
stomping Republicans,'' Mr. Carter said. ''As you well know, Republicans have a
habit of spreading a lot of horse manure around right before an election. And
lately, as you also know, it's getting pretty deep all over this country.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of President Carter in Texas

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FAKE HAPPY ENDINGS AND POP-SONG MANIA

BYLINE: FRANK RICHBy FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1119 words


THE new season has yet to produce a completely satisfying play, but somehow one
doesn't feel in the least bit famished. Whatever their failings, the two major
American comedies that have arrived this fall, Albert Innaurato's already
departed ''Passione'' and Steve Tesich's ''Division Street,'' both challenge the
audience to look at the world in a different, often cockeyed way. This is one of
the things that art is supposed to do, and even flawed art has more vitality
than no art at all.

Indeed, Mr. Innaurato and Mr. Tesich have gifts that the Broadway theater cannot
easily afford to lose. These playwrights' best speeches - or perhaps, in Mr.
Innaurato's case, one should say the best arias - bring life to the stage, even
when the plays that contain them are falling apart before our eyes. And it's a
kind of life few other writers are willing to show us. The people of ''Division
Street'' and ''Passione'' are, for the most part, losers, and some of them are
even grotesques.

What's more, Mr. Tesich and Mr. Innaurato write about their misfits -from
Vietnam-era political renegades to South Philadelphia's fat and ugly -without
ever condescending to either them or the audience. Rather than create moralistic
issue dramas that plead causes, these playwrights instead use iconoclastic wit
to make us accept an alien world on its own human terms.

As dramatists, Mr. Tesich and Mr. Innaurato are every bit as ungainly and sloppy
as the characters they create. There's nothing wrong with that. No one is asking
these writers to construct conventional comedies; when their people talk, we
could often listen to them go on all night.

Unfortunately, Mr. Tesich and Mr. Innaurato have yet to hit on a free-flowing
form that can contain their plays' unwieldy contents.  Instead, they go ahead
and try to impose a conventional order on their work - and, once they do, they
get into big trouble. We wouldn't be painfully aware that ''Division Street''
fails as a farce if Mr. Tesich hadn't tiresomely set up a ton of farcical
machinery early on, only to abandon it later with a noisy and extended clatter.

Act II of ''Passione'' wouldn't have fallen so flat if Mr.  Innaurato hadn't
tried to provide pat, old-fashioned resolutions to familial relationships that
are so obviously unresolvable. These writers' errors of construction also create
unwanted byproducts. Both plays are repetitive and both end with fake happy
endings. It's sad to see great material wasted in this way. If Mr. Tesich and
Mr.  Innaurato can only figure out how to create plays as effectively as they
create characters, we'll gain two major dramatists.

One expects to leave a musical humming the songs, but it's rather surprising to
carry tunes away from a play. Even so, it's been happening a lot lately. I first
focused on this phenomenon last season, when, after seeing Tennessee Williams's
''Clothes for a Summer Hotel,'' I could remember nothing about the play's
esteemed literary characters, Scott and Zelda Fitzgerald, but found it
impossible to get Duke Ellington's ''Sophisticated Lady'' out of my head. One of
the play's minor personages had sung it, for no particular reason, during a
party scene. And rather well, too, in the cafe style of Bobby Short. It was
crushing when the actor didn't follow it up with an encore of, say ''Something
to Live For.''

This season, a number of playwrights have been using old pop songs for reasons
other than filling time. The melodies turn up as jokes, as period artifacts, as
dramatic counterpoint. More oddly still, writers of markedly different
temperaments are using the same songs.

Hugh Leonard's reflective Irish comedy, ''Summer,'' and David Rimmer's 60's
high-school comedy, ''Album,'' have both offered selections from the Beatles'
''Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band.'' Glenn Miller numbers turned up in
both ''Summer'' and ''Passione.'' ''Those Were the Days, My Friends'' is played
more than once in both ''Summer'' and ''Division Street.''

There are times when such musical interludes have their legitimate uses. The
characters of ''Album,'' for instance, are certainly entitled to listen to the
rock hits of 1963 to 1967. If they did not do so, Mr. Rimmer would be ignoring
the most important cultural force in the lives of the generation he seeks to
describe. Just the same, the playwright doesn't just spin the golden oldies and
let it go at that. Instead, he gradually weaves old Dylan and McCartney-Lennon
lyrics into the dialogue, until finally they transcend their nostalgic
associations and become the hilarious linguistical currency of adolescent sexual
conflict.

In ''Summer,'' Mr. Leonard doesn't employ old songs nearly as well. When he
plays ''Sentimental Journey'' and ''Those Were the Days,'' he is simply using
their lyrics at face value: All he wants to tell us is that his middle-aged,
regretful characters are taking a sentimental journey back to their good old
days. This is dramatic shorthand, not drama itself.

In ''Division Street,'' which is also in part about lost youth, Mr. Tesich gives
''Those Were the Days'' a witty spin that saves it. The song is sung, repeatedly
and maniacally, by a one-time 60's radical (played by Joe Regalbuto) who dresses
in rags and has lost touch with reality. When he starts into a deranged chorus
of ''Those Were the Days,'' it's not nostalgia, but an ironic travesty of
nostalgia.  This guy isn't really remembering the good old days of his past;
chances are, he can't even remember what day it is in the present.

Perhaps songs, as well as happy endings, are better left to musicals like
''Annie.'' Revisiting that show a couple of weeks ago, I was struck all over
again by what a slick piece of show business it is. And I fell like a fool for
its neat climax all over again. That may be because of John Schuck, the fine
film actor (he played the deranged gang member in Robert Altman's ''Thieves Like
Us'') who is ensconced as Daddy Warbucks. When this crusty old billionaire falls
for the red-haired orphan, his passion is so consuming that we don't merely want
him to adopt Annie; we half-hope that he'll elope with her to Acapulco.

''Annie,'' of course, is the antithesis of shows like ''Division Street'' and
''Passione.'' It's built like a clock. But never underestimate the potential for
surprise in the theater, even at a musical in the fourth year of its run. The
night I saw ''Annie,'' a bizarre incident occured during the opening scene of
Act II.  Suddenly and violently, the curtain fell, smack in mid-dialogue, only
to rise again a few mysterious, unexplained seconds later. I tell you, between
our dizzy stagehands and our unruly playwrights, it's beginning to look like a
wild season.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of John Schuck and Allison Smith

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Rejects U.N.'s Call For a Cambodia Conference

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 115 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 23


Vietnam said today that an international conference on Cambodia called for by
the United Nations yesterday would achieve nothing and that its resolutions
would have no value.

Hanoi radio described the General Assembly resolution as ''an arrogant challenge
to the conscience of progressive mankind'' and said it was the work of ''U.S.
imperialists and Peking expansionists.''

The conference, to be held early next year, is aimed at gaining the withdrawal
of foreign forces from Cambodia, where Vietnam has about 200,000 troops, and the
holding of elections under United Nations supervision.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FEAR OF WAR OR WEAKNESS RESONATING IN CAMPAIGN

BYLINE: By E.J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1459 words

DATELINE: BOULDER, Colo., Oct. 23


The popular worries about war and peace in this university community in the
foothills of the Rocky Mountains do not run as high as they did during the
Vietnam War. But when Senator Gary Hart told a group of University of Colorado
students earlier this week that he rejected getting the United States into a
''war for oil,'' the response was thunderous.

''Who the hell cares who's President,'' said Linda Fenter, a Hart campaign
worker, ''as long as he doesn't get us into a war.'' In Colorado Springs, 97
miles to the south, there is also concern about war. But in Colorado Springs,
the home of the

This is the fifth of several articles examining how voters are reacting to major
issues in the 1980 Presidential campaign.
United States Air Force Academy, foreign policy questions are looked at very
differently.

'A Bumbling, Stumbling Giant'

''We lack the military capability to attack even Costa Rica,'' said State
Representative Steven Durham of Colorado Springs, an ardent supporter of Ronald
Reagan's Presidential campaign. ''We're not only perceived as a bumbling,
stumbling giant. We are a bumbling, stumbling giant.''

Fear of war, fear of weakness - these are themes that President Carter and Mr.
Reagan are offering voters trying to make up their minds in the final weeks of
the campaign. And the polls suggest that both themes resonate with an electorate
for whom military policy has become increasingly important as memories of the
Vietnam war recede, even as the electorate remains wary of a bellicose foreign
policy.

There is little doubt that Mr. Carter has scored substantially with his repeated
intimations that Mr. Reagan is not to be trusted on the question of war. In the
latest New York Times/CBS News Poll, released last night, roughly four voters in
10 said they were worried that Mr. Reagan might get the nation into a war.

Such fears motivated 34-year-old Ivy Zahn, who lives in a cabin in Ward, Colo.,
a hamlet 9,000 feet up in the Rockies, to register to vote for the first time.

Fears of 'Blazing Six-Guns'

''Reagan scares me,'' she said. ''He'd go out with all six-guns blazing. I want
to live in a country at peace, a country that doesn't believe it has to get out
and protect the whole world.''

But Mr. Reagan's message that Mr. Carter's foreign policies have weakened
America and lost it the world's respect has also gotten through. The Times/CBS
News poll found that 66 percent of the probable electorate, and nearly half of
Mr. Carter's own supporters, believed that Mr. Reagan, if elected, ''would see
to it that America is respected by other nations.'' Only 49 percent of all
voters felt that way about Mr. Carter.

''Mr. Carter has put us in a very vulnerable position and it scares the heck out
of me,'' said Edward Lorenz, a retired Air Force officer who was working at a
Reagan phone bank in Colorado Springs last night. ''Nobody attacks a country
that's strong, and if Mr. Carter is re-elected, we'll get weaker and weaker.''

Amid the controversy over the broader war-peace issues has come the rise in
hopes that the Americans being held hostage in Iran might be released, an action
that would have a powerful impact on the voters.  Mr. Carter and Mr. Reagan
engaged in a brief dust-up over the issue earlier this week, but Mr. Reagan has
now returned to more traditional themes. In arguing their foreign policy
positions, the candidates are operating in a political context far more
sympathetic to military spending and foreign involvement than that of just a few
years ago.

Positions on the Arms Race

The Times/CBS News poll, for example, found 56 percent of voters believing that
America should maintain military superiority over the Soviet Union. About 35
percent favored parity, and only 5 percent favored less than equality in the
arms race.

Support for increasing military spending has grown steadily, and so, too, has
the willingness of Americans to see the country come to the support of its
overseas allies. A study conducted under the auspices of Potomac Associates
found that 70 percent of Americans now favor lending military assistance to
European allies in case of Soviet attack; this compares with only 48 percent who
felt that way just five years ago.

The shift on military policy would seem auspicious for Mr. Reagan, who has
portrayed himself as being much firmer on these matters than Mr. Carter. But the
President himself, who promised cutbacks in military spending in his 1976
campaign, has shifted with the public -or it with him - cutting down on his
potential losses on defense.

More important has been Mr. Carter's attacks on Mr. Reagan's allegedly war-like
tendencies. Dr. William Schneider, a fellow of Stamford University's Hoover
Institution, argues that Mr. Carter has attempted to transform what might be an
ideological issue into a question about Mr. Reagan's competence and personality.


'Frightening Women and Children'

''People want a stronger and tougher military policy, but they don't want to get
blown up,'' said Dr. Schneider. ''Carter is going around frightening women and
small children. He's made war-peace not an issue of substance, but a discussion
of character.''

The issue does seem to be having its greatest impact on women, who are more
likely to support Mr. Carter than men. ''There are a lot of women who want very
badly to vote for Reagan on every other issue,'' said Richard Gebhardt, a
long-time liberal activist here, ''but they won't, because of war.''

One overall measure of the importance of foreign policy issues to Mr. Carter's
campaign is the Times/CBS News Poll's finding that voters who listed foreign
policy matters when asked what was the nation's most important problem were far
more likely to support the President than those who had named economic issues.
The same pattern held in the primaries, when Senator Edward M. Kennedy did best
in his challenge to the President among voters worried about the economy and
less well among those worried about foreign affairs.

Despite all the war-peace discussion in the campaign, foreign policy remains far
less important than economic issues to voters, who were three times as likely to
name economic as foreign policy matters as the nation's most important problem.

Inflation a Bigger Issue

Such findings square with the experiences of Representative Tim Wirth, a
Democrat who represents this part of the world in Congress.Asked what voters
most wanted to talk about, Mr. Wirth replied, ''Inflation, Government spending,
inflation, the effect of Government spending on inflation, the effect of
printing money on inflation, inflation, Government spending and inflation.''

There is little doubt that the imprint of the movement against the Vietnam War
on popular opinion over foreign policy issues has faded in recent years. But
there remains evidence of a Vietnam effect, and this may be contributing to Mr.
Reagan's troubles on the war issue.

The impact remains significant among the young. The Times/CBS News Poll found
that voters under the age of 30 were the only major population group within
which a substantial majority believed that Mr. Reagan would get America into
war. This group was also found to be somewhat less likely to favor military
superiority over the Soviet Union. College graduates, many of whom were affected
by the Vietnam experience, were even more opposed to superiority.

Both groups contribute substantially to the faithful remnant still supporting
Representative John B. Anderson, with the result that his supporters are far
more dovish in their views than backers of either Mr. Carter or Mr. Reagan.

Time Has Tempered Enthusiasm

Michael Cheroutis, who coordinated Mr. Kennedy's campaign here, said that some
antiwar sentiment was still alive among his contemporaries but that time had
tempered enthusiasm for the issue.

''One fact that doesn't get recognition is that these people are now 10 years
older,'' he said, ''People are less certain they are right. There's not the
sense of excitement that there used to be.''

The isolationist impulse bred by the war has also had a lasting, if ebbing,
influence on older Americans.  Keith Dever, who owns a hotel near Estes Park,
Colo., and just recently finished sending his children through college, is
supporting Mr. Reagan. He is doing this in part because he doubts any President
could start a war ''all by himself.''

But Mr. Dever is as skeptical as anyone when it comes to foreign involvements.
''I don't know why we need to get so involved in the affairs of other
countries,'' he said, ''except maybe when you're dependent upon other countries
for material things like oil. And I don't believe we should be so dependent on
them. I don't want to go to war over oil.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REP. HOLTZMAN ADHERING TO VIEWS ON ARMS OUTLAY

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1460 words


Despite the controversy over her votes against defense appropriations,
Representative Elizabeth Holtzman said yesterday that, if elected Senator, she
would continue to scrutinize military spending measures closely and raised the
possibility that she would still oppose most of them.

Asked whether she would change her consistent opposition to such spending in
view of strained relations with the Soviet Union and criticism by her opponents
in the Senate campaign, she responded, ''Not necessarily.''

''I intend to be a watchdog for the taxpayers' money,'' she said, ''and exactly
what form that will take, I can't tell you. But I will continue to hold Federal
programs to a standard.''

She has repeatedly cited waste in military spending as the reason for her
opposition to such measures, but she added a new factor yesterday in an
interview with reporters and editors of The New York Times when she said that
many of her votes had been inspired by opposition to the Vietnam War. ''I was
elected to put an end to that war,'' she said.

Miss Holtzman was first elected to the House in November 1972; the war ended in
April 1975.

Many Issues Covered

The 39-year-old Brooklyn Democrat, who has been the front-runner in most
newspaper polls, including the New York Times/CBS News survey last week, covered
a wide range of issues in the interview, the last of a series with each of the
major Senate candidates in the state.  Among the points she made were the
following:

- That she did not object to some concessions to Iran to free American hostages,
but she would not say whether she would approve sending munitions and jet fuel,
as opposed to airplane spare parts, to Iran to aid its defense against Iraq.

- That unemployment was the principal cause of the Federal deficit because of
losses of Federal revenues and Federal social welfare benefits paid out. She
proposed Federal job programs as one of the solutions.

- That the mounting Federal debt and interest payments required to finance it
were causes for concern, but that she would not favor a 1 percent
across-the-board cut in Federal personnel through attrition.  At one point, she
said of a proposed Federal public works program for the New York area: ''I'm not
so much concerned about where it's going to stop; it hasn't even started yet.''

- That she rejected the ''liberal'' label, despite her advocacy of increased
Federal involvement in many areas. ''I'm a new generation of Democrat,'' she
said. ''I'm concerned about Federal Government that is humane and compassionate,
but I'm also concerned that government doesn't waste money.'' She noted that she
had sponsored legislation against crime and child pornography - issues that
are''not associated with being a liberal.''

Cautious in Her Responses

Miss Holtzman was ultracautious in many of her answers, a common posture for
front-running candidates eager not to antagonize voters unnecessarily.

She recounted, as she has often done before, a story about her successful effort
to halt the removal of a small naval facility in Brooklyn to the Illinois
district of a new chairman of the House Armed Services Committee.

''They were going to move this project from Brooklyn, costing the taxpayers
money, to make him look good,'' she added.  Asked to identify the chairman, Miss
Holtzman first ignored the question and then, when it was pressed, said she
didn't know. Later, a campaign press aide, in response to further inquiry,
identified the chairman as Representative Melvin Price of Illinois.

She was also cautious in her responses to questions about the current Iran-Iraq
war.  Like her opponents, Senator Jacob K. Javits, the Liberal candidate, and
Alfonse M. D'Amato, the Republican, Conservative and Right to Life contender,
she said that to obtain the release of American hostages, she was ''prepared to
support any reasonable proposal including the sale of spare parts'' for American
airplanes that had been bought by Iran before the Americans were taken hostage
just short of a year ago.

Views on Iran 'Integrity'

However, the Democratic candidate appeared to be less concerned about the
possible ''dismemberment'' of Iran - as Senator Javits described it - by Iraq
and possibly the Soviet Union.

''I think we have to think very carefully about making common cause with a
government that is headed by a man whose hatred of the United States is
implacable and is well known.''

''I think it would probably be a better situation,''she added ,''if the
integrity of Iran is preserved, but the question is what we would do to do that
and what kind of common cause you would make with a country which just sent its
main leader here to say that the United States was responsible for the Iraqi
agression.''

Miss Holtzman said she thought that President Carter's approach had been correct
so far. ''Basically, our objectives ought to be to secure the Strait of Hormuz
and make sure that oil can flow through,'' she said. ''Our second objective
ought to be to contain that war and make sure that other countries do not get
involved. Our third objective ought to be to bring about a cease-fire.''

The fourth objective, she said, should be ''to keep countries like France and
other allies from selling countries in that part of the world material to build
nuclear weapons and our fifth objective ought to be to try to take some steps to
protect consumers here against possible profiteering rising from possible
shortages.''

Cautious on Women in Combat

Miss Holtzman was cautious on the question of using women in combat. Unlike her
opponents, she supported the drafting of women if a draft were started as part
of women's equal rights. She said she would permit women to volunteer for combat
units, but repeatedly avoided answering questions on whether women should be
drafted into combat units. Both her opponents oppose the use of women in combat
units on the ground that they were not physically fit for such service.

On other issues, Miss Holtzman cited her record to rebut Senator Javits's
charges that she ''distrusts'' and is ''out of touch'' with business. She noted
her advocacy of economic growth measures, Federal aid for small businesses,
Federal incentives to make American technology ''competitive'' and Federal aid
to repair the public works ''infrastructure'' in the Northeast to attract
commerce and business and halt its flight from this area.

Does that mean she doesn't distrust business? she was asked. ''I'll let my
record speak for that.'' Does she trust business? ''It depends on the business
and the circumstance.''

Although Miss Holtzman has criticized - and reiterated that criticism yesterday
- what she said was a favorable rate of interest on some $175,000 in loans by
Mr. D'Amato for his campaign, she said in the interview that she did not know
how much interest she had paid on a $200,000 personal loan for her campaign. Her
press aide said later that the figure was 11 percent.

'D'Amato Kept Quiet'

Mr. D'Amato's interest on his loans have ranged from 10.5 percent to 12 percent,
according to a press aide. Miss Holtzman has implied that Mr. D'Amato loan was
related to interest-free desposits by the Town of Hempstead, where he is
presiding supervisor.

She reiterated her criticism of Mr. D'Amato's possible connection with
insurance, political contribution and patronage practices in Nassau County that
have been criticized by a grand jury and state agencies. ''Mr. D'Amato kept
quiet, or was part of the problem,'' she said.

While Representative Holtzman was discussing these issues, two new commercials
were going on the air as part of a $150,000-a-week purchase of television time.
One of the new commercials features Representative Peter W. Rodino Jr. of
Newark, chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, praising her as one of ''the
shining lights'' in the ''dark days'' of the Watergate scandal.

The Rodino commercial not only served to emphasize Miss Holtzman's role in the
Judiciary Committee hearings on the impeachment of President Nixon, but also was
seen as a veiled appeal to Italian-American voters who might be inclined to
support Mr. D'Amato.

The second new Holtzman commercial features her standing alone in a hearing room
reciting familar arguments about her independence, integrity and effectivness.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Elizabeth Holtzman

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AN EXPLORER'S GUIDE TO THE 'NEW' CHINATOWN

BYLINE: By FRED FERRETTI

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 3462 words


ALTHOUGH Chinatown retains much of its exoticism, it is no longer the easily
defined, small downtown enclave of the city that it once was. It is growing,
spreading beyond its traditional borders, changing dramatically as Chinese from
regions of China other than Canton arrive, becoming a richer community of
varying faces and the largest community of overseas Chinese in the world.

For New Yorkers, it is a constant wonder, a place to wander about, particularly
on weekends, when Chinatown pulses with activity, when its shops, temples,
restaurants and teahouses are filled not only with tourists but also with
residents of the community joined by their sons and daughters and grandchildren
who, following custom, come home from the suburbs on weekends. No other ethnic
enclave in the city offers such an exhilarating feeling of being in a foreign
country.

The City Planning Commission defines Chinatown as a 10-square-block area bounded
on the east by the Bowery, on the west by Baxter Street, on
Mimi Sheraton's suggestions for dining

in Chinatown are on page C34
the north by Canal Street and on the south by Worth Street and Chatham Square.
But the commission concedes that this is ''Old Chinatown.'' The ''New
Chinatown,'' includes this area but extends well into the formerly Jewish Lower
East Side, and all the way through Little Italy to Houston Street. The
commission estimates that as many as 125,000 Chinese now live in this greater
Chinatown area.

The new growth has spawned almost unbounded real estate speculation. It is
common to see 110-year-old tenements sell for $500,000 and to see rents for tiny
apartments along Mott Street rise to as much as $500 or $600 a month. On the
corner of Mott Street, which is Chinatown's main thoroughfare, and Chatham
Square, a new, expensive glass-enclosed office development has just begun to
rent at prices higher than those asked at the World Trade Center. The building
was constructed by a group of investors from Macao and is known among the
Chinese as ''The Macao Building.''

A walk through the streets of Chinatown provides more evidence of rapid change.
East Broadway, once home to thousands of immigrant Jews, now looks like Nathan
Road in Hong Kong, the broad avenue that is the core of Kowloon in the British
Crown Colony. East Broadway is now decorated with Chinese calligraphic signs and
has many Asian restaurants and shops. At 33 East Broadway, halfway between
Chatham Square and Market Street, the Chatham Square branch of the Public
Library was designed by McKim, White & Mead. But its second-floor reading room
is now devoted solely to Chinese-language books for children and more than 3,500
Chinese books are available.

Throughout the new Chinatown there are exotic food and herb markets such as Wan
Chow on East Broadway and Tak Sung Tong on Mott Street that cater especially to
Chinese customers. They offer real bird's nests for soup, dried, curled bamboo
for purportedly health-giving tea, powdered deer antlers said to give strength.
These specialized markets, which once were everywhere in Chinatown, became
scarce, then, as the new people came, have resurfaced.

One now also finds shops owned by and catering to new immigrants from Vietnam
and Thailand. And with the influx of Chinese from Shanghai, Peking and the
western provinces of Hunan and Sichuan, the variety of restaurant fare has
become even greater.

Where the Sunday morning dim sum accent used to be Cantonese in such teahouses
as China Royal, 17 Division Street, Hong Gung, 30 Pell Street, and Nom Wah, 13
Doyers Street, it is now to an increasing degree Shanghai. New Shanghai-style
dim sum restaurants such as Imperial Inn, 23 Pell Street, Ju Siang Garden, 5
Doyers Street, and Peking Duck House, 22 Mott Street, serve the scallion
pancakes favored by the people of that region, adding to the Shanghai restaurant
presence once represented by such traditional outposts as Hunan Garden, 1 Mott
Street, and Say Eng Look, 5 East Broadway.  Another culinary variation brought
in by the new residents are the Hong Kong-style noodle houses represented by
Wonton Specialist, 3 Doyers Street, and its new steel-faced branch on Mott
Street. Under construction on Mott Street is a restaurant that will serve the
cuisine of the Hakka, a wandering people who eventually settled in the Canton
area.

More than 25 religious missions have been established in Chinatown in the last
two years to deal withg the surge in immigration and 12 Buddhist temples have
opened in the last 12 months.

One authority on Chinatown, Emile Bocian, an editor of The China Post, one of
the area's eight daily newspapers, says that the numbers of new Chinese
immigrants has served to delineate political differences that match those in the
Chinese world itself. Thus there are restaurants that are known in the community
as ''Taiwan'' establishments and those known as ''Mainland'' restaurants.

The Tsung Tsin Association at 1 Division Street, for example, is the
''Mainland'' neighborhood association and on Oct. 1 it flies the flag of the
People's Republic of China in honor of the Communist revolution. At Canal and
Mott Streets, the pagoda-shaped Chinese Merchants Association, descended from
the On Leong Association, is regarded as the ''Taiwan'' or Kuomintang
association and the flag of that country goes out on Oct. 15, the date of the
Sun Yat Sen revolution in China. For banquets there is the ''Taiwan'' No. 1
Chinese Restaurant on Canal Street, and there is the Silver Palace on the
Bowery, which is regarded as the People's Republic banquet hall.  It should not
be implied that Chinatown is made up of two enemy camps. Far from it. There is a
communality of interests, much of it financial, that transcends politics,
another aspect that makes Chinatown, a place of infinite variety and interest.

A Brief History

Precisely when the strip of Lower Manhattan farmland that is roughly the
intersection of Pell and Doyers Streets became home to the first immigrant
Chinese is not known. A 19th-century Asia scholar, Karl Friedrich Neumann,
maintains that a Buddhist monk, Hoei Shin, sailed to eastern America late in the
18th century. In 1808 John Jacob Astor sailed one of his ships into New York
harbor and while the city was marveling at a visitor that Mr. Astor called Pun
Hua Wing Chong, it is said that Mr. Astor unloaded a holdful of illegal furs.

In 1847 the Chinese junk Kee Ying sailed into the harbor from Canton with a crew
of 35 Chinese and a load of silk. During that summer, according to newspaper
accounts, 50,000 New Yorkers visited the Kee Ying and her crew became highly
sought after by the city's party-givers. When the Kee Ying sailed at the end of
August, it is said, not all of its crew sailed with it. Those sailors who
remained are probably Chinatown's founders.

Other Chinese arrived later from the California gold fields and from their jobs
building the transcontinental railroad, and by 1869 a sizable group of Chinese
had settled on the Lower Manhattan plots that had once been owned by John Mott
and Joshua Pell. These arrivals found work as cigar makers and laundry men.

More immigrants came in the 1870's and 80's. One of them, Lee B.  Lok, founded
the Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association, which to this day is regarded
by many residents as Cinatown's unofficial, but real, government. By 1890, an
estimated 10,000 Chinese had settled here, most of them in the triangular area
that became firmly established as Chinatown.

The great percentage of New York's first Chinatown residents were males. Unlike
other immigrant groups, most of the Chinese did not intend to stay, but to make
enough money to return to their families in China and buy land. In the early
days many did go back, but others remained. From 1882 to 1965 the Chinese were
victims of harsh Exclusion Acts that officially and effectively blocked their
immigration in the United States. But when national-origins quotas were
abolished in 1965, Chinese immigration, particularly from Hong Kong and Taiwan,
began in earnest. The ''new'' Chinatown is the result of this influx.

Thousands of new immigrants find work as well as home in Chinatown. Many of the
men find jobs in the area's restaurants and tea houses and the women in its more
than 300 garment factories. Many of those who prosper move to middle class
neighborhoods in Brooklyn and Queens and the suburbs of Long Island and New
Jersey. But on weekends they return to Chinatown to spend time with their
families.

Walking and Browsing

A walk through Chinatown appropriately begins in Chatham Square, the core of the
community from which radiate Mott, Worth, Division, Catherine and Doyers
Streets, the Bowery and East Broadway. Walk along East Broadway, home of two of
the community's movie theaters, the Pagoda, at No. 11, near Catherine Street,
and the Sun Sing, at No, 75, underneath the approach to the Manhattan Bridge.
These are outposts for romance, adventure and kung fu, all imported from Taiwan
and Hong Kong. To a non-Chinese, the films seem studied and shrill, punctuated
with clashing cymbals. But they can be diverting. Many films have English and
Chinese subtitles. You might want to browse in the New Asia book store at 53
East Broadway, long an outpost for books from Peking.

At 5 East Broadway is Say Eng Look, long an outpost of Shanghai food in
Chinatown, now moved up a few doors.  In the windows of Wong & Wong, 15 East
Broadway, fish tanks display eels and carp, dining favorites of the Chinese, and
on the sidewalks baskets of live crabs sell for $3 a dozen. A side trip down
Catherine Street, off East Broadway, will bring you to a conglomeration of shops
that the Chinese consider to be among the best groceries in the area.

At one market catering to the new immigrants, Wan Chow at 42 East Broadway, you
may see such exotica as yuk jok, strips of dried bamboo, and wei shan root, both
of which the Cantonese believe to be health-giving. At No. 54 is Hoolok, one of
the oldest noodle shops in Chinatown, where one can savor cold noodles with
sesame seed oil and mashed peanuts, or broad rice noodles in chicken broth, and
at No. 40 is the Hwa Yuan Szechwan Inn, owned by George Law, president of the
Chinese Restaurant Association, which is representative of the spicy Sichuan
food tradition.

Walk around the corner at Market Street to No. 57 and look in at Zeechow Press,
where most of the menus you read in Chinatown's restaurants are printed -
feverishly, it appears, because inflation is forcing restaurants to change menu
prices far more often than before. Turn the corner and you are on Division
Street, becoming more and more renowned as a dining street. Then stop in at 49
Division, one of the most striking shops in town, Chef Chow's Food Corporation.
There the owner, Yung Fu Chow, and his wife, Frances, cook and freeze virtually
any Chinese restaurant preparation imaginable, including Peking duck ($15 and
$20 sizes) steamed spareribs and eight-jewel rice, a sweet dessert. Mrs. Chow
says the clientele is ''half Chinese, half non-Chinese, and we are opening a
factory so we can make enough to satisfy our customers.''

At 41 Division is the Wah Keong Book Company, Chinatown's ''Taiwan'' book store,
with most of its imports coming from publishers in Taipei. And at No. 11 is one
of Chinatown's more interesting shops, Chin's Furniture, where Peter Chin sells
all of those elaborate dragon-inlaid red and gold wall panels, imitation stone
statuary and carved lanterns that have become decorating favorites all over
town.

At No. 45 is Canton, noted for its carp cooked with chicken fat; at No. 27 is Ho
Me Dor, a new eating place with 10 specially constructed tables with gas outlets
so that Mongolian hotpots can be cooked at the tables; and at No. 47 is China
Royal, one of Chinatown's pre-eminent dim sum houses.

Cutting north along the Bowery one passes the Silver Palace, a giant Hong
Kong-style dim sum house; the Manhattan Savings Bank branch built in the style
of a Buddhist temple; Confucius Plaza, the vast apartment house that has evolved
into a haven for elderly Chinese whose children have become suburbanites, and
the bronze statue of Confucius, which dominates the tiny plaza in front of the
building.

Turn west on Canal Street, walk one block, make a left turn, walk south down
Elizabeth and you pass the Fifth Precinct stationhouse that was once slated for
demolition but was saved by one of the rare community demonstrations to emanate
from Chinatown. At No. 15 is Pearl River Chinese Products, a vast department
store that once sold only products from mainland China. Since relations between
the United States and Peking were re-established, it stocks items from ''both
Chinas.'' At No. 18 in Mon Heung, a popular Cantonese seafood restaurant. And at
No. 3 Jim Chan, who owns Chan Jim's, will sell you anything from his stock,
which ranges from fine jade to herbs that might help your arthritis.

A turn west onto Bayard Street will lead to some of Chinatown's more unusual
shops. At 65 Bayard you will find the Chinatown Ice Cream Factory. In Canton ice
cream is flavored with mangos, coconuts and sweet red beans. These are all
available here along with cones tasting of lichee nuts, papaya, ginger, almonds,
bananas and green tea. And at No. 81A the area's only Thai shop was opened less
than two months ago by Rutchadaporn Unchalipongse, and it is stocked with chili
and fish pastes, with papier-mache sculpture, carvings, pottery, silk
pillowcases and embossed tin lunch pails. At No. 85 is Ping's, where you can buy
snacks of hard, dried strips of beef and pork.

Turning south off Bayard onto Mott, you'll walk past tea shops and bakeries and
Chinatown's only Baskin-Robbins. Turn east onto Pell Street for an interesting
juxtaposition of new and old. At 16 Pell is Temple Garden, one of Chinatown's
foremost restaurants. But next to it,through a side door, there is a Buddhist
temple, somewhat similar to the temple on Mott Street next door to the Chinese
Consolidated Benevolent Association headquarters. It has an altar, a gilded
statue of Buddha and incense sticks burning while people pray. It is not unusual
for tourist buses to deposit crowds in these temples, but it is unseemly if you
are less than quiet while visiting. At No. 20, up a flight of stairs, is the
area's newest bookstore, Oriental Culture Enterprises. Its stock is 98 percent
Chinese-language, but its clientele is mixed. Says Ling Lau, its manager, ''More
Americans are studying Chinese and they buy much from us - novels, history
philosophy. They also buy our kites from Tianjin.''

Veering off Pell onto Doyers you will find at No. 5, the Chinatown Gallery and
Art Supplies shop. Its owner, Simon Ho, has the only establishment in town that
will hand-carve characters on the ends of stone signature blocks, called
''chops,'' that he sells at prices ranging from $7 to $50. And at No. 1 Doyers a
stroller can imagine a time 100 years ago when the first Chinese Opera Theater
in the United States gave performances of Canton and Peking classics in the
basement of the building.

Doubling back onto Mott from Pell to Canal Street savor the sidewalk vegetable,
fruit and fish vendors, the people who sell inexpensive jade from suitcases and
the dealers in jeans whose shops are the open ends of vans. Then walk south
along Mulberry, which has become perhaps the main grocery street of Chinatown.
At the end of Mulberry, where it meets Worth Street, one of Chinatown's most
incongruous events often takes place. Funeral corteges leave what was once the
Charles Bacigalupo Funeral Home, now Ng Fook Funeral Inc. As the cars inch away
along Mulberry Street, Italian trumpeters play, as they did for Italian
funerals, in a tribute to the departed.

At Mulberry and Canal turn right, go past the huge Kam Man supermarket and start
your amble down Mott Street, Chinatown's Main Street, the place where the
tourist buses arrive, where commercial change is always reflected. Restaurants
are transformed from modest lunch counters to sleek stainless steel emporiums,
like Wonton Garden Inc. at Nos. 52-56. A shop like Quong Yee, at No. 38, which
was once Chinatown's oldest grocery, vanishes, to be replaced by the Oriental
Dress Company, with a new red and yellow plastic sign. Mott Street bubbles with
activity day and night, shoppers before 8 A.M., teahouse visitors soon after,
tourist buses at 10 A.M. From then on everything is tourists, shoppers, diners
until the early hours of the morning. A few hours of rest and Mott Street opens
again.

Food Shopping

Food shopping has become a main objective of visitors to Chinatown. Chinese
cooking is so popular that visitors shop for woks and cleavers, strainers and
spatulas, and learn to differentiate between light and dark soy sauce, and
hoisin and plum sauces. Items as common as bean sprouts, grown in the basements
of Chinatown, can be bought for a few cents a pound, while ginseng root can sell
for as much as several hundred dollars a pound. In the liquor stores visitors
can buy the usual comestibles, but they'll also find the fiery mao tai and ng ga
pei, liquors made from rice.

The biggest food markets in Chinatown are Kam Kuo, 5 Mott Street, and Kam Man,
200 Canal Street, both owned by the same cooperative group. The stores carry
virtually everything needed to cook Chinese fashion, all the tools you'll need,
all the bowls you'll eat out of, even all the tables you'll sit at.

Among the items you'll find are snake soup, dried eel, fresh water chestnuts,
barbecued ducks, sea cucuumber, the great white coils of conger maw, large
apothecary jars filled with medicinal herbs, Chinese teas, rice bowls, teapots
and mugs.

At Mott and Bayard is Chinatown's oldest market, the Wing Woh Lung Company,
where fresh fish are scaled and filleted. But the owner, Chin Gon Yeow, or his
son Albert, or the store's manager, Chin Wing Kooy, who carry on a tradition of
more than 40 years, also will be happy to help visitors through the maze of
exotic Chinese food products.

At 89 Mulberry Street, Hi Light Foods has tanks filled with live carp and eels
from Canada, live frogs from Arizona and turtles from Bangkok. The manager, Kwai
Chi Choy, will even sell you song yu fish imported live from Hong Kong. The
Cantonese say they are magnificent steamed with watercress. Other fish stores
with live carp, eels, lobsters and other shellfish abound along Mulberry and
East Broadway, and a good market will demonstrate how you can tell from the
bightness of a fish's eyes how fresh it is.

Most groceries, such as Woh Wing Lung and Kam Kuo, both on Mott Stret, sell the
spicy, thin Chinese pork sausage, which is fine steamed and served plain over
rice, and marinated pork, whole sides of pig, chickens and ducks. Some
comparison shopping is a good idea because you can decide whether you want a red
glaze, a deep brown honey glaze or a brown soy sauce glaze. Most places will
give you a taste.

A word about vegetables: Early Sunday morning is the best time to shop for
vegetables because they have just come in dewy and fresh from the New Jersey
truck farms. It is on Sunday mornings that the residents of Chinatown go into
shops like Kam Man and Shang Jan, on Canal Street, and browse among the
vegetable sellers, so tag along and buy the same things that somebody who seems
knowledgeable will buy.

Chinatown is popular for its bakeries, but none is more well regarded than Lung
Fong, 41 Mott Street, where all kinds of steamed pork buns, sponge cakes, the
sticky piles of fried dough called honeybow, and recently, moon cakes filled
with lotus-seed paste are for sale. The almond cookies aren't bad either.

Events

On most weekends there are neighborhood activities, many keyed to traditional
feasts, and often held in Columbus Park on Mulberry Street. Sometimes Chinatown
cultural events take place elsewhere in the city because of the lack of
performing or exhibition space in the neighborhood.

Tomorrow at 57 East Broadway, on the second floor, the Yeh Yu Chinese Opera
Society will hold a dress rehearsal of several small Peking and Canton opera
segments from 3 to 10 P.M. The public is welcome to watch, free of charge.

Over at 32 Marker Street, the Bibiana Shieh Dance Company, whose cast consists
of children aged 6 to 12, will perform traditional children's dances beginning
at 3 P.M. Admission is free.

And both tomorrow and Sunday at 509 Broadway, on the sixth floor, the Chinese
Dance Study Group will perform a program of opera dances beginning at 2 P.M.
Admission is free.

For full information on cultural events in Chinatown, call the office of Alan
Chow, program director of the Chinese American Arts Council, 45 Canal Street,
431-9740.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Chinatown Map of Chinatown Photo of Produce
Outdoor Market on Canal Street in Chinatown

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DISPUTE OVER TIES TO PALESTINIAN'S LEADER IS KEY ISSUE IN FINDLEY'S RE-ELECTION
BID

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 40, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: SPRINGFIELD, Ill.


''A powerful member of Congress is trying to sell a new image of P.L.O.
terrorists as responsible statesmen,'' says the headline of the campaign
brochure. Underneath is a photograph of Representative Paul Findley, the
Republican incumbent, dining with Yasser Arafat, leader of the Palestine
Liberation Organization. Inside are reproductions of newspaper articles with
such headlines as ''Rep. Findley -P.L.O. Friend in Congress'' (The Chicago Sun
Times), and ''Findley Shines P.L.O. Image,'' (The Springfield State
Journal-Register).

A dispute over United States relations with the Palestinian movement has,
incredibly, become the major issue in a Congressional campaign in America's
heartland. The 20th Congressional District in the land of Lincoln includes not
only the state capital and some large factories, but also the fertile bottom
lands of the Mississippi and Illinois Rivers.

It is an unlikely district for a controversy whose antagonists are halfway
around the world. The Palestine issue nevertheless provides the rationale,
enthusiasm and funds for an aggressive campaign being waged by former State
Representative David Robinson, a 33-year-old Democrat, who is challenging Mr.
Findley, a 20-year Congressional veteran who is one of the few endangered
Republican incumbents.

''What I've done on the Palestinian cause is probably the most important thing
I've ever done,'' Mr. Findley, 59, a mild-mannered conservative, said in an
interview. ''I wouldn't have this job the way most people live it, spending
their time staying out of trouble.''

Loss of Campaign Support

Nevertheless, Mr. Findley contends that the issue not only fueled his opponent's
campaign fund, but also cost the Congressman campaign support. Bob Hope canceled
a scheduled appearance recently at a Findley fund-raising event, and the
Congressman was told that the P.L.O. issue was the reason.

Similarly, Ronald Reagan, the Republican Presidential candidate, was in
Springfield for that event, but also did not attend, citing previous
commitments.

Thus far, Mr. Robinson has raised $350,000 in campaign funds while Mr. Findley
has raised $280,000.  Mr. Findley, a member of the House Foreign Affairs
Committee, went to the Middle East in 1974 in a successful effort to obtain the
release of a schoolteacher constituent, Ed Franklin, who had been imprisoned by
South Yemen as a spy. The Congressman met with Arab leaders, visited refugee
camps in Beirut and laid the groundwork for a series of meetings with Mr. Arafat
that began in 1978. The two men have maintained contact through both letters and
meetings.

Although Mr. Findley opposes United States recognition of the P.L.O. until the
organization recognizes Israel, he supports communications with Mr. Arafat.

''It makes sense for us to talk to the P.L.O., to communicate with them and try
to influence their behavior,'' he said. ''It would reduce tension and conflict
in that area. We can't wish the Palestinians away - they're a fact. Nor can we
select their leadership.''

Asked if such communication would confer credibility on the P.L.O., the
Congressman replied, ''That's the position of the Israeli lobby and the Jewish
lobby.''

The issue played a major role in Mr. Findley's primary campaign against Mayor
David Nuessen of Quincy, who used the Findley-Arafat photograph in his campaign
literature. Mr. Findley won the primary with 55 percent of the vote.

Mr. Robinson, who is Jewish, stressed the issue in television commercials, as
well as a series of full-page, fund-raising advertisements in such Jewish
weeklies as The Texas Jewish Post and The Washington Jewish Week.

The newspaper advertisements included an allegation, made by a former regional
director of the B'nai B'rith Anti-Defamation League, that ''Paul Findley is a
practicing anti-Semite.'' Virtually everyone who knows the Congressman says that
that is not true, and Mr.  Robinson contends that he did not see the
advertisement before it was published. He publicly apologized to Mr. Findley,
dismissed the aide who put together the advertisement and promised to publish
full-page retractions.

Mr. Robinson, a native of Springfield who worked for former Mayor John V.
Lindsay of New York City and Percy Sutton, the former Manhattan borough
president, while earning an undergraduate degree at Columbia University, has the
support of most of the labor unions.

War Foe's Position Questioned

He was a conscientious objector in the Vietnam War, a fact stressed by Mr.
Findley. The Congressman publicly questions whether his opponent could support a
strong national defense.

The two candidates disagree on federally financed abortions. Mr.  Robinson would
bar all such funds; Mr. Findley voted to to provide such funds in cases
involving rape or incest of if the mother's health is endangered.

Mr. Findley regards his opponent as a ''political opportunist'' who has shaped
his positions, such as the ban on Federal funds for abortions, to appeal to the
district. Mr. Robinson counters that his belief in the ''sanctity of life''
underlies his stand on the Vietnam War, abortions and Palestinian terrorists.

How does the Palestine issue affect a district whose tiny Jewish population of
1,600 is centered in this prarie capital?  ''It is a political issue throughout
the district because people recognize the P.L.O. as being anti-American and
armed by the Soviet Union,'' Mr. Robinson said. ''Americans reject terrorism.''

Mr. Findley takes a different view. ''I think the P.L.O. issue is getting rather
threadbare after almost a year of it,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Paul Findley map of Illinois showing 20th CD

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SHAUL EISENBERG'S BIG DEALS

BYLINE: By JANE FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1295 words


TEL AVIV H E jets around the world in a Boeing with gold fittings. His home in
Savyon, an exclusive suburb of Tel Aviv, reportedly boasts a gold wall. He is
courted by the famous and the powerful and is said to be the wealthiest man in
Israel as a result of the multimillion-dollar deals he has welded.

But despite the extravagant life style and impressive achievements of Shaul
Eisenberg, few here have ever seen him. A son-in-law says Mr. Eisenberg is an
Austrian citizen and lives in Japan. Apparently, no journalist has ever
interviewed him.

Mr. Eisenberg owns 20 companies operating in 30 countries with annual sales
estimated by family members at $1.25 billion.  But now he has attracted news
coverage in the United States because of a relatively modest transaction: The
Piryon Investment Trust Company, whose owners include three of his sons-in-law,
has joined other Israeli interests to purchase more than 10.4 percent of United
Merchants and Manufacturers Inc. for about $30 million.

U.M.M., with revenues of about $700 million last year, produces and distributes
textiles and garments. The company filed for bankruptcy in 1977 after the
collapse of its Robert Hall chain of 367 retail clothing stores. Piryon, a
holding company, had operating profits equivalent to $830,000 in the year ended
last March and made $1.3 million on sales of investments.

Piryon says that Mr. Eisenberg himself has no business connection with it.
Although Piryon has participated in Eisenberg activities, analysts say that
Piryon is indeed a separate venture.

Martin Schwab, U.M.M. chairman, at first accused Mr. Eisenberg of masking his
interests in U.M.M. behind Piryon. But he later apologized and called his
allegations against Mr. Eisenberg ''unfounded.'' He says he has never met Mr.
Eisenberg.

''I think their participation will be constructive for the company,'' Mr. Schwab
said after reaching an ''amicable agreement'' under which the Israelis will take
three seats on the U.M.M. board.  He adds that the agreement puts a temporary
freeze on any further share purchases by Piryon.

The flap has generated international interest, but Mr. Eisenberg, 59 years old
and balding, with a boyish pudgy face, has not indulged that interest. In 35
years in business, Shaul Eisenberg has concluded more spectacular and
controversial deals, all with a minimum of publicity.

Mr. Eisenberg's principal vehicle today, United Development Inc., is registered
in Panama and the entire network, says one son-in-law, Jonathan Zuhovitzky,
resembles a ''Japanese trading house.''

In 1973, Mr. Eisenberg sold a Canadian nuclear reactor to Korea, earning $5
million in commissions and $8 million in expenses.  He is also studying two
ambitious planning projects, according to press reports here. (These have not
been confirmed by his associates, however.) The first, a reported proposal from
President Anwar al-Sadat of Egypt to reclaim 500,000 acres of Nile delta land,
could cost $3 billion. The other involves discussions said to have been held
with Vietnam for a multimillion-dollar industrialization program.

Mr. Eisenberg, reportedly born in Munich, escaped from Nazi Germany in 1939 to
Shanghai, eventually arriving in Japan. He married the daughter of a Japanese
artist and settled in the Far East. He remained a trader, opening a diamond
factory in Japan, and his interests spread to other parts of the Far East. He
then went to South America.

''He understood before anyone,'' says Michael Albin, 36, comanaging director of
Piryon, ''that there would be a need for iron ore in the Far East.'' He got that
ore from South America and still supplies the Far East.

As his riches increased, Mr. Eisenberg built homes in Tokyo and Zurich, but
something was missing. With six children, five of them daughters, Mr. Eisenberg
turned to Israel.

''He wanted his family to be in Israel for heritage reasons,'' says Mr.
Zuhovitzky, 35. Mr. Zuhovitzky, born in Israel, is the other co-managing
director of Piryon and handles Mr. Eisenberg's business interests in Israel.

In the late 1960's, Mr. Eisenberg established a branch of his trading concern,
Eisenberg & Company, in Tel Aviv and began construction on his Savyon mansion.
In 1979 he broke ground for a $15 million office building, Asia House, now his
international headquarters and display case, a magnificent structure with a
sculpture hall in the lobby and several restaurants.

But today, according to Mr. Zuhovitzky, Mr. Eisenberg's Israeli business
represents only 3.5 percent of his global turnover, or about $40 million. But
despite such assertions that Mr. Eisenberg has not done extensive business in
Israel, the opposite impression exists.

H E bought a small Government-owned shipping bank for $10.5 million (and named
his sons-in-law and Mr. Albin to the board). His trading companies have sold
Israeli-designed and -built factories to the third world. He has exported
sophisticated electronic equipment from Israel, too. He has given millions to
charity. Not long ago, a grateful Government named the town of Kvar Shaul in
Galilee after him.

Mr. Zuhovitzky refused to divulge the number of Eisenberg employees or the
network's profits. He did say that Mr. Eisenberg did little business in the
United States because ''the U.S. is not exportminded,'' but he maintains a New
York office.

When in Israel, Mr. Eisenberg entertains officials and other influential persons
at his Savyon home, where kosher Japanese dinners are served Oriental-style in
the sunken dining room. But mostly Mr. Eisenberg is on the move.

Unlike Mr. Eisenberg's operations, Piryon does control factories, principally
through two textile companies, Lodzia and Ata. The owners are Mr. Albin, Mr.
Zuhovitzky and two other sons-in-law, Igal Dimant and Meir Rosenfeld, the
chairman of the board.

In 1975, Piryon's only activity, a bakery in Haifa, had gone out of business.
''All that was left was the corporate shell,'' said Mr.  Zuhovitzky, though it
held a portfolio of bonds and was listed on the Tel Aviv Exchange.

Mr. Albin and the sons-in-law bought Piryon and used the corporation to purchase
30 percent of Ata and 40 percent of Lodzia, as well as shares in about 10 other
companies. The profits of Ata and Lodzia are not included on Piryon's balance
sheet.

A year ago, Piryon began to look at United Merchants. ''It looked like a very
good investment,'' said Mr. Zuhovitzky. ''Robert Hall was the reason it went
into Chapter 11 (bankruptcy proceedings). Its stock was very low and we believed
it would make a turn-around.''

Mr. Zuhovitzky denies he wants to use U.M.M. to distribute Ata and Lodzia
textiles, an allegation first made by United Merchants' Mr.  Schwab. Given
Piryon's tendancy to invest without managing, the question is what Piryon
intends to contribute.

''I have no concrete ideas,'' says Mr. Albin. ''The company needs assistance,
financial and administrative. We'll try to supply it.'' Mr. Albin added that
Piryon is looking at over-the-counter stocks in the United States, although he
would not name any.  The trend will surely increase. Said one analyst, ''Israel
has become too small for Israeli business.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Shaul Eisenberg

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE BIGGEST ROLE OF NANCY'S LIFE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 45, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4476 words


Lally Weymouth is a freelance writer.
By Lally Weymouth
he interest in discovering how much influence Mrs. Ronald Reagan really has on
her husband is immediately apparent to anyone who follows them on the campaign
trail. At almost every stop, a local reporter will ask Nancy Reagan, as one did
the other day in Erie, Pa., ''If you become the First Lady, will you play an
important role in helping your husband make his decisions?''

To which Mrs. Reagan replied, as she usually does, ''My husband makes his
decisions. I might suggest an idea to him, but my husband makes his decisions.''

Her denials of influence have persistently been ignored, however, and she
continues to be portrayed as a powerful, domineering woman who has enormous
influence on and control over what her husband says, does and thinks.

Mrs. Reagan has a considerable amount of influence with her husband, but she is
no Svengali. She is constantly by her husband's side and he considers her his
best friend. She often attends staff meetings, and her husband uses her as a
sounding board, discussing with her almost every important decision he makes.
Because she is so finely attuned to her husband's needs, she advises on his
schedule - how much time he needs to collect himself before a speech, how much
rest he needs. She is also said to have good instincts about people, and the
Republican Presidential candidate pays close attention to her judgments.

Nancy Reagan is a modern political wife, far more involved in the political
process than, say, Maimie Eisenhower was, but she should not be compared to
Rosalynn Carter, a very active First Lady. She has said that she will not attend
cabinet meetings if her husband is elected, nor will Reagan send his family
abroad to represent the United States, as Carter has done. However, if her
husband is elected, Nancy Reagan will surely continue to be one of his key
advisers.

Aboard his campaign plane, Reagan made it clear that he feels her role in his
decision-making process has been misunderstood. ''Many of the stories have
distorted her character and her personality a great deal. Suggestions have been
made that she is - how do I say it? - some kind of mastermind behind the scenes
or something.''

He was referring to two of the key moves in his political life, for which she is
said to have been responsible: his switch from the Democratic Party in 1962 to
the Republican Party and, more recently, for the firing of John Sears, Reagan's
campaign manager in 1976 and the man who supervised his comeback this year,
through his all-important victory in the New Hampshire primary. Although there
is no evidence that his wife had a part in his decision to switch parties, she
most certainly was involved in the behind-the-scenes events that led to Sears'
dismissal. When a staff crisis loomed before the New Hampshire primary, it was
to Mrs. Reagan that both sides in the dispute turned for help. While her husband
did indeed make his own final decision, a reconstruction of the incident reveals
that Mrs. Reagan served as a negotiator and arbitrator in the dispute.

It is from her extraordinarily close relationship with her husband that Mrs.
Reagan's real influence - which is not inconsiderable - as well as her mythical
influence - which is boundless -both derive.  She is part of the Him Generation
- a woman who, in the words of the Tammy Wynette song, stands by her man.

''They are joined at the hip,'' says one
friend of the Reagans in attempting to describe their relationship.  ''When they
go to a party, they're together, although they mingle.  She's well-bred,
conservative, and not extraordinary except for her devotion to her man.''

Over and over the same refrain is repeated. ''She adores him, and he worships
her,'' says Nancy Reynolds, a vice president of the Bendix Corporation who was
formerly an aide to Governor Reagan.  ''It's 100 percent genuine. She has made
life wonderful for him. When he comes through that door, Nancy Reagan is waiting
for him. She looks like a million bucks. There's a terrific dinner on. She's the
best listener you ever saw. Is there any one of us who doesn't want that?''

John Sears says it is that very closeness that leads to confusion about what
Nancy Reagan's real role is: ''She is very close to her husband. People from the
outside, seeing their closeness, too quickly assume that she must have a hand in
the positions he takes. I've never observed that to be the fact. It has been
incorrect, at least in my experience, that she takes a strong hand about issues
or anything of substance. Even on the very few occasions when she tried to say
anything about substance, he did not take that kind of advice from her.''

After a long morning of campaigning, Mrs. Reagan sat down for an interview in
her suite in a Cleveland hotel. She is, at 57, still a very attractive woman
-short, thin and always well groomed. That afternoon she was wearing a black and
white polka-dot dress designed by Albert Nipon, one of her favorite designers.
Her hair looked as if it had just been professionally done, although she fixes
it herself on the campaign trail. ''She just doesn't wrinkle, through force of
will or something,'' says someone who has worked with her.

She is gracious but unspontaneous, often replying to questions with almost
verbatim passages from her autobio-
graphy, ''Nancy.'' What does Mrs. Reagan think of her image as a controlling
woman? ''That's just all wrong,'' she said. ''He makes the decisions. We can get
into a discussion of how to approach an issue, but the final decision is his. Of
course, after 28 years of marriage, he influences me, and I influence him, to an
extent. But that doesn't mean that you go in there and say, 'Do thus and so.'
That just isn't so.''

Discussion then turned to the dismissal of John Sears and her part in the
incident. At the time many accounts implied that Nancy Reagan had been at least
partly instrumental in getting rid of Sears and his associates, James Lake,
Reagan's press secretary, and Charles Black, national political director. These
accounts contributed to the image of Nancy Reagan as the behind-the-scenes
manipulator. The truth appears to be that her involvement was subtle but
significant.

According to one of the victims of the dramatic purge, it all started three
weeks before the New Hampshire primary, when John Sears overheard Ed Meese,
chief of staff for Reagan when he was governor and now one of the most important
of Reagan's advisers, telling some staff members that Sears would be fired the
day after the New Hampshire primary, along with Lake and Black. An intense
rivalry over areas of responsibility had been going on between Meese and Sears.

Sears told Mrs. Reagan what he had overheard and said, according to the source,
that this was ''not tolerable.'' ''He told her he knew we had some problems in
the top management of the campaign and that he had a proposal for changing
that.''

His proposal was to bring into the campaign William Clark, Reagan's former
executive assistant, whom he had appointed to the Supreme Court in California.

Mrs. Reagan says that she called Clark at Sears' request, but that he would not
leave the bench to join the campaign.
Page 94
As to whether she acted without consulting her husband, she says, ''Well, to a
certain extent that's true. At that point, New Hampshire was very important to
us and that was the main thing on his mind.'' But she wants to make it clear
that ''I was just trying to be helpful. Being helpful and being influential are
different things. I was not trying to pull strings or to make decisions as to
who stayed or who went.''

When Clark said he was not available, the Reagan camp turned to William Casey,
the East Coast lawyer who was the chairman of the Securities and Exchange
Commission under Richard Nixon. After Reagan had asked him to become chief of
staff, but before the appointment had been announced, Casey joined the campaign
in Massachusetts.

That evening, Reagan summoned Lake, Black and Sears to his hotel room. According
to one of the participants, it was ''a very contentious meeting. Anger, a great
deal of anger was displayed by the Governor, and after two hours we were at the
point where Sears said something to the effect of, 'I cannot work here as long
as Ed Meese continues to be in the spot he is in.' The clear intent was: 'Him or
me.' At that point, Reagan blew up. He jumped out of his chair and shouted.''

The day after the acrimonious meeting, Mrs. Reagan continued to ''lend a
sympathetic ear,'' as she puts it, to Black and Lake, who accompanied her to
Chicago.

She was also listening to the other side, as Peter Hannaford, formerly director
of public affairs for Governor Reagan and a longtime intimate, points out:
''Participants on both sides were probably pretty open with Mrs. Reagan. She was
trying very hard to ameliorate the tensions.''

How the story ends depends upon who tells it. But all sides agree that on Feb.
26, the day of the New Hampshire primary, Reagan asked Black, Sears and Lake to
come to his hotel room at 2:30 in the afternoon. When the three men entered,
Mrs. Reagan was sitting to one side. Reagan told them promptly that they were
fired and handed them a press
reagan first jump
release that announced their resignation.  ''I think she really tried to help us
put together something that would be satisfactory,'' said one of the three
victims. ''But I do believe that stormy meeting sealed our fate in the
Governor's mind and there was nothing she could do about it. People who don't
think Ronald Reagan's a strong person mistake him. He's a very strong person,
and where he's made up his mind, neither hell nor high water's going to change
it.''

Nancy Reagan says, ''We tried to work it out, and I tried to be helpful, but by
the time we got to New Hampshire, it was obvious to all of us that we were kind
of applying Band-Aids. It was a situation that just wasn't going to work. Ronnie
decided that, before he knew what the results were, he would make a change, so
that if he lost it wouldn't seem that this had come about because he had lost -
which I thought was very nice of Ronnie.'' Although she is now the chic wife of
a fairly wealthy and successful man, Mrs. Reagan has not always had such an easy
life. She was the daughter of Kenneth Robbins, a New Jersey car salesman, and
Edith Luckett, an actress. Almost immediately after her birth, her father
deserted her mother, and Edith Luckett, known as DeeDee, had to go to work. She
left Nancy in the care of her sister Virginia and her husband, Audley Galbraith,
who lived in Bethesda, Md.

Although Nancy Reagan has only praise for the generosity and kindness of her
relatives, she adds that, as a child, ''you want your mother.''

She got her, however, only for brief intervals: ''Whenever Mother got a play
that kept her in New York for any length of time, I'd go and stay with her. But
I missed her.''

According to people who knew DeeDee Luckett, like television journalist Mike
Wallace, she was worthy of her daughter's adoration.  ''She's an absolutely
lovely woman,'' says Wallace, ''one of the funniest women ever, warm and
fascinating.''

If Nancy has fond memories of her mother, the same cannot be said for her
father. She describes one unhappy meeting with him: ''I went to vist my father
once, and he said something about my mother that I didn't like. I got angry and
said I was going to go back to my mother, and he locked me in a bathroom. It was
a terrible feeling, and ever since then, I cannot lock the door, never do.
Ronnie, sometimes in a hotel - this was before we got Secret Service -would say,
'Well, lock the bedroom door!' And I'd say, 'No! No! No!' It just brings back
the whole thing to me.''

Just before Nancy's seventh birthday, her life changed completely, and for the
better. Her mother married a prominent Chicago neurosurgeon, Loyal Davis, and
Nancy went to live with them. Nancy and Davis got along so well that at the age
of 14, she became his adopted daughter and to this day refers to him as her
father.

Davis, chief of surgery at Passavant Memorial Hospital in Chicago and the
chairman of the Department of Surgery at Northwestern University, was, in
Nancy's view, ''a man of more strength and integrity than any I have ever known
other than Ronnie.''

Despite her fondness for Davis, she is eager to bury the story that she adopted
his right-wing political views and then passed them on to her husband. ''How
that ever got started, I do not know,'' she said.  ''My father was never
involved in politics. He was too busy teaching, being a professor of surgery,
operating.''

As for the suggestion that she persuaded Ronald Reagan to join the Republican
Party, Nancy laughs off the idea: ''I had nothing to do with it because I didn't
know anything about politics when we got married. And I'm not proud of that. I
should have, but I didn't. When I was going to college, we weren't as involved
or as aware. I promise you, I couldn't have changed anybody to anything.''
REAGAN SECOND JUMP

A friend of Nancy's agrees: ''I think he turned without too much help. He made a
lot of money, and he became very upset about the tax structure. I think his life
was changing, and he chose her because he was changing.''

''When I married Nancy,'' says Reagan, ''she hadn't given a thought to politics.
The story goes, if she didn't do it, it was her father, the surgeon. I was very
conscious that during the years before I changed, Dr. Davis was most tactful -
we didn't talk politics. I foresaw an increasing encroachment on individual
freedom by government. And over the years I finally realized I could no longer
support the leadership of the Democratic Party .'' Nancy Reagan attended Smith
College, where she majored in drama.  After graduation, she embarked on a career
as an actress, helped by her mother's friends, such as Zasu Pitts, Walter Huston
and Spencer Tracy. After acting in some plays in New York, she managed to land a
contract with M-G-M, and she left New York for Hollywood.

Although she has been reluctant to talk about any romantic life she may have had
before she met Ronald Reagan, Nancy Reagan will admit that she dated Clark
Gable: ''I thought he was the nicest man I had almost ever known in his
position. We went to a party once, and I thought I'd be standing there in a
corner. With all the beautiful, glamorous people, I thought I would be left
there twiddling my thumbs.'' But not at all.

''We went to ball games in the daytime, out for dinner and sometimes to the
theater at night. It was fun.'' As for romance: ''It was not what you're talking
about. We had a great time for a couple of weeks when he was in New York.''

Nancy Davis met her future husband through an odd turn of events.  There was
another Nancy Davis, who turned up on a list of Communist sympathizers. Nancy
Davis, the actress, began to get mail addressed to the other Nancy Davis, and
she was afraid that the confusion might hurt her career. She spoke to the
director Mervyn LeRoy, with whom she was working on ''East Side, West Side.''

LeRoy recalls that he told her he'd get a hold of a friend of his.  The friend
was Ronald Reagan, president of the Screen Actors Guild, who had been divorced
from his first wife, Jane Wyman, for four years. ''I told him she was beautiful
and that he might get to like her,'' says LeRoy. He was right. Reagan and Nancy
were married shortly thereafter, in 1952.

After their marriage and the birth of their daughter, Nancy acted in a few more
movies, including one with her husband, ''Hellcats of the Navy,'' and then
decided to abandon her career to devote herself completely to her husband and
family. Reagan explains, ''It was just the way she had been brought up by her
mother. She felt maybe some people could manage both, but she didn't feel she
could, and she chose the one she felt was the most important.'' Did he ask her
to sacrifice her career? ''I could never have asked anyone to do that.'' Nancy
and Ronald Reagan had two children, Patricia, who is now 28 years old, and Ron,
who is 22. By his first marriage, Reagan had a daughter, Maureen, now 39, and an
adopted son, Michael, who is 35.

Despite the surface of perfection Nancy and Ronald Reagan present as a couple,
their relations with their children appear to have been subject to the same
tensions experienced by many families. All four children dropped out of college.
Patti moved in for a couple of years with a member of a rock group called the
Eagles, despite her mother's belief that living together outside of marriage is
''just playing house.'' Ron left Yale University to join the Joffrey II Dancers
in New York.

Mrs. Reagan will admit that life was not always perfect in the Reagan household:
''There are things in every family that you have to deal with. The 60's were a
difficult time to bring up a child and to be a child. Certainly they were
exposed to things that we were never exposed to. And I think every generation in
a sense rebels against the preceding generation, some children more violently
than others.  Patti went through a period, not in any way as violently as a lot
of children did. None of the children got into the drug culture -none of that.''

Patti Reagan's views are the antithesis of her parents'. She is, for example,
opposed to nuclear power, which her father favors.  On abortion, she disagrees
with her parents: ''They don't feel that morally and religiously it's right, but
I don't think that is really the point. The reality of the situation is that
unwanted pregnancies happen. Do we really want to go back to back-alley
abortions? I don't think we do. Yes, it's something alive in you, but I think it
would be more sinful to put it up for adoption,'' which is precisely what her
mother recommends.

When Patti was living with Bernie Leadon, a guitarist for the Eagles, there was,
according to Nancy's friend Betsy Bloomingdale, a Los Angeles socialite, ''a
separation of a couple of years, a period when they were not all that
friendly.'' Accepting the fact that her daughter was living with a man to whom
she was not married was, according to Mrs. Bloomingdale, ''hard for Nancy
because she has very definite principles of what is right and what is wrong, and
she sticks by those principles.''

Although Mrs. Bloomingdale remembers Nancy Reagan saying, ''Oh, God, I don't
know what next,'' today Patti has returned home to Pacific Palisades, the Reagan
home in Los Angeles. Of her mother, Patti says, ''I'm closer to her than I ever
have been.''

In his freshman year at Yale, Ron Reagan called his mother to tell her he was
dropping out of school to become a dancer with the Joffrey ballet. According to
Ron, his mother said, ''It's fine with me. I'll put your father on.''

His parents were tolerant of their children's views, says Ron, adding that Patti
is ''more vocal about her disagreements'' than he is.

As for his mother, Ron says, ''She is a very strong woman, and like most strong
people she is capable of making enemies with people who perhaps disagree with
her.'' He added that ''she's very bright and warm - once you get to know her.
Suffice it to say, she was a good mother, and she's very loving.''

Maureen Reagan, who is today executive vice president of Sell Overseas America,
was 11 years old when her father married Nancy.  Maureen remembers that Nancy,
as a stepmother, was ''as sympathetic as she could be, since she had not had the
experience I've now had.'' Maureen, who has been married and divorced twice,
says, ''I've found myself over the years dating someone who has children by a
previous marriage, and I have to keep reminding myself what it was like to be
the kid. Little girls want their daddy's time and wives want their husbands'
time.''

Although, Maureen says, ''we haven't lived wrapped in plastic; we're out there
in the real world.'' She concludes, ''It doesn't make my problems any better to
tell you about them, so why should I?  I think that's basically been an attitude
of the entire family. It's not that we're secretive. It's just that it isn't
going to solve anything to talk about it over and over, so why talk about it?''
When Nancy Reagan talks about issues, she does not give any impression of
passionate involvement. You look for a core of Nancy, some thought that is hers
as distinct from theirs, but you do not find it.

Does she, like her husband, really believe that the Vietnam war was a ''noble
cause''? Mrs. Reagan says, ''He never was in agreement with Kennedy on sending
troops into Vietnam. He didn't think we should be fighting a land war there. But
once they were there, there was this tiny country that was asking for help, and
to offer help, he thought, was noble. He thought it was ignoble the way the war
was conducted, that they weren't allowed to win, that they were sent in there
with one arm tied behind their backs. He was most critical of that.''

Does she think her husband lacks adequate experience in foreign affairs, as some
of his critics have alleged? ''Nope,'' she replies, tersely.

Does the charge that he is trigger-happy have any foundation? It makes her
angry, she admits, ''because, after all, a man who has children and who has seen
four wars in his lifetime, how could anyone make a statement like that?''

Does she think her husband's age is a problem? ''He wore everybody out during
the primaries,'' she says. ''And when the flu was going around, everybody on
that plane including me got it. Not Ronnie.'' As for the thought of retirement:
''Oh, but how awful,'' she exclaims, pointing out that ''my father, at age 84,
is still the editor of Surgery, Gynecology and Obstetrics.''

On abortion, she repeats her well-known views: ''I'm against abortion on demand
except when the mother's life is in danger. I think it's taking a human life,
and I just can't get beyond that point. There are so many people who would like
to adopt a child now, and there are no children to adopt.''

On the Equal Rights Amendment, she says, ''I think that after eight years of
trying the amendment route everybody should try to go the statute route.''

Does she believe in equal pay for equal work? ''Women should get paid whatever a
man would get paid for the same job,'' says Mrs.  Reagan. ''I think it comes
down to ability.''

John Sears says that one area where Mrs. Reagan has influenced her husband on
issues is on women's rights, and that, contrary to popular perception, ''to some
degree, in that particular area, she may have accounted for some softening of
his positions.'' Nancy Reagan has changed a lot since 1966, when her husband
entered politics. ''It was a whole new life and I was scared,'' she recalls.
Her friend Nancy Reynolds says, ''She was terrified for those first few years.
Her husband was being condemned by the press. She would go to a football game
and hear them yell, 'Get Reagan.' She has overcome a lot of shyness and she's
able to take criticism better.''

''She has learned a lot,'' says a prominent journalist, who has covered the
Reagans since their Sacramento days. ''She's got good practical sense. He makes
more goofs when she's not around. He talks to her a lot. They really are married
in a way that's basically appealing. She's grown on me like a sore tooth.''

Political life, says Nancy Reagan, like anything else ''gets easier the longer
you do it. It becomes less strange to you if you like people, and I basically
do.''

If Ronald Reagan is elected President, Mrs. Reagan will continue her interest in
the Foster Grandparents Program. She has also said that she would like to do
something about the drug problem. But it is unlikely that social concerns will
preoccupy her. They have not to date. She will probably continue to forgo her
own pursuits in order to devote herself to her husband. ''Her presence will make
him happy and solid emotionally,'' says Jim Lake. ''I think that's her greatest
contribution.'' Flying from one campaign stop to another, Ronald Reagan
reflected on what his life would have been like if he had not met Nancy. ''I
don't know,'' he said, ''except I know I wouldn't have been happy. I was well
aware that I was very lonely, although I guess I was a success in Hollywood and
had all the perquisites that go with that.  But I felt the need to love
someone.''

Then, without any prodding, he posed the key question, ''Has she influenced my
life?'' He answered: ''Yes, because I've never been happier in my life than I
have been with her. She is very much what you see. There is a gentleness to her,
a fierce feeling of family loyalty. I miss her very much when we're not
together. We're very happy. I imagine if I sold shoes, as my father did, she
would have wanted to help me sell shoes.''

The plane was beginning its descent, but Reagan wanted to add one more thing:
''She's a very intelligent person. I don't know of anything we don't talk about.
When anything happens that's interesting or exciting, the first thought that
enters my mind is how I'm going to tell her.''

He concluded by recalling a remark he thinks was made by Clark Gable to the
effect that ''there is nothing more important than approaching your own doorstep
at the end of the day, knowing that someone on the other side is waiting for the
sound of your footsteps.'' He smiled and said, ''I think that sums it up pretty
well.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Nancy Reagan

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE CAVIAR CONNECTION;
by Bill Kurtis

SECTION: Section 6; Page 132, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3686 words


Bill Kurtis, who is an anchorman-reporter for WBBM-TV in Chicago, recently
returned from Iran. By Bill Kurtis ustoms Inspector Elaine Pittman was looking
over the crush of arrivals at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport when a
Swiss Air employee asked her how much caviar was allowed to be carried into the
country by an Iranian national.

Inspector Pittman answered, ''About $300 worth, duty-free.'' To which the flight
attendant replied, ''Well, then, that man has a lot of caviar -Persian caviar.''
Inspector Pittman later said that ''something clicked.'' In a rare moment of
second-guessing a fellow inspector, she looked more closely at the 21 cans of
hermetically sealed, very expensive caviar. She peeled back the bright gift
wrapping, slit open one tin and probed the black fish eggs, expecting to find
dark-colored hashish oil.  Instead, she discovered a false bottom. Inside the 21
cans were 10 pounds of uncut Iranian heroin with an estimated value close to $10
million.

Drug-enforcement authorities arrested the Iranian, a 36-year-old named Mohammed
Ali Bastanipour. Records showed that a month earlier he had declared 25 pounds
of caviar, on which he had paid a duty tax of $135. That ''caviar'' has not been
found.  What law-enforcement authorities call the ''Caviar Connection'' came to
light in April, before President Carter restricted travel to and from Iran.
Earlier in the year, Iranian students had been caught in the Los Angeles
International Airport smuggling heroin inside the frame of a picture of
Ayatollah Khomeini, and, at Dallas-Fort Worth Air-port, heroin worth $10 million
was found hidden in a crate containing a Moslem holy book.

Given the puritanical severity of the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's Islamic
regime, the fact that Iran is now supporting a flourishing trade in heroin seems
a paradox. But since last year's revolution, political instability in Iran has
weakened or eliminated controls over the production and transportation of opium
and heroin from Southwest Asia. The result could be the biggest flow of heroin
to the United States in history.

The House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control toured the Middle East
and Europe this summer, returning with a grim report. At the time, committee
chairman Lester Wolff, Democrat of New York, said, ''An epidemic-producing,
record 1,600 metric tons of opium are racing for the United States, part of a
worldwide, illicit-drug empire that does a $57 billion-a-year business.''

Even with the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq war, which could curtail the movement of
goods across the Middle East, experts believe that a large supply of the drugs
will continue to flow. The war has caused them to adjust their estimates
downward from Representative Wolff's figure of 1,600 tons to less than l,000
tons of opium produced in Southwest Asia. But that amount, in addition to what
is already in the heroin pipeline in Europe, could still send the number of
addicts, drug-related crimes and fatal overdoses in the United States to
frighteningly high levels.

A mathematical breakdown reveals why Federal authorities are sounding the alarm.
The 1,000 tons of opium are produced by Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan. The last
epidemic of white heroin (in contrast to brown heroin, which comes only from
Mexico) to hit the United States, in the early 1970's, was produced by the
comparatively small amount of 80 annual tons of Turkish opium. If 625 tons are
consumed in Europe, as drug authorities predict, 375 tons would remain for
conversion into heroin (10 kilograms of opium will produce one kilogram of
heroin) that would be targeted for the United States. Federal Drug Enforcement
Administration (D.E.A.) agents expect a doubling of the current supply of heroin
on the streets of our major cities. Representative Wolff predicts that the
''new'' heroin from Southwest Asia will soon increase the drug's availability on
the streets 20-fold.

A more cautious appraisal of the problem, however, comes from the White House's
Associate Director for Drug Policy, Lee Dogoloff. He stops short of spreading
the alarm that there is an impending drug epidemic. He says, ''We are concerned
about the indicators in various United States cities, but we're on top of it and
we will increase steps to interdict the supplies coming into the United States.
We're not sleeping. If anything is predictable about the drug-abuse problem, it
is that in the future it is likely to change in ways that are not predictable.''

Peter Bensinger, director of the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration,
indicates that the white Southwest Asian heroin is already beginning to arrive.
So far this year, narcotics agents have seized more white heroin in the United
States than was seized during the whole of 1979 - including 160 pounds in New
York, 18.26 pounds in Chicago and 2.3 pounds in Los Angeles, as the drug thins
out across the country.

The number of arrests made nationally for smuggling Southwest Asian heroin
surpassed last year's total of 64 in the first six months of 1980. In New York,
according to Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau, heroin arrests are
up nearly 40 percent over last year and 85 percent over 1978. Heroin-overdose
deaths are predicted to rise to 600 by the end of 1980, compared with 472 in
1979 and 246 in 1978. The prime source of the heroin: Southwest Asia.  The
illegal drug flow begins quietly, like the headwaters of a great river,
trickling down from the inaccessible mountain areas of Pakistan, Afghanistan and
Iran.

In northwest Pakistan's Karakorum Mountains, for instance, the poppy harvest
begins in the late spring. There is no drug abuse here, no haunting figures
huddling on street corners. The farmers who harvest the poppies think only of
the money this year's crop will bring, hoping for a yield of 12 to 15 kilograms
of opium gum from one acre of poppy flowers. Other crops, like wheat and maize,
are far less lucrative and often bring only bartered goods in trade. A Pakistani
farmer sells one kilogram of raw opium to a trafficker for $35-$70. That
kilogram is worth $350-$700 after it is converted to a morphine base, and
$9,000-$21,000 after conversion to heroin. It will sell for $35,000 in Europe,
$150,000-$200,000 when it enters New York City and up to $2 million when it
reaches the streets.

A typical opium farmer is found most often in special tribal areas outside the
direct control of the Pakistani Government. Much of his crop will supply 150,000
opium addicts in Pakistan, a problem that the Government has tackled with a
vengeance. In those parts of the country that it does control, the Government
has successfully enforced a ban on opium-poppy growing, part of President
Mohammed Zia ul-Haq's program to deal with the addict problem and his effort to
lead the Islamic revival stirring his constituents. In addition, a new Islamic
ordinance provides for a punishment of 30 lashes and up to five years in jail
for the offense of importing, exporting, transporting or manufacturing an
intoxicant (alcohol, opium or heroin).

But the crop of the Pakistani farmer who continues unencumbered by the
governmental ban passes from harvest to a wholesaler found in a lawless frontier
town like Landi Kotal, high in the mountains near the Khyber Pass.

The inhabitants of Landi Kotal tend shops full of tires, wood, gasoline and
plenty of guns to supply the Afghan guerrilla fighters.  They will smuggle
anything anywhere, including drugs, their primary product.

Huge stockpiles of opium are neatly stacked in black slabs of drying gum, most
often in a storeroom behind a small shop. According to Drug Enforcement Agency
agents who monitor the business in Pakistan, these shops often have as much as
one full ton of opium on hand. A prospective customer gets a first-hand look at
the goods he will be buying. Quality plays an important role in the opium trade.
Like wine, opium improves with age - during a drying process that can extend
over five years. Current stockpiles should last for the next four years, while
the maturing process refines the morphine content of the opium. Representative
Wolff estimates that there are 400 tons of opium stockpiled in Pakistan alone,
enough to keep the drug flowing to the West for years.

The big sales in the dusty shops of Landi Kotal used to be of multiton
quantities of opium. But the stories of great heroin profits have drifted back
into the mountains and the wholesalers have begun to process the opium
themselves. The opium is distilled to a morphine base - 10 pounds of opium gum
will yield one pound of morphine base, which is chemically converted to one
pound of heroin. A $1,000 investment in a small processing lab at Landi Kotal
can yield a product worth $7,000 to a buyer from Europe or Iran, and it makes
smuggling easier, since there is less bulk to carry across the mountains.
Pathan tribesmen, who constitute the majority of the opium growers, generally
leave the task of transporting the drug to the Kuchi tribe, the traditional
nomadic caravaneers of the Middle East. They can deliver raw or processed opium
by burro, camel or truck - despite even the military obstacles created by the
Soviet Union's invasion of Afghanistan. Their transportation routes detour
around the fighting through Punjab and Baluchistan Provinces to reach highways
across the interior of Iran.

The routes are often little more than rocky paths at high elevations, quite
inaccessible to vehicles and impossible to block.  This is why the best way to
fight opium trafficking is to cut off supplies at their source, for once a
shipment of the illicit drug gets into the pipeline, some of it will always get
through.

The opium shipments leave Pakistan by sea through the port at Karachi, or
overland through Iran toward the eventual destination of Turkey. The land route
is the most heavily traveled because the chances of being interrupted in Iran
have decreased in the last year since the revolution. The Iran-Iraq war has
added a temporary barrier to the drug flow through southwest Iran. But,
according to D.E.A.  agents, the drug highway has simply turned north, using
previously established routes that lead into Turkey.

Much of the opium and heroin that enters Iran stays there to satisfy an enormous
addict population. The country uses far more than it can grow itself. Director
Bensinger of the Drug Enforcement Administration says, ''Opium is being grown in
far greater proportions than during the Shah's regime. Of more significance, a
number of officials whom we worked closely with out of our office in Teheran for
many years, trained in the most up-to-date law-enforcement techniques, have just
disappeared. Some have been shot. Some have not returned to the Government. Some
have fled. So you have a group of untrained, unprofessional individuals in a
variety of Government positions in Iran, including international police
efforts.''

The result is a proliferation of the drug problem. During a meeting of the
United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs in Vienna last February, Iran's
delegate expressed concern about the country's growing addiction problem. Mathea
Falco, Assistant Secretary of State for International Narcotics Matters, says
that the Iranian representative mentioned 800,000 opium and heroin users. That
is an increase of some 300,000 over the last available figures, compiled while
the United States still had observers in the country.

On May 10, 1980, after more than a year without any formal attempt by the new
revolutionary Government to address the Iranian narcotics problem, President
Abolhassan Bani-Sadr appointed the Islamic judge Ayatollah Sadegh Khalkhali to
head a new antinarcotics campaign. The mullah immediately employed the same
methods that he used to punish the Shah's secret police, SAVAK: He executed
hundreds of drug smugglers. But it is still too early to gauge the deterrent
effect of these stern measures.  Historically, America's white heroin problems
have been linked not to Iran, but to its neighbor, Turkey. Throughout the 1950's
and 1960's, Turkish and French smugglers fed the European heroin market with
opium grown in the eastern part of Turkey. But in 1972, under pressure from the
United States, the Turkish Government banned the unlicensed growing of poppies,
and, with $35 million in American aid, implemented crop-substitution and
rehabilitation programs. The same year, the famous French Connection was smashed
by American and French agents. This huge operation processed Turkish opium in
Marseilles and shipped it to the United States. The dozen arrests virtually
destroyed the links between Europe and the United States, and caused a decline
in the availability of white heroin in major American cities.

But the empty supply line was soon filled by heroin out of Mexico and Southeast
Asia. Federal narcotics agents turned their efforts to these new sources. Aerial
herbicides applied to wild poppy crops grown in Mexico reduced the shipments of
brown Mexican heroin. And the networks that funneled Southeast Asian heroin from
the ''Golden Triangle'' - encompassing Thailand, Burma and Laos - were damaged
when American servicemen were pulled out of Vietnam and the United States'
presence was reduced in Thailand. After years of wallowing in readily accessible
heroin, the United States addict population actually dropped.
Turkey is playing a different role in the latest heroin-epidemic threat. Small
laboratories, located along its eastern border with Iran, process opium into one
of the various stages of morphine base.  It is then transported to continental
Europe. Turkish nationals are the main couriers, according to United States
intelligence reports.  The transit is made easy by the massive movement of
Turkish workers who commute regularly between jobs in West Germany and their
hometowns in Turkey.

West Germany has the fastest growing addict population outside the United States
and Iran. According to officials of the German rehabilitation program, in a
population of 62 million people there are 80,000 heroin addicts. Their overdose
death rate is about six times greater than that in the United States.

Southwest Asian heroin now accounts for 85 percent of all the heroin seized
inside West Germany, including drugs taken from United States military
personnel. During a meeting of NATO ministers last November, Cyrus Vance, then
Secretary of State, discussed the alarming number of drug-related deaths among
United States servicemen and expressed concern that heavy drug use could affect
military readiness - a problem that has taken on a new urgency in the light of
recent Soviet movements in the Middle East. Seven months later, in June 1980,
the United States Army arrested 144 American soldiers and seized $2 million
worth of heroin and hashish, the result of extensive undercover efforts by West
German and American investigators around Nuremberg.

Drug Enforcement Administration agents, working out of United States embassies
around the world, uniformly paint a dire picture of the tide of heroin now
reaching the United States. They base their concern on a number of
''indicators'' throughout Europe.

One of the important signs is the price of heroin in Europe. It has been
dropping, evidence of a market that is saturated. As Europe fills up, drug
authorities agree, the heroin is spilling over into the United States,
especially since the profit margins here can be multiplied six times. A special
Drug Enforcement Administration Southwest Asian heroin task force is already
detecting heroin from the European pool in samples monitored in Harlem and on
New York City's Lower East Side.  One of the reasons that authorities fear the
white heroin is its potency. Director Bensinger says, ''It has been seized and
tested at 80 percent pure and above. That means the dealers will probably cut it
(with sugar, starch, powdered milk or quinine) four or five times - 'step on it'
is the phrase - and then reduce it to 6 or 7 percent purity. In the case of
Mexican heroin that was traditionally imported at 20 or 30 percent pure and then
cut five or six times, the purity was down to 3.5 percent. That greater increase
in potency will cause greater injuries and in many cases fatalities to addicts
unfamiliar with the new potency.''

Representative Wolff agrees. ''The purer heroin has greater appeal to young
people,'' he said. ''They can stuff it in a pipe or roll it in paper and smoke
it like marijuana, thus eliminating the time-consuming and painful processes of
cooking it and injecting it into the veins.''

New York Governor Hugh Carey has warned for months that the problem is not
limited to the inner cities. He has said, ''it is not just a ghetto phenomenon,
nobody's neighborhood is safe.'' New York's State Division of Substance Abuse
Services reported an increase of 92 percent in heroin-related deaths in 1979
over 1978, and says the rate is accelerating in 1980. In Westchester and
Rockland counties, heroin-related hospital and half-way house admissions for the
first quarter of 1980, compared with the first quarter of 1979, were up 49
percent. For Nassau and Suffolk counties, the admissions were up 62 percent.
Governor Carey will ask the State Legislature for $6 million to treat drug abuse
and fight the ''war on heroin.''

White House Associate Director for Drug Policy Lee Dogoloff calls the present
situation an ''orange light'' of warning, not yet a red alert. But what Dogoloff
and others see as successful law enforcement - the recent arrests of
organized-crime figures trying to smuggle white heroin into the country - others
see only as an indication that the old channels are open again, and flowing.

In early March of this year, two men met in the cargo hangar of Alitalia
Airlines at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York. One of the men was a cargo
employee of the airline. The other was one of a small group of men interested in
shipping heroin from Milan, Italy, to the United States. The cargo employee was
asked to insure its safe arrival. Listen-ing to the conversation were agents of
a special Southwest Asian heroin unit set up at J.F.K. by the Drug Enforcement
Administration.

According to the D.E.A., two of the men in the smuggling group - Giuseppe and
Rosario Gambino - were relatives of Carlo Gambino, the now-deceased former head
of one of New York City's leading Mafia families. Three other men were also
involved - Domenico, Emanuel and Antonio Adamita.

On March 18, 1980, according to the Drug Enforcement Administration office in
New York, the three Adamita brothers arrived in Milan and made contact with
their source of heroin from Southwest Asia. They carefully packed 40 kilograms
of pure white heroin into olive-oil tins. They placed the tins of what appeared
to be Italy's national product into a corrugated cardboard box addressed to
Central Nastri International Importers, 74 18th Avenue, Brooklyn, N.  Y. The
brothers delivered it to a shipper near Milan for delivery to Alitalia Airlines.
They sent word to the United States to make preparations for the pickup in the
Alitalia cargo department at Kennedy.

Drug Enforcement Administration agents tipped off the Italian police. They
arrested the Adamitas, who are still being held in Italy for extradition, and
seized 81 1/2 pounds of white heroin. In New Jersey, D.E.A. agents arrested both
Gambinos, who are now out on bail awaiting trial on charges of conspiracy to
smuggle drugs into the United States.

Then, on June 4, Italian police, acting on Drug Enforcement Administration
information, raided two major heroin laboratories involved in processing
Southwest Asian heroin near Milan. Four French chemists were arrested inside an
old castle and 59 kilos of morphine base were seized. Two French drug
traffickers were also arrested in Nice, which brought the total number of
defendants to nine, including several who had been involved with the French
Connection of the early 1970's.

Despite these important arrests, the Drug Enforcement Administration's Director
Peter Bensinger predicts that the Southwest Asian heroin pipeline will continue
to operate and that the drug will continue flowing into the United States.
''There is no question in my mind,'' he says, ''that the Iranian connection is a
new threat that is most difficult, because we don't have a government in place
that is seriously equipped to deal with the problem.''

The indicators, reflected in intelligence reports, seem clear: The United States
is being buffeted by a storm of white heroin from Southwest Asia. One may not
see young men ''shooting up'' on public street corners, as could be seen, at
least until recently, in the slums of Teheran. But the new wave of Southwest
Asian white heroin is sending equally deadly doses into what is likely to become
an expanding market of young Americans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of workers harvesting opium gum from poppy field
photo of tins of heroin

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Self-Propelled Cannon Taken From U.S. Base

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 91 words

DATELINE: LAWTON, Okla., Oct. 26


A civilian took a self-propelled 155mm howitzer from Fort Sill early yesterday
and knocked down fences and ripped up lawns as he drove it through a residential
neighborhood.

The police chased the vehicle, but the driver turned the huge cannon around and
began pursuing the police instead.  The authorities said that Larry Joe Sales, a
29-year-old Vietnam veteran, was arrested several hours later by Highway Patrol
troopers after tear gas canisters were fired at the cab of the vehicle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

News Analysis;

THE ISSUES TAKE A BIG STEP FORWARD IN THE CAMPAIGN

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1005 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 26


This Presidential campaign was supposed to be about the economy and foreign
policy. In its eighth week, it finally was.

With the debate Tuesday in Cleveland between President Carter and Ronald Reagan
widely described as a critical roll of the political dice, there had been
expectation that the campaign's pace would drop off until then as the candidates
studied for their confrontation.

But speculation over a possibly imminent decision by Iran to release the 52
American hostages boiled over into a campaign controversy all week long. And a
grim set of inflation figures, the final important economic statistics before
Election Day, underlined the issue that one American in three, according to the
latest New York Times/CBS News Poll, regards as the most important facing this
country.

Those outside influences, played upon and magnified by the candidates, refocused
a Presidential campaign that had often seemed more concerned about extravagant
attacks and slips of the tongue that could be made to serve as indicators of
potential behavior in the White House.

There was more to the eighth week of the campaign than just a serious approach
to issues, of course. In Texas, Gov. William B.  Clements got tangled in his own
intense desire to see Mr. Carter defeated in his state, calling the President a
''goddamned liar'' and then being widely criticized for his language. The
episode cheered Democrats, and John C. White, the party's national chairman,
said today in Austin, Tex., ''If we win, I think Clements has won it for us.''

New Campaign Advertisements

There were new television commercial pitches, too, from Nancy Reagan saying that
she is ''deeply offended'' by Mr. Carter's labeling her husband a warmonger to a
series of Carter commercials in which working men and women identify with the
President.

But to a remarkable degree the campaign this week was about issues, and
important ones.  The Iranian developments amounted to a very high-stakes test of
the general principle that the electorate rallies behind a President on foreign
policy issues, as it did in 1972 when Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger
announced that ''peace is at hand'' in Vietnam.  But in that election the effect
was to increase the landslide victory of Richard M. Nixon. In contrast, the 1980
election looks like a very close one, and so, if Mr. Carter scores on the
hostage issue, it could be decisive.

The possible release of the hostages is something the Reagan campaign has
worried about as a pre-election surprise for months, and his advisers seemed
especially nervous all week. Mr. Reagan, getting tougher in his talk, betrayed
that concern Tuesday when he attacked Mr. Carter for the ''humiliation and
disgrace'' of the hostages' captivity.

Suspicion on Republican Side

The Republicans, including Mr. Reagan and former President Gerald R. Ford,
hammered away at the charge that Mr. Carter was moving now for political
purposes. Even if they had no evidence to contradict the widespread perception
in Washington that it was the Iranians who were finally moving, and that the
Administration was doing little more than signalling a readiness to respond with
its talk of spare parts and improved relations, Mr. Carter's foes seemed to be
tapping a vein of suspicion.

Still, even though the hostage issue was compelling and offered a plausible
yardstick for judging candidates on foreign policy, its discussion was stunted.
Mr. Reagan once suggested that he had ideas for handling it, but would not
specify them. That led Mr. Carter to charge gleefully that Mr. Reagan had a
''secret plan'' for freeing the hostages, in a comparison with the label that
critics put on Mr.  Nixon's 1968 unspecific suggestion that he could end the
Vietnam War. For his part, Mr. Carter only asserted that he was doing all he
could.

There were no such inhibitions when it came to the economy. Mr.  Reagan seized
on the return of a double-digit inflation rate, as measured by the Consumer
Price Index, to argue that the country needed him to get a ''humane economy.''
Mr. Carter tried to make the best of the unexpectedly high increase in the rate
for September by saying that it showed inflation was too serious to permit
risking Mr. Reagan's tax-cut schemes.

This economic debate comes at a point when public perceptions of party strengths
appear to have undergone a historic shift. The view of Republicans as stronger
on peace and war issues and the Democrats as better able to handle the economy
seems to have reversed in 1980.  The Times/CBS Poll showed that of the 50
percent in the survey who cited inflation or the economy in general as the
nation's most important issue, 47 percent of those thought the Republicans most
capable, while 33 percent favored the Democrats. On foreign policy, cited by far
fewer, the Democrats were preferred, but by a narrower margin.

Reagan Focuses on Economy

Mr. Reagan, criticized for weeks for seeming unable to make the economy the
issue that dominated the campaign, bought another halfhour of national
television time to assail Mr. Carter's economic record on Friday.

The issue was doing him some good. The Times/CBS Poll did make it clear that the
troubled economy was helping Mr. Reagan, although perhaps not as much as it
might if he had been able to make it the dominant piece of campaign dialogue.
Among both Democrats and independents, support for Mr. Reagan was considerably
stronger among the only slowly declining ranks of those who said that their
family financial situation had worsened in the last year.

With Mr. Carter continuing to stress his experience and Mr.  Reagan's alleged
unsuitability on foreign policy, and his Republican rival hammering away on
inflation and unemployment, the two candidates enter the climactic final week of
the campaign not only talking about issues that were on the public's mind. They
were, as V. Lance Tarrance, a Republican polltaker in Houston, put it, playing
to their strengths, or ''dancing with the girls they came in with.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'THE CONNECTION' IS REVIVED AT HENRY ST.

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 920 words


BACK in 1959, Jack Gelber's ''The Connection'' was the play that put the Living
Theater on the map. In its original production, this documentary look at heroin
addicts was considered an exciting breakthrough for the theatrical avant-garde.
Mr. Gelber had not only exposed the harsh existence and brutal vocabulary of his
bummed-out junkie heroes, but he had also upended the conventions of sentimental
dramaturgy. In neo-Brechtian fashion, he used comic improvisations and an
onstage jazz band to ward off any mawkish moral judgments about his characters.
For audiences of another generation, Mr. Gelber's iconoclastic technique was a
revelation: ''The Connection'' piled up a run of almost two years.

Looking at the play today - in a first-rate revival at the Henry Street
Settlement's New Federal Theater on Grand Street - one may well wonder what all
the fuss was about. Compared to subsequent dramas, movies or even television
shows about drug addicts, ''The Connection'' is almost romantic. As Mr. Gelber's
junkies wait in a dingy room for the arrival of the title character, a dealer
named Cowboy (Morgan Freeman), they give eloquently spaced-out speeches more
reminiscent of ''The Hairy Ape'' than ''Panic in Needle Park.'' The playwright's
once shocking street language now sounds tame; his once daring theatrical
devices now seem like either playful doodling or outright padding.

The new production has been directed with both skill and affection by Carl Lee,
the actor who originated the role of Cowboy in 1959.  Presumably with the
approval of the author, he has done a bit of updating. There are now lines that
refer to Rainer Werner Fassbinder, the New York Rangers and the current Governor
of New York. What's more, a new-fangled video artist (Michel Auder) appears on
stage to broadcast the action on a pair of television monitors that flank the
proscenium. (The video segments are credited to Shirley Clarke, the film maker
who did the movie version of ''The Connection'' in 1962.) Mr. Lee's
resourcefulness is admirable, but ultimately useless: this drama is locked into
a time warp from which there is no escape.

For all the contemporary references, Mr. Gelber's characters still belong to the
pre-psychedelic era; today's heroin addicts are more likely to hallucinate to
rock music, not jazz. The playwright's esthetic is stranded somewhere between
1950's beat and 60's camp.  When the addicts recite their more lyrical reveries,
we could be at a poetry reading at San Francisco's City Lights bookstore, circa
1956.  The funnier speeches - and the accompanying bits of stoned slapstick -
are precursors of the deadpan drug gags perfected a decade later by Andy Warhol
and Paul Morrissey in such Vietnam-era movies as ''Trash'' and ''Heat.'' When
Mr. Gelber interrupts the action to send his play's ''producer'' (Lindzee Smith)
and ''writer'' (Sam McMurray) into the audience, we see the gingerly genesis of
Living Theater techniques that would eventually be expanded to the point of
selfdestruction.

Some of the comic bits still fly -especially those delivered by Mr Freeman's
bemused Cowboy, Mr. Smith's nervous impresario, and by the respectively literary
and whimsical addicts played by Robert Silver and Greg Duhart. Unfortunately,
the lighter moments are separated by long, static scenes, which all too
literally document the languor of the junkies' claustrophobic world. The jazz
interludes, well sparked by the pianist Albert Dailey, don't help much, either;
they simply provide the playwright with easy transitions between monologues. The
final result is at once tedious and strange. In 1980, ''The Connection'' no
longer dramatizes the passions of drug addicts; it merely revives the musty
fashions of a theatrical bohemia that failed to outlive its time.

Drug Culture Updated
THE CONNECTION, by Jack Gelber; directed by Carl Lee; video by Shirley Clarke;
music composed by Gary Bartz; costume design, Edna Watson; set design, Robert
Edmonds; light design, Leo Gambacorta; production stage manager, Dwight R.B.
Cook.  Presented by the Henry Street Settlement's New Federal Theater, Woodie
King Jr. and Steve Tennen, producers. At Harry DeJur Henry Street Settlement
Playhouse, 466 Grand Street.  Jim Dunn ................................Lindzee
Smith Jaybird ..................................Sam McMurray Leach
.......................................Phil Levy Ernie
...................................Bernard Duffy Solly
...................................Robert Silver Sam
.......................................Greg Duhart Photographer
.............................Michel Auder Harry NcNulty
............................James Lively Cowboy
.................................Morgan Freeman Sister Salvation
.....................Cynthia Belgrave Musicians Gary Bartz, Tom Barney, Albert
Dailey and Freddie Waits.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Morgan Freeman

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

China Promises to Support Thais;
China Assures Thailand Of Aid Against Vietnam

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 73 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Oct. 27


Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang assured Thailand today that it would have China's
support if Vietnam again intruded into its territory.

The new Prime Minister gave the assurance at a banquet welcoming the Thai Prime
Minister, Prem Tinsulanonda, who arrived today for an official visit.

The Thai leader was expected to explain proposals of non-Communist Southeast
Asia for a political settlement of the war in Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
INFORMAL CHIEF OF NEGOITIATIONS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 643 words

DATELINE: MIDDLETOWN, N.Y.


The paint is peeling on the outside of 24 Roberts Street, the cream-colored
Victorian home in this aging upstate city that is used by Representative
Benjamin A. Gilman as his district offices.

Inside, a pensioner asks a clerk why he is not getting his disability checks. A
group of black youngsters - heralded by the noise echoing from the old floor
boards - arrives to discuss employment problems in nearby Newburgh.

The Congressman, in a sweater, opens the door to an unpretentious office. On the
door is a yellow ribbon, with a button that says ''Until They're Free,'' a
reminder of the American hostages in Iran.

Mr. Gilman is an upstate New York Republican with a history of involvement in
exchanges of political prisoners. Yesterday, he interrupted his reelection
campaigning here to fly to Miami and greet 30 Americans who had been imprisoned
in Cuba. The 57-year-old Republican had led an informal House committee that
negotiated with a Cuban diplomat, Ramon Sanchez-Parodi, head of the Cuban
interest section at the Czechoslovak Embassy in Washington, for their release.

Constituent Released

One of them, Ray Fitzgerald of Suffern, N.Y., was from the Congressman's
district. Representative Gilman expressed pleasure at the Cuban Government's
''cooperation and assistance'' in the case.

The Congressman, who is known as an energetic man who keeps a busy schedule, is
considered certain to win a fifth term. His three opponents in the 26th
Congressional District are Eugene Victor, a Democrat; Edmond Farrell of the
Right to Life Party, and Thomas Goonan of the Libertarian Party.

The ranking minority member of the subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs of the
House Foreign Affairs Committee, Mr. Gilman said he became involved in release
of the Americans in Cuba after ''their families reached out to me.'' He said he
organized an ad hoc committee of 60 House members in June and meetings were set
up with the Cuban diplomat, Mr. Sanchez-Parodi.

''He assured us he'd give it his prompt attention,'' said the Congressman, a
stocky man with slightly graying hair, who was codenamed ''Uncle Ben'' in some
of the secret negotiations he has conducted on foreign prisoners. Mr. Gilman
added that he was hopeful that the Cuban Government's move indicated that it was
ready to improve relations with the United States.

Three-Way Exchange

It was not the first time the Congressman had been involved in prisoner-exchange
negotiations, according to his aides. Mr. Gilman helped arrange a three-way
exchange of prisoners in 1978 among the United States, East Germany and
Mozambique. Last year, they said, he played a key role in the release of four
Americans from Cuba in exchange for the release of four Puerto Rican
nationalists from United States jails.

In July, he wrote a letter to the Iranian Parliament urging the hostages'
release. Mr. Gilman noted that the letter was signed by 186 of his House
colleagues. In 1973, during his initial term in Congress, he began a long
campaign on behalf of the missing in action in Vietnam.

Mr. Gilman explained his interest in international exchanges by saying he has
''always been involved in State and Federal human rights concerns.''

He recalled that as an assistant New York State Attorney General in the
mid-1950's, one of his jobs was to obtain court writs in cases where prisoners
and mental patients were seeking release from institutions.

Benjamin Arthur Gilman was born in Poughkeepsie on Dec. 6, 1922, and attended
school here before going to the University of Pennsylvania and New York Law
School. He served in the Army Air Corps in World War II. He was a State
Assemblyman from 1967 to 1972, before his election to Congress. Mr. Gilman was
divorced in 1978. He and his former wife, also a lawyer, have four children. A
14-year-old daughter was killed in a car accident in 1976.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Benjamin Arthur Gilman

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Garwood Judge Refuses Information on Deserters

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 194 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Oct. 27


A military judge today denied a request by attorneys for Pfc. Robert Garwood for
information about two alleged Marine Corps deserters whom the lawyers assert
were given new identities by the military after taking up arms against American
forces in the Vietnam War.

However, the judge, Col. R.E. Switzer, presiding over the first court-martial of
an American serviceman for charges of desertion and collaboration in Vietnam,
said that he would reconsider the request if the claims could be documented. He
scheduled opening statements to begin Nov. 6.

Private Garwood spent nearly 14 years in Vietnam before returning to the United
States last year. Former prisoners of war have accused him of joining forces
with the enemy. He also faces charges of sexually molesting a 7-year-old girl in
North Carolina. When polled by Colonel Switzer, only three of the six marine
officers on the jury said that they had heard of that arrest.

Defense attorneys have challenged one juror who said he could not state
categorically that he would not be influenced by the charges.  Colonel Switzer
delayed a ruling on the challenge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE ERRORS OF A CHRISTIAN POLITICAL ACTIVIST

SECTION: Section A; Page 38, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 704 words


To the Editor:

Gary Potter and I may share the same church, but I think we'd be uncomfortable
if we sat in the same pew. His article on ''A Christian America'' (Op-Ed Oct.
15) contains many religious-political views that read very differently from
those which motivate me.  e claims that, numerically and philosophically, ours
is a Christian nation. I can count noses as well as he, but a caution flag goes
up in my mind when he speaks of the needs of all our citizens.

''Who is more likely to secure their entitlement,'' he asks, ''than Christians,
those who recognize they are God's children?'' I wish it were so. I hope it
would happen. But personal experience and history lead me to conclude that
Christians haven't done any better - and sometimes have done far worse - in
securing those rights proclaimed in our Declaration of Independence. I have much
to be ashamed of as a Christian and as an American.

Mr. Potter claims that good morals depend on religion (only the Christian
religion?). He says that our laws, policies and public ceremonies used to
reflect the values, beliefs and principles of Christianity - and they should
again. This is nostalgia for a Golden Age that never existed.

What about slavery, the corruption that followed the Civil War, our Mexican War,
Indian wars, the Spanish-American War, Vietnam? Did these reflect the views of
Christians - or was it only the despised ''secularists'' who perpetrated these
imperialistic policies? Was it the secular humanists who made it hard for Mr.
Potter's ancestors and my own when they arrived in this country, only to be put
down by the Know-Nothings? Is the anti-Semitism in our society merely the work
of those who reject religion?

Mr. Potter and his fellow Christian political activists want politics to assure
the freedom of all citizens to ''do their duty.'' That duty, he explains is to
''win salvation.'' I'll take care of my own salavation, thank you. No need for a
politician, Christian or otherwise, to intrude in that matter. I'll be more than
satisfied if our political leaders can help us solve the problems of inflation,
joblessness, pollution, housing and such here-and-now concerns.

My friends wonder if non-Christians would be oppressed in a Christian society.
Not to worry, we are assured. It is the secularist who ''regulates, controls,
manipulates, dictates and, in the end, tyrannizes.'' Funny, but I thought the
Somozas, Pinochets and their fellow dictators in Latin America claimed to be
Christian - Catholic ones, I'm sorry to say.

Resistance to their abominations has been led by Christians too, I'm proud to
say. But I hardly think that human-rights activists in Latin America or
elsewhere are exclusively religious. Religion is one source of good morals, and
a powerful one. But there are other sources.

In ''A Secular Humanist Declaration,'' printed in the Oct. 15 Times, 61
prominent scholars and writers said that reason and science ''can make a major
contribution to human knowledge and can be of benefit to mankind.'' I want to
work with them, not fight them. I don't accept their denial of divine guidance,
but the burden is on me to show that religious belief and compassionate social
action are not antithetical.

My reading of the Bible shows Jesus and the prophets harshest in their
denunciations of ''religious people'' who said ''Lord, Lord,'' and ''the temple
of the Lord'' but oppressed their neighbor.  Triumphalism is not a virtue. Mr.
Potter and his ''Christian political activists'' had better set their own house
in order.

I for one do not want to add to our nation's problems by polarizing our society
between those who hold religious beliefs and those who don't. Why can't we work
together on those things on which we share agreement, most of which are the
stuff of politics?

Rather than a Christian nation or an atheistic nation, I thought our experiment
in liberty was an attempt to establish a pluralistic nation. If religious and
non-religious persons must compete, let's make it a race to see who can do the
best job of ''feeding the hungry, clothing the naked and visiting those in
prison.'' Whoever succeeds, we all stand to gain.
RICHARD ARMSTRONG, Old Tappan, N.J., Oct. 16, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Vietnam Veteran Arrested In Casino Poisoning Plot

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 159 words

DATELINE: STATELINE, Nev., Oct. 28


A Vietnam war hero sought in a $10 million poison-extortion attempt against a
Lake Tahoe casino was arrested today in Mountain View, Calif.

Harry Leland Leach, 32 years old, was held in $100,000 bond in Palo Alto. Mr.
Leach was accused last year of poisoning

National news appears on pages A16-29; political news, pages A24-
29.
fish ponds in the San Jose, Calif., area, but was acquitted. He has denied any
connection with the extortion threat.

The San Jose police said last week that Mr. Leach's handwriting closely
resembled that of the extortionist who left notes at Caesar's Tahoe and the
nearby Sahara-Tahoe threatening to poison the water supply at Caesars unless $10
million in ransom was paid.

Mr. Leach has maintained in several interviews that he had nothing to do with
the threat and that he had not left Mountain View since his acquittal on the
fish poisoning charges.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

3 EX-ATTORNEYS GENERAL TESTIFY ON F.B.I. SEARCHES

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 680 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 28


Three former Attorneys General, Ramsey Clark, John N. Mitchell and Richard G.
Kleindienst, testified today that they had never authorized agents of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation to enter and search homes without search
warrants, even in national security cases.

Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Kleindienst said that they might have approved requests to
conduct such ''surreptitious entries,'' also known as ''black bag jobs,'' if
they had believed that they were necessary to collect intelligence information
about Americans collaborating with hostile foreign governments. Mr. Clark said
that he would have considered authorizing searches without warrants only in
''extreme circumstances'' involving, for example, terrorist threats to explode a
nuclear bomb.

Mr. Clark, Mr. Mitchell and Mr. Kleindienst testified in Federal District Court
here at the trial of two former officials of the F.B.I., W. Mark Felt and Edward
S. Miller, who are accused of conspiring to violate the constitutional rights of
citizens by authorizing a series of break-ins in 1972 and 1973.

The purpose of the break-ins was to obtain information about fugitive members of
the Weather Underground, an antiwar group that had taken responsibility for
bombings at the United States Capitol, the Pentagon and other public buildings.


Testimony by Mitchell

Mr. Mitchell, who was Attorney General in the first three years of the Nixon
Administration, from January 1969 to March 1972, said that he was never asked to
approve warrantless searches because J. Edgar Hoover, former Director of the
bureau, had ordered an end to use of the technique in 1966.

After consulting F.B.I. documents while he was on the witness stand, Mr.
Mitchell said that Mr. Hoover's objections to ''black bag jobs'' had been based
on the ''operational hazards involved'' rather than on doubts about the legality
of the technique.

Mr. Mitchell said that he believed that he was making his first appearance in
Federal court since his conviction in 1975 on criminal charges arising from a
conspiracy to cover up the Watergate scandal.  Mr. Mitchell served 19 months in
prison.

The three Attorneys General were called by the Government as rebuttal witnesses.
William B. Bryant, chief judge of the Federal District Court here, is expected
to send the case to the jury later this week.

Factor in Approving 'Bag Jobs'

Mr. Mitchell, in response to questions from one of the defense attorneys, said
that he would have been likely to approve ''black bag jobs'' in the Weather
Undergound investigation if he had known that members of the group had ties to
Communists in Cuba, North Korea and Vietnam. The knowledge of such ties, he
said, ''would be a very strong factor in my approval, all other factors being
proper.''

Mr. Mitchell said that the break-ins conducted by the F.B.I. before 1966 were
done ''without the approval of the Attorney General, without submission of the
question to the Attorney General.'' Prosecutors maintain that Mr. Felt and Mr.
Miller were required to seek explicit approval from the Attorney General for
each break-in, just as the bureau sought case-by-case approval for the
installation of electronic eavesdropping devices in national security cases.

Mr. Kleindienst, who was Attorney General from June 1972 to May 1973, said that
if he had known about the break-ins, he would have required the bureau to obtain
his authorization in each case. Mr.  Kleindienst, a lawyer now in private
practice in Arizona, pleaded guilty in 1974 to a misdemeanor charge of
misleading a Senate committee that was investigating the Justice Department's
handling of an antitrust case against the International Telephone and Telegraph
Corporation.

There was speculation today that prosecutors would ask Richard M, Nixon to
testify tomorrow. It would be his first court appearance since 1969 when he
became President.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Ex-Attorney General John Mitchell

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Luis Aguirre-Edwards, Bank Officer From Chile

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 225 words


Luis Aguirre-Edwards, a former vice president in New York of the Grace National
Bank, predecessor of the Marine Midland Bank, and a descendant of a family of
Chilean diplomats and newspaper publishers, died in Santiago, Chile, on Sept. 14
after a long illness, according to friends in New York. He was 81 years old.

A native of Chile, Mr. Aguirre-Edwards came to the United States as a young man.
He studied business administration and worked for the Grace National Bank,
eventually becoming a director and senior vice president of the bank in charge
of the foreign department.

Mr. Aguirre-Edwards was a descendant of Francisco de Aguirre, one of the
founders of Santiago, Chile's capital city, and of the Edwards family that
established the newspaper El Mercurio of Valparaiso, which was founded in 1827
and is believed to be the oldest newspaper in South America.

He was also related to Agustin Edwards, who was at one time President of the
League of Nations and Chile's Ambassador to London before World War II.

Mr. Aguirre-Edwards is survived by his wife, the former Marie-Christine Irene
Bellot. Their only child, Louis, died near the end of the Vietnam War while
serving with the United States armed forces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 29, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A VIETNAMESE CHEF WITH AMERICAN TASTES

BYLINE: By FLORENCE FABRICANT

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1299 words


ON his first trip to the United States, Robert Vifian particularly enjoyed two
dishes: chili and cioppino, a tomato-based stew of Pacific Coast seafood found
in San Francisco. And cookies. ''America is the best place in the world for
cookies,'' said Mr. Vifian, a Vietnamese chef who owns a restaurant in Paris. A
recent 12-day cross-country swing gave him ample opportunity to sample a good
many native American specialties as well as American interpretations of the
cuisines of other countries.

''Americans seem to like spicy foods,'' he said with a satisfied smile. ''That
pleases me. The French would never stand for it.'' He was amazed at the variety
of cuisines served in American kitchens, often several on a single menu. ''We
had meals that mixed the cooking of two or three countries. Steak tartare and
South American hors d'oeuvres. Fascinating! We can't do that in France.
Everything is labeled. As much as I loved cioppino I couldn't put it on my menu.
The public is not interested in an American dish in a Vietnamese restaurant.''

Mr. Vifian, who was born in Saigon and joined the rest of his family in Paris in
1968, has owned Tan Dinh, a Vietnamese restaurant, since 1972. In 1974 his
restaurant, one of hundreds in Paris specializing in Vietnamese food, was
awarded a coveted toque in the Gault-Millau guidebook.

His trip to the United States was sponsored by Ocean Spray Cranberries as part
of a campaign to promote new uses for cranberries. Mr. Vifian liked their
sweet-sour flavor. He pickled them and used them as a garnish for various
dishes. ''I always include something red in my dishes,'' he said. ''In Vietnam
red is the color of luck.''

Although the food in Mr. Vifian's restaurant is strictly Vietnamese, he likes to
refer to it as ''nouvelle Vietnamese.'' ''I try to make it less complicated,
simplifying it so each ingredient can be tasted and appreciated,'' he said. ''I
refuse to use flavor enhancers such as monosodium glutamate. I find a pinch of
sugar does the trick.'' For him, the temptation to change traditional recipes is
almost irresistible, a way to avoid boredom in the kitchen of a 60-seat
restaurant that is open for lunch and dinner.

Various types of spring rolls filled with pork or crabmeat and then eaten
wrapped in lettuce leaves with condiments such as ginger and coriander are some
typical dishes served at Tan Dinh. ''We often wrap foods to keep them moist
while cooking and make them easier to eat,'' he said. Entrees are sometimes
stir-fried combinations of meat or seafood with vegetables and flavored with a
tart, chewy herb called lemon grass or with basil, a purple variety of which
grows abundantly in Vietnam. Hotly spiced soups and sweet, soft puddinglike
confections often flavored with coconut are also served.

Mr. Vifian's interpretation of Vietnamese food is distinguished by the service
of wines. His wine cellar comprises more than 30,000 bottles and includes close
to 600 American bottles. ''I think the wines of Pomerol (one of the districts of
Bordeaux) tend to best complement my food,'' he said. ''Wine makers order the
American wines.''

He noted how few Vietnamese restaurants there were in the United States,
especially in New York. ''There should be more,'' he said.  ''Americans should
like Vietnamese food. We use more raw herbs and vegetables than the Chinese do
and our cooking is often very spicy.  It would be a disappointment to me if
Vietmanese cuisine did not become popular here.'' But Chinese restaurants were
more popular than he expected and he was surprised at the availability of
Oriental ingredients.

Generally, American vegetables and fruits did not impress him. But he liked the
corn. ''Corn is eaten in Vietnam - we cook it every way,'' he said. ''We eat it
on the cob like you do but brushed with peanut oil and seasoned with nuoc mam
instead of butter and salt.'' (Nuoc mam is a highly salted sauce made from
fermented fish that is used as a condiment in Vietnam.) ''Our corn is not as
sweet and tender as yours,'' he said. ''My mother used to cook it twice as long
as they do here, but it's better than in France. The corn in France is
terrible.''

While he was in New York, Mr. Vifian prepared several dishes, including a sweet
corn and coconut ''soup'' that was meant to be served as dessert. ''Americans
would probably find it surprising, but it is typical,'' he said. He also
fashioned rolls of marinated beef wrapped in lettuce leaves, skewered and
grilled. That recipe follows.

Saigon Beef Rolls

6 ounces boneless sirloin steak or fillet of beef, sliced paper-thin (see note)
1/2 teaspoon five-spice powder (see note) 3 tablespoons peanut oil 1 tablespoon
light soy sauce 1/2 teaspoon minced garlic 1 teaspoon sugar 1 head Boston
lettuce 2 tablespoons lemon juice 1 tablespoon nuoc mam (see note) 1 teaspoon
grated ginger 1/4 cup water.

1. To prepare this dish you will need small skewers, either metal or Oriental
wooden ones. If you are using wooden skewers, soak them in warm water for at
least one hour.

2. Toss beef in a bowl with the five-spice powder, one tablespoon of the peanut
oil, the light soy sauce, garlic and half a teaspoon of sugar. Allow to marinate
10 minutes.

3. Meanwhile, separate leaves of Boston lettuce and rinse them thoroughly to
remove all grit and sand. Plunge the leaves into boiling water just until they
wilt. Drain them on paper towels.

4. Wrap one or two slices of the beef in each lettuce leaf, rolling the lettuce
and tucking in the ends to make a neat, compact package.  Thread the beef rolls
on skewers. Brush them with peanut oil.

5. Mix the lemon juice, nuoc mam, ginger, remaining half teaspoon of sugar and
water in a small bowl to make the dipping sauce.  6. Grill the beef rolls on a
hot broiler about one minute on each side, turning them once and brushing again
with oil. Serve hot with the dipping sauce.

Yield: 4 servings.  Note: 1. The beef must be very tender. Use only prime
sirloin steak or fillet of beef. To be sure it is sliced thin enough, do not
leave this task to the butcher. Place the meat in the freezer for about an hour,
then slice the meat while it is partly frozen.

2. Five-spice powder and nuoc mam (fish sauce) are sold in Oriental food stores.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Robert Vifian

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 30, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TESTIMONY BY NIXON HEARD IN F.B.I. TRIAL

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 29


Richard M. Nixon, in his first courtroom appearance since he resigned as
President on Aug. 9, 1974, testified today that he had approved a proposal
allowing the Federal Bureau of Investigation to enter and search homes without
search warrants in 1970 but added that he revoked his approval four days after
giving it.

Mr. Nixon's testimony at the trial of two former F.B.I. officials was
interrupted by protesters shouting charges of ''thief'' and ''liar'' and calling
him a ''war criminal'' who ''committed genocide.'' Three spectators were removed
from the courtroom by Federal marshals, and Mr. Nixon continued his testimony
without further incident.

The protesters said they represented a group of former antiwar activists and
Black Panther Party members who contend that they were victims of the bureau's
intelligence programs.

The 67-year-old former President was on the witness stand in Federal District
Court for 45 minutes. The fact that he had approved a program that included
break-ins as an investigative technique was not new, but in his testimony today
Mr. Nixon provided the first extended account of his rational.

Called as Rebuttal Witness

He had been called by the Government as a rebuttal witness at the end of the
trial of W. Mark Felt and Edward S. Miller. Mr. Felt, former acting associate
director of the bureau, and Mr. Miller, former chief of its intelligence
division, are accused of conspiring to violate the constitutional rights of
citizens by authorizing a series of break-ins while searching for fugitive
members of a radical group called the Weather Underground in 1972-73, when Mr.
Nixon was President.

Mr. Nixon, describing the concerns he had as President during the Vietnam War,
said he was eager for the bureau to find the Weatherman fugitives because there
was ''hard evidence'' that some members of the group had collaborated with
foreign governments and because their violent protests in the United States
impeded efforts to end the war. He was not specifically asked, and did not say,
whether he had approved the break-ins that Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller are accused
of authorizing.

A month after he resigned Mr. Nixon's successor, President Ford, gave Mr. Nixon
an unconditional pardon for all Federal crimes that he ''committed or may have
committed'' during his five-and-a-half-year tenure in the White House. From that
time until today, Mr. Nixon, although named as a defendant in dozens of civil
lawsuits, has avoided testifying in court.

Trial Is in Seventh Week

His lawyers have said that the former President was willing to testify in the
Felt-Miller case because he felt strongly about the importance of the issues
involved. The trial, which is in its seventh week, is being heard before Judge
William B. Bryant, chief judge of the Federal District Court here.

In response to a question from John W. Nields Jr., the chief prosecutor, Mr.
Nixon said that he had approved the so-called Huston plan on July 23, 1970. The
plan, described in a memorandum from Tom Charles Huston, a staff assistant in
the Nixon White House, relaxed restraints on domestic intelligence-gathering
operations and authorized Federal agents to conduct ''surreptitious entries,''
also known as ''black bag jobs.''

Mr. Nixon said that, as President, he had inherent authority to order
warrantless searches to gather foreign intelligence information in selected
cases involving threats to national security. In delegating his authority to the
F.B.I., Mr. Nixon said, he was acting on precedents established by a number of
Presidential directives dating to 1939 that made the bureau responsible for
combating espionage, sabotage and subversive activities in the United States.

In his memorandum, Mr. Huston said that the use of surreptitious entries was
''clearly illegal'' because ''it amounts to burglary.'' When a President
authorized such entires ''for good cause,'' Mr.  Nixon testified, ''what would
otherwise be unlawful or illegal becomes legal.''

Hoover Objected to Plan

The former President said he rescinded approval for the plan four days after
approving it because of objections expressed by J. Edgar Hoover, then Director
of the F.B.I. But Mr. Nixon added that he ''did not intend my revocation of what
is called the Huston plan to be a prohibition'' on the use of warrantless
searches.

He said his actions amounted to ''neither an authorization nor a prohibition,''
and left Mr. Hoover with whatever authority he previously had.

Mr. Nixon said that he communicated directly with Mr. Hoover on these matters,
and added that ''it was not required to go through, and it was not the custom to
go through, the Attorney General.'' The prosecutors say the bureau needed
authorization from the Attorney General or the President for each break-in.

Mr. Nixon said that Mr. Huston told him that Mr. Hoover ordered an end to
warrantless searches in 1966. Explaining his respect for Mr.  Hoover's
preferences, Mr. Nixon said that ''Attorneys General seldom directed Mr.
Hoover'' and ''it was difficult even for Presidents'' to do so. The F.B.I.
director died on May 2, 1972.

23 Killed in 15 Months

Mr. Nixon said repeatedly that the threat posed by subversives and terrorists,
including the Weather Underground, was magnified by the fact that the United
States was at war at the time.

From January 1969 to April 1970, Mr. Nixon said, there were more than 40,000
bombings, bomb scares and bomb threats in the United States. The bombings killed
23 persons and injured hundreds, he added, and caused more than $20 million in
property damage.

Thus, the former President testified, he felt it was ''essential to strengthen
our capacity'' to catch the terrorists before they killed more ''innocent
people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Former President Nixon in Washington

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 30, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WISCONSIN'S NELSON FINDS HE'S IN A FIGHT TO SURVIVE;
The Race for Congress

BYLINE: By REGINALD STUART, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 995 words

DATELINE: MADISON, Wis., Oct. 28


In his three bids since 1962 for a seat in the Senate, Gaylord Nelson has always
won handily. This time his prospects appear less certain.

Recent voter polls taken by two of the state's leading newspapers, The Milwaukee
Sentinel and The Milwaukee Journal, gave 64-year-old Mr. Nelson, a Democrat, a
commanding lead over his Republican challenger, 38-year-old Robert W. Kasten Jr.

But campaign strategists in both camps and Wisconsin political observers say the
race is much closer, perhaps even a dead heat, and they question the margin in
the polls.

The Sentinel poll, a telephone survey conducted Oct. 7 through 12 among 1,031
persons, found Mr. Nelson leading Mr. Kasten by 51 percent to 30 percent. Among
579 of those considered likely to vote, Mr. Nelson polled 52 percent to Mr.
Kasten's 35 percent. The Journal poll of 1,044 persons between Oct. 13 and 17
found that of 694 persons likely to vote, Mr. Nelson got 53 percent of the votes
to Mr. Kasten's 33 percent. Another 12 percent were undecided, with 2 percent
refusing to answer.

Mr. Nelson is another of the Democrats on the political target list of
conservative groups that are campaigning actively around the nation to oust
liberals. But the presence of these forces to date, to the surprise of many in
Wisconsin, has been negligible.

'Going to Run Our Own Campaigns'

''This isn't that kind of a state; we're going to run our own campaigns,'' said
Mr. Kasten in a recent interview, referring to the active role of dump-liberal
groups in such neighboring states as Iowa, South Dakota and Indiana.

Still, Mr. Nelson has found himself vulnerable to Mr. Kasten on two fronts, each
with an underlying message that Mr. Nelson might have outlived his timeliness as
a representative of this state.

Mr. Kasten, a youthful, snappy character, drives home the message that the
Federal programs and policies of the 1960's and 1970's are largely responsible
for the unemployment levels of 12 to 15 percent in Green Bay, Milwaukee, Kenosha
and Janesville, industrial regions in the southeastern part of the state that
are all tied in some way to the fortunes of the automobile business and Detroit.
And Mr.  Kasten ties those policies and problems to Mr. Nelson, a leading
liberal in the Senate.

Mr. Nelson's record for visiting the home folks to survey their sentiments is
not admirable either, his opponent charges. Mr. Nelson is out of touch with his
constituents, says Mr. Kasten.

Manner of a School Principal

All of this has upset Mr. Nelson, a man who has been known to spit fire at times
but who comes across at most public gatherings in a manner reminiscent of the
high school principal explaining to concerned parents the virtues of what they
have in him, a seasoned fighter for issues dear to the hearts of his
constituents.

In a state in which the leading business is tourism drawn by natural
attractions, Mr. Nelson was in the forefront of the ecology movement, a founder
in 1970 of the Earth Day campaign. He was one of the first critics of American
involvement in the Vietnam War and he has been an advocate of many social
programs.

Older voters may still be in Mr. Nelson's corner, political observers say. But
those who have come of voting age since Earth Day and Vietnam, they say, have
trouble identifying with Mr. Nelson. And those voters, they note, could be the
key in this contest.

Nelson campaign aides assert it is debatable whether the Senator should share
the blame for the Government's inability to conquer inflation and unemployment.
But they acknowledge that the argument has made uncertain the rank-and-file
labor vote that has customarily supported Mr. Nelson. They admit that it does
look as though the Senator does not spend much time at home compared with his
friend Senator William Proxmire, a Democrat, who is at home nearly every
weekend, shaking hands and constantly politicking. And because Mr.  Nelson has
not had to campaign aggressively in a long time, the belief that he may be rusty
has begun to creep in.

Reintroduction to Voters

To counter Mr. Kasten's sunup-to-sundown campaigning and the subtle attacks on
the Senator's reputation, Mr. Nelson's campaign has focused heavily on
''reintroducing'' him to his constituents, as a campaign aide put it.

Mr. Nelson, at first balking at the idea of making as many as three appearances
a day, is now enjoying his new-found campaign thrust: shaking hands at the plant
gates, working the streets and making all the bingo parties in the
industrialized cities. For the first time in memory, Mr. Nelson even walked
through the streets of South Milwaukee last Saturday with Clem Zablocki, the
veteran United States Representative.

''It's targeted to the people who should vote for him,'' said Stephen M.
Johnson, a chief campaign aide.  Whether Mr. Kasten can siphon off enough
support by Election Day and Mr. Nelson can cut his losses is what political
observers feel is uncertain.

Mr. Kasten, a real estate developer who ran unsuccessfully for his party's
nomination for Governor two years ago, has still had problems assembling an
effective statewide organization to get his name known and the vote out on Nov.
4. He is also somewhat frustrated in his efforts, in the view of Republican
political specialists here, by the fact that ''the strong Republican attitude''
needed to win a statewide race does not seem pronounced enough to push him over
the top.

Meanwhile, Mr. Nelson, having started his campaign late partly because of the
long session of Congress this year and partly because he initially misjudged Mr.
Kasten's threat, is confronted with the possibility that he did not act soon
enough to turn the Kasten tide.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Senator Gaylord Nelson

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 30, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

30MOUSEKETEER ALUMNI IN REUNION

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 779 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Oct. 29


''M-I-C ... K-E-Y ... M-O-U-S-E!'' For the 25th anniversary of the Mickey Mouse
Club, 30 Mouseketeers were at Walt Disney Studios last night to rehearse a
television special. With Mickey Mouse ears perched on balding heads and white
Tshirts block-lettered CUBBY or MARGENE stretched across 37-year-old chests,
they should have seemed ridiculous. That they didn't is both the measure of the
joy they still take in remembering their years on the Mickey Mouse Club and a
measure of Walt Disney's shrewdness in picking the well-scrubbed, bright-faced
children who represented him for three years on television.

''The Mickey Mouse Club'' had its premiere Oct. 3, 1955, on ABC. It went off the
air in 1958 but was immensely successful in syndication until the late 1960's.
There were 39 Mouseketeers altogether, men and women who now range in age from
33 to 41.

Most of the first year's crop of 24 children were picked from dancing schools in
the Los Angeles area. There was no thought then of balancing white faces with
black or Oriental ones, so Walt Disney chose the open, middle-American features
that he found appealing.

'Walt Liked Cute Faces'

''We hoped they'd be talented,'' says Tom Mahoney, dance director for the show.
''But Walt picked personality. He liked cute faces. I think any kid too smart or
clever might have offended him.'' For the second and third year, the show's
director, Sid Miller, went farther afield, choosing Don Grady out of 400
children who auditioned in San Francisco and Linda Hughes out of 400 in San
Diego. Only the children who got the most fan mail returned for a second or
third year. The eventually acknowledged star of the Mouseketeers, Annette
Funicello, who would remain under contract to Disney for 12 years, was, in fact,
the last of the 24 chosen the first year, after a Disney talent scout saw her in
a children's production of ''Swan Lake.''

''It was like being in fantasyland, Disneylandish, everyday,'' Miss Funicello
says, summing up the experience. She did not begin to recognize her celebrity
until midway through the second year, since ''they never gave us our fan mail
because some kids got so much more than others.'' Long happily married, she now
has a 15-year-old daughter and two sons, and does commercials for Skippy peanut
butter.

Of the other roll-call Mouseketeers, those dimpled 10-or 12-year olds who got to
shout out their names on each show, Cubby O'Brien is a drummer, Bobby Burgess a
dancer on the Lawrence Welk show, Lonnie Burr a dancer and occasional television
writer. Tommy Cole is a makeup artist who won an Emmy Award for ''Backstairs at
the White House.'' Sharon Baird plays Charley the Owl on ''The New Zoo Revue.''

Where Others Are Now

Doreen Tracy was a freelance entertainer in Vietnam during the war and a
technical adviser on ''Apocalypse Now.'' Darlene Gillespie is a registered nurse
in Nashville, Tenn., and Karen Pendleton a housewife in Fresno, Calif., while
Cheryl Holdridge, the widow of the multimillionaire Lance Reventlow, spends half
the year in her home in Aspen, Colo., and the other half cruising on her yacht.

None of the 39 Mouseketeers are dead, none disabled by drugs. There have been
some divorces but no suicides, and most of their lives are filled with children
and are at least reasonably happy. Even Doreen Tracy, who considers herself
''the rebellious black sheep of the Mouseketeers'' and whose career includes
nude photo layouts, says that ''anything that helped me through life, I learned
here.''

Flicker of Fame Remains

It was not as difficult as one might expect to locate all 39 Mouseketeers and
reunite 30 of them for the television show, which will be aired Nov. 23 on NBC.
The six or seven who have dropped out of sight were found within hours through
announcements in newspapers and on television last April. Typically, Charley
Laney, who managed a supermarket in San Diego, was turned in by a truck driver
who delivered to the market.

An attempt to create a new, ethnically balanced, Mickey Mouse Club failed in
1977. Neither the performers nor the audience could turn the clock back to the
innocence of 1955. But for Dickie and Sherry, Mary and Johnny, the tiny flicker
of fame remains from a quarter of a century ago.

''I sang a Rolling Stone song to the G.I.'s in Vietnam, and then they sang
'M-I-C- ... K-E-Y ... M-O-U-S-E!' to me,'' says Doreen Tracy. ''And I realized
that some day I'm going to be embalmed in a wax museum.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Annette Funicello

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 382 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 31, 1980 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

BRONSON IN 'BORDERLINE,' THRILLER ABOUT ALIEN SMUGGLERS

BYLINE: By Tom Buckley

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Weekend Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 427 words


ALTHOUGH he wears a uniform in ''Borderline,'' which opens today at the Rivoli,
Charles Bronson has not altogether abandoned his most effective role as the man
who does things his way. When one of his men and a young illegal immigrant are
found shot dead, Mr. Bronson, the head of a Border Patrol substation west of San
Diego, decides to go after the killer himself, although the case falls under the
jurisdiction of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

He does so because the arrogant and ignorant G-Men, biting hard on a red
herring, are certain that narcotics smugglers committed the crime. The Bronson
character is certain that smugglers of aliens are responsible. On its way to
proving that he is correct,''Borderline,'' which is said to be based on events
in the career of a Border Patrol agent, unfolds with scarcely a moment of
surprise or tension.

Mr. Bronson, always an assured and attractive performer, gets only one brief
opportunity to do his specialty -beating up one of the villains until he squeals
on the others. The only car chase seems to proceed at about 30 miles an hour.
The final shootout is so perfunctory that one might suppose Mr. Bronson was
going after rabbits instead of that stock figure - a psychopath who learned to
be a professional killer in Vietnam.

''Borderline'' has an air of cheapness and improvisation. The characterization
and dialogue are rudimentary, as is the direction of Jerrold Freedman, who works
mainly in television and whose only previous theatrical film was the dreadful
''Kansas City Bomber.''

The film is rated PG (''Parental Guidance Suggested''), probably because of the
use of a moderate degree of violence and an occasional obscenity. Tom Buckley

A Man Alone

BORDERLINE, directed by Jerrold Freedman; screenplay by Steve Kline and Mr.
Freedman; director of photography, Tak Fujimoto; film editor, John F. Link 2d;
music by Gil Melle; produced by James Nelson; An Associated Film Distribution
release. At the Rivoli Theater. Running time: 105 minutes. This film is rated
PG.

Jeb Maynard . . . . . Charles Bronson
Jimmy Fante . . . . . . Bruno Kirby
Carl Richards . . . . . Bert Remsen
Henry Lydell . . . . . Michael Lerner
Malcolm Wallace . . . . . Kenneth McMillan
Hotchkiss . . . . . Ed Harris
Elena Morales . . . . . Karmin Murcelo
Arturo . . . . . Enrique Castillo
Scooter Jackson . . . . . A. Wilford Brimley
Willie Lambert . . . . . Norman Alden
Mirandez . . . . . James Victor
Benito Morales . . . . . Panchito Gomez
Charlie Monroe . . . . . John Ashton
Andy Davis . . . . . Lawrence Casey
Ski . . . . . Charles Cyphers

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A PALESTINIAN GUERRILLA DESCRIBES TAKING COMBAT TRAINING IN SOVIET

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1451 words

DATELINE: HEBRON, Israeli


Occupied West Bank, Oct. 30 - The commander of the Palestinian terrorist squad
that killed six Jewish worshipers in a Sabbath ambush here in May said today
that he had received six months of intensive training in the Soviet Union.

The Russians, he said, provided instruction in military tactics, the use of
small arms and hand grenades, the manufacture and planting of explosive devices,
topography, radio communications and political matters.

The terrorist, Adnan Jaber, 32 years old, a member of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, offered one of the most detailed descriptions available to date of
Soviet efforts to improve the military proficiency of Palestinian guerrillas. He
said that such courses were also conducted in China, Vietnam and North Korea,
and that ''freedom fighters'' for various groups within the P.L.O. were
routinely sent to those countries after completing training in the Middle East.

Soviet Has Denied Training P.L.O.

Western and Israeli intelligence officials have often charged that the Soviet
Union and its allies were involved in such training.  Although the Soviet Union
supports the P.L.O. diplomatically, its leaders say they are against the use of
terrorism as a political weapon, and they have denied reports they help train
terrorists. Most such reports have been indirect.

Mr. Jaber was interviewed in a sparsely furnished office at the headquarters of
the Israeli military government for the Hebron area, where he and the three
other members of the squad that he commanded have been jailed since their arrest
in mid-September.

The session, which lasted two hours, was arranged by the Israeli Army at the
request of The New York Times, and was conducted in the presence of an army
public relations officer. No guards or interrogators were in the room. The
prisoner, subdued but talkative, spoke in Arabic, which was translated into
English by an employee of The Times's Jerusalem bureau.

Mr. Jaber admitted having participated in the attack, which took place on May 2,
shortly after the Jewish Sabbath began, and was directed against a large group
of Jewish settlers and worshipers walking back from prayers at the Tomb of the
Patriarchs in the heart of the Arab city. Six were killed and sixteen wounded by
grenades and automatic rifle fire.

Four months later Mr. Jaber was arrested by the Israelis while trying to cross
the Jordan river into Jordan with another terrorist, Yasir Hussein Mohammed
Zeidat. The army originally identified Mr.  Zeidat as the group's commander, but
later learned that he had been responsible only for local aspects of the
operation and that Mr.  Jaber had been the overall commander. Mr. Jaber said he
infiltrated into the West Bank from Jordan nearly a year ago, with specific
instructions to attack Jewish settlers near Hebron.

He said he had been born and raised in the West Bank village of Tayasir. He fled
to the east bank of the Jordan, he said, with his father, a Jordanian Army
corporal, on the fourth day of the 1967 war. His father was killed in an Israeli
air attack across the Jordan in 1968, he said, and in 1969 he joined Al Fatah,
the biggest group within the umbrella organization, becoming a guerrilla
fighter.

Selected for 'Outside' Training

After training in Syria and Lebanon, he was selected to be one of 21 guerrillas
from various P.L.O. factions to undergo special instruction ''outside,'' as he
put it.

''Usually you go through courses or military training,'' he explained of the
P.L.O.'s system, ''and the people who graduate go on to something else. When you
reach a certain level, it's decided that you can go outside.''

Although he said that most apparently went to the Soviet Union, Soviet training
was not considered the best. ''The training of the Vietnamese is better,'' Mr.
Jaber said, ''from the point of view of military experience. The experience of
Vietnam is considered contemporary, and it resembles approximately the situation
in which the Palestine Liberation Organization finds itself, whereas the
experience of the Soviet Union and China resembles more the experience of World
War II.''

In March 1974, he said, his group boarded an Aeroflot jetliner in Damascus for
the flight to Moscow; his impression was that the P.L.O. paid for the tickets.
The group was taken to the town of Skhodnya, about 20 miles from Moscow, where
they received their instruction.

Contact With Russians Prohibited

Housed in a stone building where they also had classes, the Palestinians were
not allowed to have any contact with Soviet citizens other than their
instructors, Mr. Jaber said. ''It was forbidden, by them and by us,'' he
explained. There was nothing to do in the evenings but sleep; once the group was
taken on a sightseeing tour of Moscow and Leningrad, but he ended up with little
impression of Soviet life.

Six classes were held daily from 8 A.M. to 4 P.M., he said, conducted by Soviet
instructors of various ages, both in uniform and in civilian clothes. Most spoke
only Russian, which had to be translated into Arabic by Soviet interpreters,
though a few spoke to them directly in Arabic.

Courses in tactics and politics were taught by men of 50 years or older, he
said. The political lectures dealt with the principles of the Communist Party,
he recalled, and Soviet positions on the Middle East. Propaganda techniques were
also taught.

He said that during the training the Soviet instructors never mentioned Israel
as an enemy, and did not attempt to whip up an anti-Israel mood among the
guerrillas. ''The target was 'the enemy,' '' Mr. Jaber recalled. ''Israel was
never mentioned.''

Training Not Directly Applicable

The course's specific purpose was to train the young men to command units of
about 30 guerrillas, he said, and the emphasis was not on individual acts of
terrorism but on conventional military techniques not directly applicable to his
operation in Hebron or similar acts against civilians.

Nevertheless, he concluded that his Soviet training was extremely important in
contributing to his military competence. Israeli officials have said that the
Hebron attack was the first within memory, and possibly the only one, in which
all the terrorists survived unharmed. It was regarded as a skillful and highly
professional assault.

Words Were Uncompromising

Mr. Jaber did not have a fiery look in his eyes. He slouched, and his expression
was somber, almost sad. Yet his words were uncompromising.

''I'm like any man who has a cause,'' he said. ''It is important for me to
explain. We, as fighters, we fight not because we like to fight and like
killing. We want the American people to know about the Palestinian case and the
Palestinian people. This war, which we are in - I don't believe it is going to
come to an end in the near future. There is no just political solution on the
horizon. We as fighters hope that there will be a just solution to this
question, but we see it as being very difficult. We are aware of the
difficulties.''

But how can a man fire a gun into a group of unarmed civilians, he was asked,
killing innocent people?  ''It is probable whenever there is a war,'' Mr. Jaber
replied, ''whether it is justified or unjustified, that innocent people will be
killed. There is no escaping the fact that there will be casualties among
civilians around the area. It wasn't our purpose to hurt children or women, but
we came up against fire when we clashed there.'' Four women were injured in the
Hebron attack.

''I hope that you will publish this precisely,'' he said. ''It is true that
there were some people there who weren't armed, but there were people there who
were armed. Maybe I should ask the public in America: There is a Palestinian
people that is scattered throughout the world, throughout all corners of the
world. If public opinion in the world is against killing innocent people, we
Palestinians are being killed every day, if not by an Israeli tank, then by Arab
nations all over the Middle East. I hope Americans will hear and know that we
were killed and scattered in '48 and we were killed and scattered in '67.''

'I Have to Carry It Out'

''The Hebron operation,'' he said, ''is part of the general operation that takes
place between us and Israel. As a fighter, when they give me an order, I have to
carry it out. My personal feelings are that I am sorry that the situation has
reached this point.''

When the last question was asked and the last answer given, a guard came in and
replaced the handcuffs that had been removed when the interview began, and Mr.
Jaber was taken back to his cell. His trial is expected in a few months, and he
is likely to get no less than life in prison.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

PSYCHOLOGIST IS PREPARING FOR COUNSELING HOSTAGES

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 643 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 30


For several days, Isaiah M. Zimmerman had kept a packed overnight bag in his
closet and never left home without telling the State Department where he could
be reached.

Yesterday, Mr. Zimmerman's anxious vigil ended, as he and a small group of
psychologists, psychiatrists and social counselors, members of the 18-person
team responsible for the health and welfare of the American hostages held in
Iran, flew to Wiesbaden, West Germany, to prepare for their possible release.

Mr. Zimmerman had prepared for this trip for months. Hired in May by the State
Department as a ''consultant for Group and Family Relations,'' he has three
major responsibilities: to supervise counseling of the families of the 52
hostages; to coordinate the ''reentry'' counseling program for the hostages in
Wiesbaden, and to insure that the counseling team itself remains psychologically
equipped to help the hostages.

''Our experience with hostages and prisoners of war from Korea and Vietnam tells
us that hostages will require about seven to nine days with our team, a kind of
buffer zone, in order to reconnect with their new environment,'' Mr. Zimmerman
said.

Urging a Delayed Reunion

Therefore, he and other counselors have attempted to dissuade relatives of the
hostages from flying to West Germany to greet their loved ones.

''We suspect that many of the hostages will be somewhat withdrawn, disoriented,
and confused after their long confinement and emotional estrangement,'' Mr.
Zimmerman said.

''For the sake of the hostages,'' he added, ''the families should not be there.
The hostage needs some space and should not be burdened with the emotional
performance that a happy reunion requires.''

Mr. Zimmerman, who was interviewed at his home in Washington before leaving for
Wiesbaden, said that most of the hostage families had been counseled about what
to expect when the hostages come home and how they could help them readjust to
normal life.

Families Use Hotline

About two-thirds of the families, he said, have used the ''outreach hotline,'' a
telephone line for hostage families to call, free of charge, that has been
manned by counselors and wives of foreign service officers who volunteered.

The hostages's families have been toldwhat to expect not only through the
hotline, but also through personal contacts by Mr.  Zimmerman and his team.

After the initial ''honeymoon'' of a reunion, Mr. Zimmerman explained, former
hostages would begin what he called a ''backwardlooking review'' of decisions
made in their absence.

''They will ask their spouses why they sold the favorite car, or decided to rent
the basement, or change their children's schools.  This missing information will
have a lot of emotional impact on them,'' he said.

''The decisions were made without their being consulted and, though it may seem
irrational, it is only natural that conflicts over these seemingly minor issues
will erupt.''

In Wiesbaden, the Air Force hospital has been prepared for months for the
hostages's arrival. Last August, Mr. Zimmerman visited it to insure that the men
would be able to select the housing arrangements they prefer and to plan the
final hostages's ''re-entry'' program.

The first stage, he explained, would involve identifying which, if any, of the
hostages was experiencing a psychiatric crisis, such as severe depression.

The hostages, many of whom have been separated from each other while in
confinement, may also need time to re-connect with each other.

The hostages would then be given a chance to catch up on world events. The State
Department has prepared summaries and film clippings of news events of the past
year.

Finally, the hostages would then be able to withdraw and meditate, to
contemplate their experiences and, as Mr. Zimmerman put it, ''to re-establish
their feeling of physical identify and pride.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 1, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article yesterday incorrectly reported the movement of a team of
psychologists and psychiatrists that will deal with the American hostages when
they are released by Iran. The team has not yet departed for Wiesbaden, Germany.

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

KOCH PROPOSING MINORITIES PLAN FOR CONTRACTORS

BYLINE: By ROBERT McG. THOMAS Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 552 words


Mayor Koch is preparing to publish proposed regulations designed to bolster
minority-group contractors by allocating $100 million of the city's annual
construction budget for a program focused on the poor.

The proposed regulations, which will be published in The City Record on Monday,
are designed to implement a vaguely worded executive order issued by Mr. Koch
two months ago.

The regulations would reserve 10 percent of the city's $1 billiona-year
construction contracts for small subcontractors who derive 25 percent of their
revenues from one of the city's 166 federally designated poverty areas, or who
draw 25 percent of their work force from those who meet Federal definitions of
the poor.

The program, described by city officials as the first of its kind in the
country, seeks to help black and Hispanic businessmen without resorting to the
specific racial formulas the Mayor opposes.

Other Cities Interested

The operating assumption, as the Mayor has expressed it, is that ''the poor are
overwhelmingly black and Hispanic,'' and that any program keyed to the poor will
inevitably benefit minorities.

The proposed regulations will not take effect until after a comment period that
ends Dec. 31. Douglas H. White, director of the city's Bureau of Labor Services,
which devised the regulations, said the final version would be published early
next year and . go into effect 30 days later.

Under the regulations, companies that win city-financed construction contracts
and that subcontract as much as 10 percent of the work would be required to
allocate 10 percent of the contract's total value to subcontractors registered
and approved by the Office of Economic Development as ''locally based
enterprises.'' Those subcontracting less than 10 percent of the work would have
to give all the subcontracted work to such locally based enterprise,

To obtain designation as a ''locally based enterprise,'' contractors would have
to establish that they have revenues of no more than $500,000 a year, and that
they either derive at least 25 percent of their gross receipts from construction
work done in the designated poverty areas, or have a work force with at least a
25 percent representation of those who meet Federal definitions of the
economically disadvantaged - welfare recipients, those with individual or family
incomes below the city's Federal poverty level, unemployed Vietnam veterans and
displaced homemakers.

The workers would have to meet the qualifications either at the time of the
contract bidding, or, for those hired within the previous two years, at the time
of their employment.

Officials of the Office of Economic Development could provide no estimates of
how many contractors might qualify as locally based enterprises, but said they
had compiled a list of about 900 that met the threshhold requirement of revenues
of no more than $500,000 a year.

The comment period for the proposed regulations was set at about twice the 30
days required by the City Charter to accommodate what is expected to be an
outpouring of views from civil-rights leaders, contractors and the general
public.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WEEKENDER GUIDE;
Friday;
NEW SCANDINAVIAN FILMS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1103 words


A five-week series of new films from Scandinavia has begun at the Museum of
Modern Art and some of the film makers will be on hand to introduce their work.
This afternoon at 2:30, Jorn Donner will be there for ''Men Can't Be Raped,'' a
film about the vengeance of a woman on her attacker. And tonight at 6, Erland
Josephson, who played the husband in Ingmar Bergman's ''Scenes from a
Marriage,'' will present ''Marmalade Revolution,'' which he directed. The movie,
featuring Bibi Anderson, is a tragicomedy about a man's rebellion against the
predictability of his life. Both films are subtitled.  Tickets by request with
admission to the museum, which is $2.50 ($1.50 for students, 75 cents for
children and the elderly).

SOCIAL COMMENT IN ART

Former President Richard M. Nixon is seen in 18th-century wig and gown; Senator
Edward M. Kennedy, portrayed as a pussycat, holds a tiny mouse resembling
President Carter. They are part of an exhibition of satiric social and political
drawings by 28 artists including David Levine, Jules Feiffer, Ed Sorel and
Robert Osborn at the American Institute of Graphic Arts, 1019 Third Avenue.
Issues of the last decade, from the Vietnam War to the nuclear accident at Three
Mile Island, are examined in the show, which is on through Nov. 26, Monday
through Friday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:45 P.M. (PL. 2-0813).  Admission is free.

FUN FROM FEYDEAU

The amorous desires of some upper middle class men and women in
turn-of-the-century Paris are frustrated by the wrong people showing up in the
wrong place at the wrong time in Georges Feydeau's farce ''The Happy Hunter.''
The play, adapted by Barnett Shaw and directed by John Reich, will open the
season of the PAF Playhouse on 185 Second Street, Huntington Station, L.I.,
tonight at 8:30. Tickets tonight are $11. Information: (516) 271-8282.

EAST HAMPTON ATTIC SALE

Lauren Bacall and other celebrities, as well as ordinary folk, have poked
through their attics and come up with all kinds of objects for you to buy.
Marble fruit, lamps, furniture, books, towel racks, toys, games and jewelry will
be offered today and tomorrow in the annual attic sale of the Guild Hall in East
Hampton, L.I. Also on hand will be new items, such as art books, cookbooks,
china and art posters.  The sale, for the benefit of Guild Hall, a museum and
theater center at 158 Main Street, is on from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. each day.
Information: (516) 324-0806.

Saturday

'AIDA' IN NEWARK

The New Jersey State Opera opens its season Saturday at 7:30 P.M.  with Verdi's
''Aida.'' Placido Domingo is Radames, and making their American debuts are
Guillerina Higareda of Mexico in the title role and Luigi De Corato of La Scala
as Amonasro. The performance, at Symphony Hall, 1020 Broad Street in Newark,
marks the 15th anniversary of the company, whose music director is Alfredo
Silipigni. Tickets to the performance range from $8 to $50. Season subscriptions
for this and subsequent performances, of Donizetti's ''Lucia di Lammermoor'' and
Mascagni's ''L'Amico Fritz,'' range from $18 to $100. Information: (201)
623-5775 or (201) 623-5757.

JO DAVIDSON AND HIS TIME

The works of Jo Davidson, the sculptor who died three decades ago and whose list
of subjects reads like a rollcall of the Hall of Fame, will be shown at an
exhibition opening Saturday and running through Nov. 22 at the ACA
gog jp
Galleries, 21 East 67th Street. ''Jo Davidson - In Relation to His Time''
includes more than 65 sculptures, including Franklin D.  Roosevelt, James Joyce,
George Bernard Shaw, Carl Sandburg, Charles de Gaulle, Helen Keller, Mohandas K.
Gandhi, Gertrude Stein, Charles Chaplin, Albert Einstein and Golda Meir. The
hours are 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., Tuesdays through Saturdays. Admission is free.

LACY QUINTET'S FINALE

Saturday will be the the last chance to hear the Steve Lacy Quintet before it
returns to Europe, where the jazz ensemble has been living and working for more
than a decade. The group is made up of Mr. Lacy on soprano sax, Steve Potts on
alto sax, Kent Carter bass, Oliver Johnson drums and Irene Aebi, who plays the
cello and sings. It is closing its weekend at Soundscape, 500 West 52d Street,
corner of 10th Avenue, with music starting at 8:30 P.M. Tickets are $5.
Reservations: 581-7032.

Sunday

FULTON'S STEAMER

People were skeptical when Robert Fulton, engineer and artist, designed a paddle
wheel steamer, the Clermont, in 1807. So they joked about ''Fulton's Folly,''
although his venture was to radically change the history of shipping. Fulton
wasn't the first to build a steamboat, but his was the first to be commercially
successful in American waters, so he's known popularly as its inventor. Some 20
draftsman's copies of his drawings for the steamer (the originals were destroyed
by fire), along with two Fulton self-portraits and a model of his ship are on
exhibit at the Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street.
Museum hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Tuesday through Saturday, 1 to 5 P.M. Sunday.
Admission is free.

VOICES AND WINDS

Vincent La Selva's New York Grand Opera Singers will be at the Market at the
Citicorp Center, 53d Street and Lexington Avenue, Sunday at 1 P.M. in the first
of three November appearances there.  The company performs pieces from popular
and rare operas. Admission is free. Meanwhile, in Oyster Bay, L.I., the Concerts
at Coe Hall series at the Planting Fields Arboretum opens at 2:30 P.M. Sunday
with the Dorian Wind Ensemble playing Mozart, Ravel, Vivaldi and Beethoven.
Tickets are $7. Information: (516) 922-0061.

RUGBY ON RANDALL'S I.

Before American football, there was British rugby. Football's forerunner is
still with us and, in fact, is said to be winning new interest on American
campuses. The games are similar, although rugby teams have 15 players, instead
of 11, and minimal protective equipment. The ball can be advanced only by
running, kicking or laterally passing. No blocking or forward passes are
allowed. On Sunday, starting at 11 A.M., the first annual Old Grand-Dad Special
Selection Championship will be held at Downing Stadium on Randall's Island, just
off the Triborough Bridge. Seventeen collegiate clubs are scheduled to compete.
Admission is free.
Eleanor Blau

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Les Luthiers members

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: VIETNAM WAR AND A KILLING IT SPAWNED

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 878 words


IN the spring of 1977, a brief report ran in The New York Times telling about a
17-year-old South Vietnamese woman living in Flushing who had been raped and
murdered by a 31-year-old former Marine who had served in Vietnam. Several weeks
later, Francis X.  Clines, in his ''About New York'' column in The Times,
provided more poignant details about the victim, her refugee family and the
veteran.

The family had begun to build a new life in Queens when the battleshocked
veteran killed her in the belief that he was back in Vietnam interrogating a
Vietcong prisoner. At his trial, psychiatrists for the prosecution and defense
agreed that the former Marine was insane when he committed the crime, the court
found him not guilty by reason of insanity and he was institutionalized.

The item and the column captured the attention of a freelance writer, David
Haward Bain, who was doing various jobs, including playing the piano in a
wine-and-cheese shop in his home town, Port Washington, L.I., to help pursue his
writing career. He envisioned a deeper story on the tragedy of Vietnam, in the
manner of C.D.B.  Bryan's ''Friendly Fire'' or David Rabe's post-Vietnam plays.

The other day, Mr. Bain recalled that he got in touch with the victim's father,
Le Thanh Hoang Dan, and the former Marine, Louis Kahan, who is now in Creedmoor
State Hospital, and proposed that he write the full story. Both agreed to
cooperate; both sought understanding without sensationalism.

The result of Mr. Bain's research is published today as ''Aftershocks: A Tale of
Two Victims,'' by Methuen, New York. The book traces the events leading up to
the death of the woman, Le My Hanh, the parallel lives that she and Mr. Kahan
led in Southeast Asia and the United States, the disposition of the case and, in
an appendix, facts about help for both veterans and Vietnamese in this country.

The human story in ''Aftershocks'' has aroused the interest of paperback houses,
according to Sukey Howard, executive editor and director of subsidiary rights at
Methuen, and it might be turned into a television film.

The 31-year-old writer discovered in doing his research that all concerned,
including prosecuting and defense attorneys, spoke candidly because they
recognized that without the war such a tragedy would never have occurred.

The victim's father, who had been a professor of philosophy in Saigon, invited
the writer into his home, drove him around Queens and provided details of the
family's life in Vietnam.

He described how after their arrival in the United States his daughter had
excelled in school and how she strove to become an ''average American
teen-ager.'' Mr. Kahan was living in the same apartment project in Flushing as
the Vietnamese family, experiencing the rejection felt by other veterans who had
been unable to adjust.  For two years, he had been unable to sleep properly.
When he encountered Le My Hanh, he found himself back in the war and his mind
exploded.

''In our many interviews, Louis Kahan made no self-serving statements,'' Mr.
Bain said. ''Although at times he was in mental and physical anguish recalling
the events, he willingly discussed the killing. He was as eager as I was to
discover what had happened to him, and why.''

A different kind of story about Vietnam emerges in ''Village at War: An Account
of Revolution in Vietnam,'' by James Walker Trullinger Jr., published by
Longman, New York. It is a history of a village near the old provincial capital
of Hue. The author, a former refugee officer, helped to establish the Shoeshine
Boys, a social welfare project for homeless Vietnamese youth, leaving the
country just ahead of the North Vietnamese forces.

Robert Elegant, author of the best-selling novel, ''Dynasty,'' has a new
historical novel out, from McGraw-Hill, ''Manchu,'' which reaches back to the
great Ming dynasty. An old Asian hand who was long a Los Angeles Times
correspondent, Mr. Elegant was in town the other day from Ireland, where he now
lives. He said that researching the novel provided a chance to use the languages
he and his wife knew.

''I speak Mandarin, read Japanese and several other languages, but I had to
resurrect my classical Chinese for the research,'' said Mr.  Elegant, who
studied at Columbia. ''I lived 'Dynasty,' but I had to do a great deal of
digging in the past for 'Manchu.' ''

The novel follows the journeys of a 17th-century soldier of fortune, passing
through wars, sampling court life and, along the way, getting entwined with
three women, one a Chines and noble, one a concubine, and one wealthy and
Portuguese. How did the author research these three beautiful women? ''I spent a
long time as a bachelor in Asia,'' Mr. Elegant said.

He felt his journalistic experience gave him ''a certain regard for
ascertainable facts.'' He said that as a newspaperman he tried to write ''little
pictures'' and that maybe he was a ''novelist manque'' all along.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 1, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

2 CONSERVATIVES FIGHT CLOSE BATTLE FOR SENATE IN ALABAMA;
The Race for Congress

BYLINE: By WENDELL RAWLS Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words

DATELINE: MOBILE, Ala., Oct. 31


Regardless of which lever voters pull Tuesday in the Alabama race for the United
States Senate, they will have sided with a candidate who campaigns on support
for God, family and a strong national defense.

The Democrat, James Folsom Jr., and the Republican, Jeremiah A.  Denton, have
made the three concepts girders of their bridges to a somewhat apathetic
electorate in a state where motherhood, the Maker and the military are widely
popular. The two men have rarely strayed to more provocative or precarious
issues.

Mr. Folsom is the 31-year-old, one-head-shorter and one-furlongmore-conservative
son of the 6-foot, 7-inch tall two-term Alabama Governor known as Big Jim, who
was one of the last true populists in the South.

Incumbent Upset in Primary

The younger Folsom, a handsome, hulking, slow-walking and slowtalking public
service commissioner, rode his father's name to recognition by 85 percent of the
voters at the beginning of the primary campaign and stunned an incumbent
Senator, Donald W. Stewart, in a runoff election while spending less than
$100,000.

Mr. Denton is a salty-tongued retired admiral who spent more than seven years as
a prisoner of war in North Vietnam. He is mixing his reputation as a patriotic
war hero with a call for pay-as-you-go, free-enterprise economics and the
recitation of a series of moral and family values that he says America is
forsaking.

He has the support of the Rev. Jerry Falwell's Moral Majority and a $700,000
bankroll, of which the maximum $173,000 was contributed by the Republican
National Committee. The committee contributed almost as much as the $180,000
total that Mr. Folsom had raised for his primary and general election campaigns
combined.

Political experts say that the contest is very close as the campaign reaches the
final days. Each candidate maintains that he has a slight edge, but neither will
cite the source of his confidence.

Postures Virtually the Same

The candidates have adopted virtually the same posture on the broader issues of
the campaign. Both want less government interference in personal lives and
business. Both want more attention given to military strength and national
prestige. Both want a balanced Federal budget. Both want to curtail government
spending and waste and encourage work incentives for welfare recipients.

Their political differences seem to be for the most part a matter of degree.
Their major differences appear to be more personal, and Mr. Folsom may have put
them most succinctly when he said this week in Huntsville, ''I guess that I'm
more of a good ol' boy than he is.''

The Denton camp has said that Mr. Folsom is ''too young,'' and has questioned
his intelligence with assertions that he has a ''roomtemperature I.Q.'' In a
speech to a Rotary Club luncheon crowd this week, Mr. Denton, 56 years old,
said, ''I'm sure there are some 31-year-olds in the state smarter than me, but
he's not one of them.''

The former admiral, who founded the Coalition for Decency in Mobile, contended
this week that his opponent had received about $22,000, about 12.5 percent of
the total of his funds, from coal mining interests he must regulate as a member
of the Public Service Commission.

Fear of Soviet Attack

And, unlike Mr. Folsom, he seems to find the threat of military attack by the
Soviet Union of overriding importance. He asks audiences, ''What can we do after
we are hit by missiles from the Soviet Union?'' He maintains that the ''Soviets
don't hit us because of things like the Polish strikes.'' He predicts that
''inflation would not be the No. 1 issue when Soviet missiles strike the North
American continent.''

In private interviews, Mr. Denton closes his eyes as he talks and stresses his
concerns about teen-age sexual promiscuity, popular music lyrics, the sexual
tone conveyed by television and the societal unhappiness he says these things
produce.

''Suicide is the second largest cause of death among teen-agers,'' he says.
''And it is caused by unhappiness.'' For his part, Mr. Folsom claims an
''all-Alabama'' campaign and accuses Mr. Denton of accepting an inordinant
amount of money and celebrity endorsements from outside the state.

''And while Mr. Denton and The Moral Majority are right-wing and
ultraconservative,'' he says, ''they are not any more moral than I am.''

Views His Youth as an Asset

He views his youth as an asset and points to ''an Alabama tradition of sending
young men to Washington and allowing them to stay there a long time to build up
seniority and get into positions where they can help the state.''

Sources close to Mr. Folsom said privately that he had not expected to win the
Democratic nomination and had entered the race only as a way to establish
himself statewide as a political entity distinct from his father and to prepare
himself for a run at the Governor's office in 1982.

Mr. Folsom, however, insists that he is his own man. ''I admit that I'm proud of
my father and his accomplishments for the state,'' he says, ''but I am a
separate individual.''

His father, who now is blind, almost deaf and pretty much homebound in Cullman,
Ala., in the hill country north of Birmingham, was first elected Governor in
1946, and two decades before the Voting Rights Act he called for such reform
measures as repeal of the poll tax that had often prevented blacks from voting.

Passed the Bucket for Coins

He campaigned with a cornshuck mop and a bucket, he made the ground shake with
promises to ''clean up the mess in Montgomery,'' and he passed the bucket that
soon rattled with coins from farmers and mill workers whose feet tapped to the
beat of music from a hillbilly band.

Legend has it that he kissed all the women and slapped all the backs he could
reach, and that when he opened a bottle of whisky he threw away the cork because
it would not be needed again.

In evidence of a different era, this week his son was speaking in a hotel
ballroom, having been introduced as ''the next gentleman to be elected to the
Senate from Alabama.''

His son's opponent was speaking in a banquet hall in south Alabama and he
followed a man who announced that ''the noon average of Dow Jones industrials
was down one-point-ninety-six.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Jeremiah A. Denton Photo of James Folsom

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 1, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT PUERTO RICO WANTS FROM CONGRESS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 638 words


To the Editor:

''Tricky Promises in Puerto Rico'' (Oct. 28) constituted tricky editorializing
by The New York Times.  It is one thing to ask Congress to grant special
privileges to Puerto Rico which would have the effect of loosening the island's
ties to the United States. That is what our adversaries did when they were in
power, and Congress acted most appropriately in turning them down.

It is something very different to ask Congress to confer equality of rights and
responsibilities upon a community of American citizens by incorporating Puerto
Rico into the Union. That is what my New Progressive Party proposes to do upon
receiving a plebiscite mandate from our voters.

The Congressional initiatives of the past would have driven a wedge between
American citizens on the mainland and those on the island.  Our initiatives, by
contrast, will give substance and permanence to a relationship which for too
long has remained ill-defined and poorly understood.

Although The Times's editorialist seems not to have comprehended it, this
distinction has not been overlooked by our nation's leaders, which explains why
the two major parties (through both their Presidential candidates and their
platforms) and a unanimous Congress (in a joint resolution approved last year)
have formally endorsed statehood for Puerto Rico, should that be the will of our
electorate.

As to what The Times described as ''special rules'' for Puerto Rico, it should
be noted that specific concessions to newly admitted states have throughout
American history been the rule rather than the exception. Indeed, outright cash
grants have been awarded in some instances, and - in the case of Alaska - the
Federal Government transferred title to 100 million acres of land containing
natural resources worth billions of dollars.

Puerto Rico's purpose in seeking transitional legislation will be the same as
that of the states that have entered the Union before us: to guarantee that
statehood will be economically viable, through the avoidance of such interim
dislocations as those which would result from the overnight imposition of
Federal income taxes, from which Puerto Rico has always been exempt in
accordance with the principle of ''no taxation without representation.''

Your editorial indignation as to the arrangements that should be made for ''a
dependent people on an economically distressed island'' indicates a prejudice
toward our people that is not typical of The New York Times. Our so-called
''dependent people'' happen to be natural-born American citizens who have been
denied their political rights for 63 years, yet have willingly served the nation
and given their lives in defense of our nation in two world wars, in Korea and
in Vietnam. As a matter of fact, troops from Puerto Rico sustained more
casualities in the Korean War, on a per capita basis, than those from any state
of the Union.

Today's Puerto Rican aspires to advance from dependence and political impotence
to greater economic vitality and the full exercise of the rights of American
citizenship. Second-class citizenship as residents of a ''commonwealth'' is both
personally demeaning and economically debilitating.

Our nation's leaders are anxious to put an end to the perennial international
embarrassment spawned by Puerto Rico's ''colonial'' status. We ourselves are
anxious to emerge from a nether world of ambivalence and inferiority into a
future endowed with dignity and definition.

There is nothing ''tricky'' about any of this. Nor are there any ''promises''
involved - only suggestions open to eventual discussion with the Congress. We
invite The Times to take a closer look. More accurate appraisal of the facts
will yield a more constructive set of conclusions.
CARLOS ROMERO-BARCELO, Governor of Puerto Rico, San Juan, P.R., Oct. 29, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'GANG OF FOUR' TRIAL IS FURTHER DELAYED

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 898 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Nov. 1


The trial of China's radicals has had to be postponed because Jiang Qing, the
widow of Mao Zedong, has refused to confess and insisted that everything she did
in the Cultural Revolution was at Mao's behest, a senior Chinese official said
today.

The official, who did not want to be identified, said that Miss Jiang's
''behavior has been very bad'' during what he termed the pretrial phase of the
case, which has been going on over the last few weeks.

Miss Jiang quoted an old Chinese proverb to the panel of special prosecutors set
up to deal with the radicals' trial, the official said. It was, ''If you are
going to beat a dog, you should first think of its master,'' an allusion to her
relationship with Chairman Mao.

Miss Jiang's position appears to create a severe embarrassment for Peking, for
it has long been important in Chinese law to have accused persons confess their
guilt as a sign that justice is being done. The traditional Chinese legal
theory, which still carries weight today, is that a person would not be arrested
and brought to trial if he or she was not guilty.

Radicals Blamed for All Excesses

Miss Jiang's stance also raises the sensitive question of Mao's role in the
Cultural Revolution in the late 1960's and the continued political and economic
difficulties of the early 1970's. Until now, China's current leaders have sought
to blame the radicals, known as the Gang of Four, for all the excesses and
failures of that period, exculpating Mao.

The senior Chinese official, who is involved in preparations for the trial, said
it was now undecided when the special high court would begin its hearings. But
other Chinese sources still suggest that the trial could start as early as next
week.

Peking first announced the coming trial on Sept. 27 and indicated that it would
start by mid-October. Since then officials have given several other dates for
the case to start, but each has passed without any public explanation of what
happened.

In addition to Miss Jiang, the accused include her cohorts in the Gang of Four,
Zhang Chunqiao, Yao Wenyuan and Wang Hongwen, as well as Mao's former political
secretary, Chen Boda, and five senior generals who were associates of the late
Defense Minister Lin Biao.

The Gang of Four are charged with plotting a ''counterrevolutionary armed
rebellion'' and persecuting thousands of officials. The generals are to be tried
for attempting to murder Mao.

Indictment Given to Defendants

The official who disclosed Miss Jiang's refusal to confess said that the state's
indictment against the 10 defendants had already been given to them and to the
35 specially appointed judges who make up the tribunal.

He did not explain what constituted the pretrial phase of the case and under
what circumstances Miss Jiang refused to admit her guilt.  Under China's
criminal code, the prosecutor, or procurator, normally examines the defendant
before the case goes before a judge.

Miss Jiang and the other members of the Gang of Four were arrested in October
1976, less than a month after Mao's death. It is not known where they have been
kept in the meantime. But if at this late date Miss Jiang is still unwilling to
confess, it suggests that she may not have been subjected to torture, as many
officials were during the Cultural Revolution.

On a separate but possibly related subject, the Chinese official said the police
still did not know who it was that planted a bomb in Peking's railroad station
Wednesday, killing nine people and injuring 81. The official said he believed
the explosive device was a ninepound package of dynamite.

Antipersonnel Mine Suspected

But foreign military specialists who have visited the railway station since the
incident say the damage appears to have been caused by an antipersonnel mine,
like the claymore mines that United States forces used in the Vietnam war.

Chinese officials say they do not rule out the possibility that the bomb might
have been placed by a disgruntled follower of the radicals.

Yesterday the Communist Party Central Committee announced that it had
posthumously expelled from the party another high-level supporter of Mao, Kang
Sheng, who for many years was in charge of China's security police. Mr. Kang,
who died in 1975, was closely allied with Miss Jiang during the Cultural
Revolution.

Earlier in the week The People's Daily, the organ of the Communist Party,
carried several sharply worded articles calling on elderly senior officials and
incompetent and corrupt bureaucrats to resign.  The paper did not mention any
names, but Western diplomats took the articles as a possible attack on Ye
@Jie@ying, the 84-year-old chairman of the National People's Congress, China's
parliament.

Mr. Ye was widely expected to step down at a session of the legislature in
September, in view of Peking's moves to retire aged officials and install a
younger generation of leaders. There have been several veiled references
recently in the press to nepotism involving Mr. Ye's family. One of his sons is
a deputy mayor of Canton, and another son, who lives in Peking, has a reputation
as a free-spending playboy who carries a large amount of cash.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

4 MINOR-PARTY CANDIDATES FOR SENATE GIVE THEIR VIEWS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 39, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 618 words


Four Senate candidates who are on Tuesday's ballot in New York by petition
rather than nomination say that no matter how the election turns out they have
already scored victories.

They have succeeded, they say, in circulating their ideas - ideas that range
from the need for less government to the need for more.  The Free Libertarian
candidate, Richard Savadel of Glen Cove, L.I., contends that his rivals would
expand government. ''I believe the people should retain the bulk of their
money,'' he says, ''and make the economic decisions, which they can do better
than any bureaucracy.''

The candidate of the Communist Party U.S.A., Bill (William R.) Scott of Spring
Valley, N.Y., says: ''If big business won't keep plants open, then the Federal
Government must.''

Would Abolish Defense Budget

Tom Soto of Manhattan, of the Workers World Party, would slash defense spending
to get $30 billion for emergency works in the state.  And Victor A. Nieto of
Hempstead, L.I., of the Socialist Workers Party, would eliminate the defense
budget and set up ''crash public works.''

Mr. Savadel, 49 years old, is a computer systems manager in Westbury, L.I. He
spent eight years in the Conservative Party, polling 8 percent of the vote as a
State Senate candidate in Suffolk in 1972. He joined the Libertarians in 1973,
he says, ''because the Conservative Party leadership made too many deals.''

''We believe government is the cause of our problems,'' he says.  His campaign
urges a $200 billion cut in spending and taxes ''to avoid a serious
depression.''

Encountered Racism in the Navy

Mr. Scott, 54, a black, says he joined the Communist Party in 1946 after
encountering racism in the Navy in World War II. He is a past president of the
Spring Valley chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People.

A welder who was employed at the General Motors plant in Tarrytown, N.Y., in
1969, he says he was dismissed in 1977 for publishing a story in a rank-and-file
newspaper about a woman being molested by a foreman. He was reinstated in 1978
as a result of a United Automobile Workers grievance, he says, but is now on
disability leave.

Mr. Scott calls for public ownership and worker management of shutdown plants
and unlimited unemployment benefits of 75 percent of wages. He would halve the
military budget to bring $7 billion to $11 billion a year into the state for
jobs.

The Workers World Party, split from the Socialist Workers in 1959, is fielding
its first candidates. Mr. Soto, 37, of Puerto Rican descent, served in the Army
in Vietnam in 1963 and 1964.

Urges Free Medical Care

He was a porter in a Helmsley-Spear subsidiary, he says, when he was discharged
in 1975, but reinstated after two years in a National Labor Relations Board case
that he says strengthened workers' rights to distribute leaflets.

He calls for two years' notice before companies may move or sell out, and worker
operation of plants if need be, a moratorium on debts during unemployment or
strikes, free medical care, unlimited unemployment benefits, free mass
transportation paid by taxes on business, rents of not more than 10 percent of
income, and bringing home nearly 500,000 servicemen from overseas.

Mr. Nieto, the Cuban-born Socialist Workers candidate, came to the United States
in 1961. He is a 1971 business administration graduate of Baruch College.
Experience as a social worker led him in 1975 to the Socialist Workers. ''We
can't come to solutions unless we change the economic system,'' he says.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT'S ALLOWED ON TV--PRESSURES FOR CHANGE ARE MOUNTING

BYLINE: By PETER FUNT

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2957 words


Among the many decisions to be made this election day, one in particular will
not be made at the polls. It will be made by television viewers in their homes
in New York, Los Angeles and a dozen other cities where the choice involves
bypassing the election-night banter of Messrs. Cronkite, Chancellor and
Reynolds, in favor of watching the Academy Award-winning Vietnam War drama,
''The Deer Hunter.'' If enough viewers cast their ''vote'' for ''The Deer
Hunter'' - which its New York City outlet, WOR-TV/Channel 9, warns ''contains
dramatic subject matter and dialogue suitable only for mature audiences'' - it
could have major implications for the future of television.

The issue to be decided - or at least illuminated - is how far television may go
in the showing of sex and violence. All three conventional broadcast networks -
CBS, NBC and ABC - have rejected ''The Deer Hunter'' as too violent for
television, while all the pay-cable networks - including Home Box Office and
Showtime - as well as several local broadcast stations, including WOR-TV, deemed
it acceptable. These differing standards raise important questions: Are some
conventional broadcasters significantly liberalizing their views toward
so-called adult material? If so, does the trend reflect a changing society or is
it more the result of competitive pressure from cable and other forms of home
video? Furthermore, as increased attention is focused on standards of taste and
discretion, what will come of television's - especially network television's -
procedures for self-censorship?

CBS held an exclusive option to purchase ''The Deer Hunter'' for network
television, but after screening the film, the network decided not to exercise
that option. Especially troublesome to the CBS censors were the scenes in which
American soldiers are forced by their Vietcong captors to play Russian roulette,
and later the gruesome death of one drug-crazed participant; also, scenes in
which GI's are tortured in cages by the Vietcong. CBS believed that so much
would have to be cut that the television version would no longer resemble the
work that won five Academy Awards. The distributor, MCA-TV, then approached both
ABC and NBC, but they too felt that the editing necessary to meet network
standards would vitiate the film's dramatic appeal.

Meanwhile, ''The Deer Hunter,'' enjoyed a highly successful run on pay-cable and
subscription television in its unedited, R-rated form.  Indeed, the premiere of
the film on Home Box Office last May 18 delivered such high ratings in a special
A.C. Nielsen Pay-Cable Report that it staggered the conventional networks, which
had rejected ''The Deer Hunter,'' and tantalized programmers at local stations
with the prospect of sky-high ratings when, and if, the film could ever be shown
over-the-air. Nielsen's report gave ''The Deer Hunter'' a 40 rating and a 57
share among pay-cable homes on that evening - a remarkable achievement since
pay-cable subscribers know well in advance that several showings of a film will
be scheduled, and because the premiere of ''The Deer Hunter'' came on a Sunday
at 8 P.M., a time when the commercial networks usually schedule their strongest
programs.

The rating figures mean that of all pay-cable homes where television sets were
in use that night - about 3.2 million - more than half - 57 percent -watched
''The Deer Hunter.'' If these ''numbers'' were ever to be translated into a
truly nationwide figure and not just pay-cable homes, ''The Deer Hunter'' would
have ranked as one of the highest-rated telecasts of the year.

Against this background comes the decision by WOR-TV, New York, KCOP-TV, Los
Angeles, and several other independent stations around the nation to telecast
''The Deer Hunter'' in prime time on election night. After much deliberation,
and press releases to the contrary, WOR has decided to edit ''a few seconds'' of
profane dialogue but intends to leave the video portion intact. KCOP, on the
other hand, has opted to make no edits whatsoever - a decision that the station
is vigorously promoting in print and broadcast advertisements in the Los Angeles
market.

The action by these local broadcasters represents a departure from their usual
follow-the-networks procedure. In response, Alfred R.  Schneider, the ABC vice
president in charge of standards and practices, warned recently that
broadcasters must now ''question whether cable's unfettered programming isn't
likely to alter some basic assumptions the country has about television
programming in general.'' Citing ''The Deer Hunter'' telecast as an onerous
example, he added that ''it's apparent that cable's programming of explicit sex
and excessive violence is already affecting what is deemed acceptable for home
viewing.''

Mr. Schneider's remarks are echoed by ABC Television president Frederick Pierce,
who is now calling for a ''voluntary code of acceptability'' among cable casters
to eliminate a ''double standard'' that he feels exists between cable and
conventional television.

Such comments are surprisingly blunt yet not totally unpredictable from the
network that more than a year ago began using promotional phrases such as
''another great movie on free TV.'' Clearly, all three major networks, which
have seen their collective ''share'' of total viewing erode during the past
year, are sensitive to the competitive challenge offered by cable. Yet, since
parent companies of all three have made clear their intentions to aggressively
enter the home video field, it is impossible to judge whether it is morals or
profits that has caused the real concern.

The fact is that within the television industry it is the local station operator
- WOR-TV, for example - that feels the greatest pressure for self censorship,
since stations are licensed by the Federal Communications Commission. F.C.C.
rules about program content are vague but do contain an implied threat that a
license can be revoked for repeated poor judgment involving program content.
Conventional broadcast networks - ABC, CBS and NBC - do not labor under direct
government control but clearly must respect the concerns of local stations which
carry the networks' programming.

Cable networks - such as Home Box Office and Showtime - have virtually no
restraints and aim to please only the cable companies that carry their
programming and, in turn, those companies' customers. Finally, there are the
cable companies themselves, whose concerns about program content are influenced
chiefly by local government (which grants the cable franchise) and pressure
groups within the community that attempt to curb certain program formats while
promoting others.

The workings within this structure are easily demonstrated by using ''The Deer
Hunter'' as an example. ''Scheduling the film represented nothing out of the
ordinary for us,'' explains Jim Heyworth, president of HBO. ''Our programming
includes the best recently released theatrical films we are able to obtain. This
includes some R-rated product, all of which is scheduled after 8 P.M. Eastern
Time, with an advisory as to content. But none of the films presented on HBO is
ever edited in any way.'' On the cable-system level, it is doubtful that any
cable owner balked at carrying ''The Deer Hunter'' via HBO last May, or for that
matter, paid any attention to the fact that the film was being shown. Cable
operators who carry HBO and other pay-television networks have already made a
commitment to offering unedited, R-rated films.

At CBS-TV, however, things were dramatically different. ''Despite our investment
in 'The Deer Hunter,' we felt that the finished film had some thematic problems
that could not be resolved,'' explains Donn O'Brien, vice president in charge of
program practices. ''With the editing necessary to meet our standards, we would
not have been able to present the same film that won five Academy Awards, so we
decided not to present it at all.'' Mr. O'Brien's concern centered not on the
rough language - which could easily be edited out - but on the extreme violence,
particularly in the film's graphic scenes involving Russian roulette.

At WOR-TV in New York, general manager Robert Fennimore decided that the visual
content presented no problem. ''Frankly,'' he observes, ''some of the old cowboy
movies I've seen the networks running get into a bloodier mess than what I
viewed (in 'The Deer Hunter').'' But after one agonizing weekend during which he
viewed and reviewed a tape of the film at home, Mr. Fennimore decided that he
could not, in good conscience, allow the language to go unedited.  He decided
upon ''selective editing,'' which he insists will delete only ''a few seconds''
of the sound track.

But at KCOP-TV in Los Angeles, program director Peter W.  Schlesinger disagreed.
''We gave it a lot of thought,'' he reports.  ''We decided that because of what
the film is, because of the point it makes about war and the way in which it
makes that point, to do anything to the film would hurt the point it was trying
to get across.'' Thus, KCOP will present ''The Deer Hunter'' with no editing
whatsoever. ''But I would view this as a very special case,'' Mr.  Schlesinger
adds. ''Just because I would do it with 'The Deer Hunter,' does not mean I would
do it with another film.''

While ''The Deer Hunter'' was rejected by all three conventional networks as
unsuitable, yet uneditable, for television, several major films with equally
sensitive subject matter have been accepted - though not without drastic and
dramatically weakening sanitizing.  Last season, for example, when ABC presented
Paul Mazursky's ''An Unmarried Woman,'' among the scenes eliminated was the
highly pivotal bedroom encounter between Jill Clayburgh and Alan Bates.
Similarly, NBC's censors deemed it necessary to severely alter the tasteful but
frank sex scene that was crucial to the development of the characters played by
Jane Fonda and Jon Voight in ''Coming Home.'' Occasionally, networks can solve a
standards problem with simple editing-room tricks. In the occult film ''The
Exorcist,'' CBS simply played some of the harsher dialogue in reverse, thus
changing shocking scenes to laughable ones. In other situations -where language
presents the only problem - networks simply edit out the objectionable material.
In ''All the President's Men,'' for instance, the removal of just three
four-letter words, spoken by Robert Redford, was all that was needed to change
an R-rated theatrical film into a version acceptable to CBS.

Unlike theater owners, who rely on the Motion Picture Association of America to
assign a letter-rating to most films, television programmers have no set of
specific guidelines. In addition to the F.C.C.'s vague standards there is a
code, loosely designed by the National Association of Broadcasters and
voluntarily adhered to by station operators, but it too is purposely vague. Such
vagaries have, over the years, allowed network standards and practices
departments to evolve into giant bureaucracies. The CBS operation is described
thusly by Donn O'Brien: ''We have a staff of 75 people who watch everything that
is aired on CBS-TV, including the commercials. They review scripts, attend
rehearsals and tapings, and work closely with producers. There is a paragraph in
every contract we sign with every producer which says the project is subject to
the approval of program practices and if it is not made acceptable for air, then
we don't pay for it. That gives us a lot of clout.''

But how does a producer or supplier know what is acceptable and what is not?
Only through trial and error and, perhaps, through a haunting suspicion that if
something is at all controversial, the networks won't like it. ''We have a very
good working relationship with our producers,'' Mr. O'Brien insists. ''That is
not to say we don't have our fights, but when it does come down to the wire we
simply say, 'Look, if you're not going to change it, we're not going to pay for
it.''

According to Mr. O'Brien, CBS will not telecast any motion picture that carries
an R or X rating, unless that film has been appropriately edited so as to
warrant a PG rating from the M.P.A.A.  ''For the most part,'' he claims, ''the
major audience out there does not want R-rated language, sex or violence coming
into their homes.  This is not to say that (cable) does not provide a viable
sort of programming that people should have access to. But if you look at the
whole audience of an R-rated film in a theater - a block buster - you find that
it got to maybe eight or nine million people. If it reaches network television,
in one or two runs, it gets to 30 or 40 million people. That means most of those
people want to see such a film in a different form.''

Mr. O'Brien's analysis seems to omit concern for persons unable to afford
movie-going, and those who live in areas where there are few theaters. He is,
however, more sympathetic to the role of cable television than is his
counterpart at ABC. ''Viewers deserve the same protection from questionable
material and deceptive advertisements regardless of the delivery system,''
states Alfred Schneider. ''It is time for cable to join the coalition of
restraint -to become part of the on-going national debate about what is socially
acceptable.''

The fact is many cable operators have recently become even less restrained, and
hold to the belief that the only ''ongoing national debate'' necessary when it
comes to program content is the debate among members of a household over which
cable services, if any, should be bought. The nation's fifth largest cable
company, Gill Cable, plans to launch a new adult pay service in January called
''Rendezvous,'' which will feature unedited R-rated films but no Xrated titles.
Other cable companies have reported success with Xrated films that are available
to customers via a special channel, which, like ''Rendezvous,'' is priced at
about $8 per month.

New York City cable viewers have long been familiar with the highly erotic,
usually amateurish programs appearing on the socalled access channels. Manhattan
Cable and Teleprompter Manhattan are able to disavow any responsibility for such
programming because it is made available to outside producers, without
restraint, under terms of the New York City franchise. Yet, unrestricted access
programming is apparently responsible for much of the cable firms' appeal in the
New York market.

As cable casters siphon off more of the conventional broadcasters' audience, the
debate over what ABC's Frederick Pierce calls ''the double standard'' is bound
to heat up. Public television, which has, at its better moments, served as an
alternative to the commercial broadcasters, will feel the pressure as well.
According to David Crippens, station manager of one of the nation's more
progressive public-television stations, KCET, Los Angeles, ''I take the position
that public television has to be an alternative and it must be somewhat daring.
If it is not daring and if we do not do things to make people think, then maybe
we don't have a reason to be there. I'm not out to create controversy or to put
things on simply to titilate people, but we must change as standards change.''

If public broadcasters as well as local operators of commercial stations change
their standards in the face of challenges from new video forms, then the
conventional networks will be trapped in a squeeze play. The three major
networks have loosened their standards somewhat in recent years, but they will
always be the slowest to respond to both social and competitive pressures since
their programming is aimed at the broadest spectrum of audience tastes. At the
same time, network programmers may find that the cable challenge is so great
that ''another movie on free TV'' will soon have to becomme ''another unedited
movie on free TV.'' The success of ''The Deer Hunter'' on pay-cable was not
enough to persuade the conventional networks to alter their standards in order
to carry it, but network standards might change if the film scores a impressive
ratings success on conventional stations while the networks are running election
coverage on Tuesday night.

According to Mr. O'Brien of CBS, ''We are not feeling any special pressure to
change what we do. There is a place for individual broadcasters to make
individual decisions about what should be offered on television.''

But according to Mr. Schneider of ABC, the decision by local stations to
telecast a film that the networks would not ''certainly represents the changing
climate of acceptability. Limits have been extended by cable's exploration of
territory forbidden to broadcasters.''

It seems that what happens on election night may be only the first step in a
long and bitter campaign to determine television's new standards.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NUMISMATICS;
BRYAN DOLLARS RECALL GOLDEN AGE;
by Ed Reiter

SECTION: Section 2; Page 39, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1357 words


Political campaigns have spawned a cornucopia of collectibles - buttons,
posters, stickers and the like. Most of these have little or nothing to do with
numismatics, but in Presidential politics there has been one outstanding
exception: The series of campaigns involving the candidacy of William Jennings
Bryan.

In three unsuccessful runs for the Presidency, candidate Bryan triggered an
outpouring not only of emotions but also of medals and tokens - some favorable,
others critical. These so-called ''Bryan dollars'' were produced as commentaries
on the issue that helped catapault Mr. Bryan to national prominence: his
advocacy of ''free silver'' - the production of silver coins in quantities
unrestricted by law.

The nation had started out with just such a coinage arrangement.  The act of
Congress establishing the United States Mint in 1792 had provided for free and
unlimited coinage of silver and gold at a valuation ratio of 15-to-1, with all
coins of both metals enjoying the status of legal tender.

But this had been a delicate and easily disrupted balance. The relative value of
silver and gold had varied through the years, and with each variation the coins
that were undervalued at that time had been systematically withdrawn from
circulation by speculators and melted for profit.

Bimetallism - the recognition of silver and gold as joint cornerstones of the
U.S. monetary system - was abandoned for all intents and purposes in 1873 when
silver dollar coinage was suspended and restrictions were placed on the legal
tender status of silver coins. Effective in that year, silver coins were
recognized as legal tender only up to a limit of $5.

Demonetization of silver caused an uproar in Western silver-mining states and
this, in turn, prompted Congress to authorize resumption of silver dollar
coinage in 1878. But the Western states wanted a complete return to bimetallism,
and their fight gained added impetus in the early 1890's, when a serious
recession caused disenchantment with the gold standard in other parts of the
country as well.

This was the setting as William Jennings Bryan moved to center stage in American
politics.  Mr. Bryan, a lawyer who had been a two-term congressman from
Nebraska, was a fiery orator - and as almost every schoolboy is aware, it was
through his silver tongue that he gained the Democratic nomination for President
in 1896 when he delivered his famous ''Cross of Gold'' speech at the party's
national convention.  That speech called for unrestricted coinage of silver at a
16-to-1 ratio with gold.

From a numismatic standpoint, the Presidential campaign of 1896 was, without
question, the most significant in our nation's history.  Coinage, in fact, was
the central theme, with Mr. Bryan championing the cause of silver and his
Republican opponent, William McKinley, arguing for retention of gold as the
basis of our economy. But the campaign's special appeal to numismatists derives
from the Bryan dollars almost as much as it does from the coinage debate.

Considering that coinage was an overriding concern, it was only natural that the
two camps should choose tokens and medals - metallic devices closely resembling
coins - as a medium for conveying their message. These pieces were issued, for
the most part, by groups or individuals opposing Mr. Bryan's position - but
backers produced a number, too.

Bryan dollars generally can be categorized as being either ''comparative'' or
satirical. Comparative pieces were large silver issues containing the amount of
precious metal that would have been required in a silver dollar if Mr. Bryan's
tenets were enacted into law. On the face of it, these were informational,
rather than critical, bearing only noncommittal statements concerning their
bullion content. In practice, foes of free silver used them to dramatize how
hopelessly unwieldy a full-value silver dollar would be.

Satirical pieces were cruder, as a rule, in terms of both appearance and
approach. Most were made of base metal - lead, iron, pot metal, bronze or
aluminum - and they got their point across with simple, straightforward mottos
and designs. One common issue, for example, bore an unflattering depiction of
the Democratic donkey along with the mottos, ''United Snakes of America'' and
''In Bryan We Trust.''

In a 1926 article on the subject, Farran Zerbe, one-time president of the
American Numismatic Association, listed a total of 141 different Bryan dollar
varieties. Many of these, he noted, were similar in appearance to the Morgan
dollar - so close, in some cases, as to be in violation of counterfeiting laws.
Many of them were, in fact, confiscated by Federal authorities he reported
-although enforcement tended to be lax in areas where their distribution served
the purposes of local political leaders,

The great majority of the Bryan dollars were made and distributed during the
campaign of 1896. A smaller number came into being four years later, during the
Bryan-McKinley rematch of 1900, when free silver again was a major issue. Mr.
McKinley, of course, won both confrontations - and in 1900, under his prodding,
the nation adopted the single gold standard in law as well as fact.

Many additional Bryan dollar varieties have been identified since the
publication of Mr. Zerbe's study. Chris Jensen of Johnson & Jensen, a Danbury,
Conn., dealership specializing in medallic art, estimates that perhaps twice as
many pieces are known today. Prices are modest for the most part, he reports -
but scarcer pieces sometimes bring several hundred dollars. The surge in the
value of silver has also greatly enhanced the worth of Bryan dollars struck in
that metal.

Joseph Levine, president of Presidential Coin & Antique Company Inc. in
Alexandria, Va., and one of the major dealers in Bryan material, reports that
demand for Bryan dollars is steady and enjoying ''slow growth,'' with interest
being divided ''half and half'' between numismatists and collectors of political
memorabilia.

At present market levels it would be possible to assemble a good starter set of
base-metal Bryan dollars for a relatively small outlay. And as Mr. Jensen notes,
these pieces embody ''a great deal of history'' of very special interest to
numismatists.

A reprint of Farran Zerbe's article on Bryan dollars can be ordered for $3.50,
plus $1 postage from Bebee's Inc., 4514 North 30th Street, Omaha, Neb. 68111.

Satirical Medal

Robert W. Julian of Logansport, Ind., is now accepting orders for the fourth in
a series of annual satirical medals. This year's medal deals with the
deterioration of the nation's defense, as perceived by Mr. Julian.

The obverse portrays Gen. Douglas MacArthur and carries the inscription, ''There
Is No Substitute for Victory.'' The reverse depicts Uncle Sam -blindfolded,
stripped to the waist and holding an antique rifle intended to represent the
declining military might of the U.S. Also on the reverse are the words, ''A
Litany of Disaster,'' and a listing of trouble spots where in Mr. Julian's view
U.S. power has been stymied: China, Kora, Cuba, Vietnam, Cambodia, Angola,
Nicaragua, Iran.

High-relief bronze examples, 2 1/2 inches in diameter, will be struck by
Medallic Art Company of Danbury, Conn., to advance orders only. Orders will be
accepted until Nov. 30 and delivery is scheduled to begin at the end of January,
with completion expected within 30 days thereafter. The cost per medal is $9.95,
including postage and insurance. Indiana residents must enclose sales tax of 40
cents per medal, and orders will not be accepted from outside the U.S. or its
territories. Send orders to Defense Medal, Box 725, Logansport, Ind.  46947.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of satirical medals

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INDEX;
New York Times Magazine November 2, 1980

SECTION: Section 6; Page 4, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 384 words


William Safire 16 On Language

Perils of the Fast Track
Russell Baker 20 Sunday Observer

A Fact of Life
Steven V. Roberts 26 The Year of the Hostage

Election day will mark the passage of a year since the U.S. Embassy in Iran was
seized.  It has been a time of persistent national tension.
Joseph Kraft 31 The Post-Imperial Presidency

The all-powerful office ushered in by the New Deal has been hobbled by the
impact of Vietnam, inflation and a new brand of political activism.
Barbara W. Tuchman 38 The Decline of Quality
Robert Moss 42 Terror: A Soviet Export
Francesca Stanfill 80 Fashion

Furs That Work
Martin Filler 82 Design

A Clash of Tastes at the White House
Craig Claiborne 87 Food with Pierre Franey The Way a Cracker Should Crumble
David Burnham 96 Congress's Computer Subsidy

Federally financed computers, franking privileges and public funds for
direct-mail experts have given an edge to members of Congress seeking
re-election.
102 Puzzles

Answers, Page 109
110 Letters
Cover: Photograph by Chris Callis
Copyright 1980, The New York Times

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE YEAR OF THE HOSTAGE

BYLINE: By Steven V. Roberts

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5389 words


A year ago at this time, Americans were already in a funk. Iran, one of our
strongest allies in the Middle East, had fallen to the forces of a medieval
religious fanatic who was turning back the clock with both hands. Sheiks in
desert robes were raising oil prices with impunity, and Americans were forming
long lines at gas pumps for their regular ration of fuel and frustration.
Inflation was crushing the family budget, squeezing out the little extras in
life and flattening hopes for the future. As for the recent past, a series of
leaders had marched the nation through the swamps of Vietnam and Watergate, and
no President in 20 years had survived two full terms.  President Carter, for his
part, had retreated to his mountaintop at Camp David and emerged to tell the
people that they were suffering from a malaise of the spirit, a national loss of
self-confidence.

Many Americans did not think things could get much worse, but on Nov. 4, 1979,
one year ago on Tuesday, they did. Iranian militants seized the American Embassy
in Teheran and captured 66 hostages, as Washington stood by, helpless and
confused. Less than two months later, Soviet troops marched into Afghanistan,
choking off an incipient rebellion. President Carter proclaimed that the
invasion represented the greatest threat to world peace since World War II, but
again, the United States seemed incompetent to influence events.

As the year of the hostage drew to a close on Election Day 1980, there were
signals that the crisis might soon be resolved. But whether the Americans were
freed or held captive, their ordeal had left a lasting mark on the national
psyche. Americans everywhere have seemed to doubt their leaders, their country,
themselves. The articles of faith that carried them through the postwar world,
faith in perpetual prosperity and predominant power, have been eroded by
continuing inflation at home and continuing impotence abroad. To many Americans,
the Star-Spangled Banner has needed mending. America the Beautiful has become
America the Vulnerable. We are having trouble meeting the monthly payments on
the American Dream.

Moreover, to many voters, the election does not seem to offer much hope for
improvement. They feel their choices at the polls range from dismal to
distressing. And they ask whether the Presidency itself has been so limited in
its power that it might not make any difference who wins (See story Page 31). In
the 60's and 70's, of course, America was riven with problems: civil-rights
protests, race riots, antiwar demonstrations, all choreographed to music by the
Beatles, and fueled by regular doses of marijuana and birth-control pills. But
there was something joyful, even hopeful, at least zealous, about those days.
Americans clashed bitterly, but they were fighting for something, some vigorous
vision of where the country should be going. Today, the mood is more leaden,
gloomy, depressed.  We seem to be waiting in line to fill up with a new sense of
national purpose, but, for the moment, at least, the pumps of promise have run
dry.

There are many varied reasons for the mood but no event symbolized it more
graphically than the seizure of the hostages. It was as if the whole nation had
been blindfolded and hogtied, hauled through the streets of a strange city with
people taunting them in a foreign tongue. Americans' sense of futile rage grew
even sharper last April after they tried and failed to rescue the hostages. No
myth goes deeper in the American character than the belief that good will
triumph in the end, that the cavalry will ride over the hill at the last minute
and save the day. Accordingly, the spectacle of American troops, trapped by
swirling sand and faulty helicopters in a remote desert, then crashing into one
another in their haste to escape, could hardly have been more humiliating. A
nation that was raised on the battle cry, ''We have not yet begun to fight,''
found itself unable to fight at all. A nation that once put a man on the moon
couldn't even get as far as Teheran. John Wayne had stopped the cavalry charge
at the last minute and returned to the fort because a horse had thrown a shoe.
The good guys had lost - again.

Harry McPherson, a Washington lawyer and author who worked in Lyndon Johnson's
White House, called the hostage stalemate a ''classic paradigm'' of America's
troubles and explained, ''The last time we got involved with some two-bit
country we lost 50,000 men.  Now we were involved with another one, and there
was nothing we could do about it. That gave us an increasing sense of
impotency.''

''We really operated on two levels,'' he went on. ''On one, we were negotiating
and doing all we could to keep those people from getting killed, and a lot of
that is very reasonable. We recognize that you just don't go rushing in. But on
another level we're furious and frustrated. We felt we should be stronger, that
we should be able to have some effect on them. We felt wronged, morally wronged.
It's as if your wife were spat upon and there was nothing you could do about it.
And that made it all the more enraging.''

To many other analysts as well, the public reaction to the hostage crisis was
directly linked to the United States experience in Vietnam. In Southeast Asia,
America was victimized by its own optimism, the belief that it could do
anything. Now, in the Middle East, it was plagued by the reverse conviction,
that it could do little or nothing to control events. ''We've lost face and
everybody knew it,'' said Joel L. Fleishman, director of the Institute of Policy
Sciences and Public Affairs at Duke University. ''This really reached way down
to our subconscious. America had always been the great, powerful nation. We
stood for things we admire; we were able to get things done; we'd never lost a
war. Now, we've not only lost a war, we're losing the peace. We see our
friendships being chipped away, and the real trauma is that we can't do anything
about it, because we don't want to risk a war.''

Anita Staenberg, wife of an insurance agent in South Orange, N.J., one of scores
of voters interviewed during the last several weeks, said, ''Our whole prestige
has been diminished. I feel our position of strength is at its very lowest ebb.
It makes me feel terrible; we're laughed at abroad.'' Howard Cox, data processor
in Akron, Ohio: ''We're so degraded that if you go to a foreign country they
spit on you.'' Diane Wilks, a grocer in Nashville, Tenn.: ''I think we've lost a
lot of respect, and self-respect, too. We don't feel good about it -it looks
bad.''

This is not the way that Americans are used to thinking. This is not what the
patriotic songs and political speeches taught them to expect. And many of them
share the surprise and confusion of Janice Ray, the wife of a photographer in
Nashville, who says, ''The impression we're leaving the rest of the world is
that American superiority is gone. Growing up, we learned in history that
America was the best at everything. We had the respect of the whole world. But
where can you go today and be respected for being American?''

As Mrs. Ray's comments indicate, the hostage issue had been simmering just
beneath the surface of the campaign all fall, but it did not intrude directly
into the debate until rumors started spreading that the 52 prisoners might soon
be released (14 were set free subsequent to the initial seizure). Ronald Reagan,
thrown on the defensive by assertions that he was a warmonger, tried to regain
momentum by blaming the President for the year-long incarceration of the
Americans and adding: ''The fact that they've been there that long is a
humiliation and a disgrace.'' Mr. Carter retorted that his opponent had turned
the hostages into a ''political football.''

Listening to this debate, some Americans felt that, even if the hostages were
released, the price paid had been unconscionable. For some, the issue itself
revealed a deeper problem - that America's military might, and the will to use
it, was deteriorating dangerously. ''We've lost stature in our own eyes; we've
lost confidence in ourselves,'' said Bob Tigert, a toy-store manager in
Nashville. ''If we had a stronger foreign policy, I don't think Iran would have
taken advantage of us the way they did.'' Americans feel vulnerable. ''Other
countries do whatever they want to do,'' complains Karman Martin, a young mother
in Terre Haute, Ind. ''It seems like we can't get anything done.''

Frank Kennedy is retired from the Air Force now, and he and his wife, Kathleen,
both work in civilian jobs at Tinker Air Force base outside Oklahoma City. When
we talked one evening at a shopping center near the base, they both felt that
President Carter bungled the whole hostage issue. ''We should have gone in a
long time ago,'' Kathleen asserted. ''A strong President and a strong Government
wouldn't let Iran get away with that.''

''I've lived all over the world,'' Frank said, ''and years ago, when I went into
the service, the United States had respect in foreign countries. Then along came
Vietnam, and we fought a pitiful war -we wouldn't really let the military fight
- and we ended up losing. I agree with Teddy Roosevelt. Walk softly but carry a
big stick. And club the hell out of them if you need to.'' Kathleen added
bitterly, ''Our stick is down to a toothpick.''

But while Frank Kennedy admires Ronald Reagan and yearns for action, John
Harris, a tire salesman in Erie, Pa., backs President Carter precisely because
he avoided trouble in Iran. ''He hasn't got us into any battles, the way Reagan
might have,'' said Harris, who is 29. ''He's doing it the soft way.''

Polls show that Reagan runs better among men, and Mr. Carter among women, many
of whom are mothers of teen-age boys and like the President's ''soft way'' of
handling disputes. But there is an interesting age split among men.

Those like Frank Kennedy, who at age 43 is old enough to remember when America
fought, and won a ''good'' war are hawks. The Kennedys represent a strong
tradition, a tradition that conquered the mountains and the wilderness, the
Indians and the Mexicans, the Germans and the Japanese - anything or anybody
that stood in its path. And a candidate that promises to ''make America great
again'' touches a raw nerve, a nerve that has been exposed - and throbbing -
since the defeat in Vietnam.

But many Vietnam veterans are much more skeptical of using military force to
solve problems. William Catlin, a behavioral therapist in Erie, thinks Reagan is
too trigger happy. ''A lot of my buddies got killed in Vietnam to no avail,''
says Catlin, a former Marine, ''and, if we got involved in the Middle East, it
would be the same type thing.'' Many Americans remain deeply uncertain about how
to cope with their diminished stature and power in the world. As Joel Fleishman
pointed out, our response to the hostage dilemma - and other challenges to
national power - were constantly tempered by fears of going too far, of plunging
into another hopeless or perhaps pointless war.  The nation's present
frustrations go far beyond the hostage situation. Many Americans are simply not
sure these days whether they will be able to stop inflation, reduce interest
rates, afford a home, control crime, find reliable leaders, compete for world
markets, secure adequate oil supplies, thwart Russian advances, prevent nuclear
proliferation, welcome new immigrants, rebuild the slums, wipe out poverty,
solve the welfare mess, preserve the environment, influence their children, or
send them to college.

These self-doubts are so troubling precisely because Americans are so used to
being optimistic. America was founded by pioneers with missionary zeal who
thought they were building a ''city on a hill,'' a fresh, new model that tired,
old Europe could not emulate.  ''Progress was one of the keys to the American
character, right from the beginning,'' said Austin Ranney, a political scientist
who is now a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute. ''We
believed our fate was in our own hands, that we were a kind of special people
with a special mission. We could do anything we set our minds to.''

If many Americans think the ''city on a hill'' is now obscured by a nationwide
smog alert, some analysts are not so sure that the loss of confidence is
justified. ''It's a very neurotic period,'' insists Frederick G. Dutton, a
veteran lawyer and political strategist. ''We hear great complaints and a
gnashing of teeth, but we've failed to keep in perspective the basic health of
our society - the success of people compared to their parents or even their own
lives 10 or 15 years ago.''

''By any human standard, the best is yet to come,'' chimed in Ben J. Wattenberg,
author and television producer. ''We talk about a sick society; we say that
nothing works, but look at immigration to this country. It's off the wall, and
that's a very healthy sign. When people vote with their feet, they vote for
us.'' Indeed, John P.  Sears, once Ronald Reagan's campaign manager and now a
political commentator, thinks the gloom might soon be coming to an end. ''These
things go in swings,'' he said. ''We've been on a downer, but I think we're on
the backswing of the pendulum and starting to go the other way.'' Occasionally,
one does meet up with someone like Joyce Rentschler of Flint, Mich., a buoyant
sort who sells jewelry, cares for her grandchildren and refuses to look on the
dark side of things. ''Twenty years ago,'' she said, ''people like you and me
were sitting around saying the same things. We didn't know how we were going to
make it. But somehow, some way, society does survive. Down deep we feel we're
No. 1, the invincible. And I don't see anything wrong with flag waving.'' Still,
the flag looks pretty droopy to a lot of voters this fall, and justified or not,
their loss of confidence has played a major role in the campaign. In an
important sense, both major candidates have keyed their advertising to try to
take advantage of this mood.

Ronald Reagan basically has taken the line that the United States does not have
any really inherent problem, that all would be well if certain forces - from
inept bureaucrats to bleeding-heart liberals - could be eliminated or
controlled. One of his main slogans, ''Make America Great Again,'' plays on the
belief that a lost Golden Age, when the cavalry always came to the rescue, can
be recaptured with the right leadership. Jimmy Carter accepts the idea that some
things really have changed, that America does have some real problems, but that
the country can, with a little pluck and measured wisdom, pull through. His
commercials stress words like ''prudent,'' ''reasonable'' and ''experienced.''
As one of his advisers put it, ''he's trying to make the middle ground the high
ground.''

One reason so many voters remained so undecided for so long has been their
raging ambivalence on just this point. Reagan comes across as strong and
decisive, but he has failed to convince many voters that his vigor would be
tempered by good sense. Nancy Laro, a Republican accountant in Flint, summed up
this dilemma when she described her ideal candidate this way: ''I want him to be
very strong, but I want him to be rational all the time, thinking all the time.
And I'm afraid Reagan may say something he doesn't mean.''

Most voters see Carter as ''rational all the time,'' but they wonder whether his
prudence can be animated by some better sense of purpose or vision. Neal R.
Peirce, an author of several books on American politics, described Carter's
problem as ''an inability to define where we are, to make us believe that the
sacrifices and shifts he is talking about are worthwhile, that he is capable of
leading us to a better future.''

As a result, the campaign has been marked by an extraordinary degree of negative
thinking. Voters see this as a year to cut their potential losses, control the
damage. ''The question is not which one is the best,'' said Frank Wolonsky, a
rubber worker in Akron, ''but which one is the least worst.''

In fact, it is hard to find voters who express any confidence or enthusiasm
about their political leaders. Estell Jones, the wife of a state employee, put
it this way over a fried-chicken lunch at the Oklahoma State Fair: ''I don't
think anybody could do a very good job. Jesus Christ himself would have trouble
running the country.'' If you look for the day when Americans started losing
confidence in their leaders, it was probably Nov. 22, 1963, the day President
Kennedy was shot. Jani Thompson, a management trainee at a department store in
Terre Haute, brought me up short when she said, ''The first thing I remember is
the Kennedy assassination - I was 5 years old.'' Since then, the assassination
has come to symbolize for many the end of an era, an era of innocence and
progress, and the birth of a certain malevolent strain in American politics. ''I
think they're all crooks, to be honest with you,'' snapped John Landis, a
25-year-old electrician in Allentown, Pa. ''It seems like every time we get a
decent politician, like the Kennedy brothers, they get shot. The big companies
or someone is trying to knock them off.''

Vietnam and Watergate still reverberate in the thoughts of voters like Bob
Winner, an appliance repairman who was reading a newspaper one evening while his
wife finished shopping. He called politics a ''lost cause,'' and, when I asked
him to explain, he continued this way: ''It basically started when I was over in
Vietnam. I just lost interest in the whole thing, being over there and seeing
the way things went. Then, when I got back, I had a lot of problems with the
Veterans Administration. I don't know. I just don't have faith in government. It
has nothing new to offer me.''

''I always voted in the past,'' said Winner, who is 31 now and lives in
northeastern Pennsylvania. ''I always thought it was my patriotic duty. If you
don't vote, you can't complain. But when I did vote, I voted for Nixon, and he
got thrown out. Then I voted for Carter, and he didn't keep his promises. It
just seems that bad things are continuing on.'' The current national mood
reflects a disenchantment not only with leaders but also with basic government
institutions. If the electorate had a single rallying cry this year, it has
been: ''Get the Government off our backs.'' Fred Dutton, who started running
campaigns in California in the 1950's, says, ''What this country wants is to be
let alone.''

This resentment springs in part from the often annoying performance of many
official agencies. Many fellow sufferers at the hands of government bureaucrats
could sympathize with Jeanette Bode, a housewife in Oklahoma City, when she
described how her husband's architectural firm had recently hired a new employee
simply to keep track of Government paper work. ''The big firms can take
advantage of tax breaks,'' she complained, ''but the middle-income person
suffers.''

But on a deeper level, the growing antipathy toward ''big Government'' also
reflects a basic shift in the economic selfinterest of the electorate. ''I think
the guys have forgotten where they came from,'' explained Joe Gentile, president
of an auto workers local in Linden, N.J. '' Years ago, when they hired in here,
they didn't have much going for them, and they were with the Democrats. Now
things are pretty good. They have a nice house and two cars. Their kids are in
college, and their wife is working, and it's changed their way of thinking. They
don't want the politicians looking out for the little guy who's on welfare,
because they believe the myth that they're getting ripped off.''

Moreover, support for helping the ''little guy'' drops even more dramatically
when working people, hustling to pay for those houses and cars and tuition
bills, feel pinched by an economic slump. ''The Democrats want to give money to
everyone, but it's coming out of my pocket,'' snapped Sheryl Simpson, the
manager of a dress store in Waukegan, Ill. In fact, many Americans are highly
inconsistent on this point. Few really want government reduced across the board.
What they really want is a reduction in programs that don't benefit them, and an
increase in those that do. In our political lexicon, a ''balanced budget'' means
that somebody else's program has be cut.

In one sense, the loss of confidence in government and its leaders certainly
hurts President Carter, since he has been running things for the last few years.
Reagan has scored points by picturing the President as weak and ineffective.
Undoubtedly Reagan attracts votes from Joe Gentile's union members who think
they are getting ''ripped off'' by welfare and other social programs. But in
another sense the issue can actually help the President. One of the more piquant
ironies of the year is that Jimmy Carter, who came to the Oval Office with no
Washington background, has given inexperience a bad name, and Ronald Reagan is
suffering for it. Since Carter did so badly, goes the argument, we don't want
another Governor, an outsider who doesn't know his way around. Carter, at least,
has had four years to learn the job. Moreover, if voters don't really think that
anybody can do very much as President, they would rather have a decent,
hard-working do-nothing.  Another shock to American pride has been the invasion
of imported goods, from cars and televisions to stereos and steel. In the
American industrial heartland, where jobs are being lost every day to foreign
competition, people often seem helpless. One seldom hears talk about
out-designing or out-producing the competition; the main answer seems to be
protectionism, higher tariffs. Indeed, the animosity has reached the point of
palpable xenophobia in a town like Anderson, Ind., where General Motors is the
core of the economy and unemployment has topped 20 percent. Norman Price, who
runs a camera store in a shopping mall south of town, said he gets ''quite a bit
of static'' when he gives customers good buys on Japanese-made film.  ''They see
foreign competition taking their jobs,'' he says wryly, ''but then they ride
away in their Hondas and think nothing about it.''

As a basically pragmatic, practical-minded nation, Americans have always taken
great pride in their technological achievements. And even as Americans continue
to scoop up most of the Nobel Prizes in the physical sciences, it's a great
shock to a man like Paul Andonian, a rubber worker in Akron, to look around his
city and see huge industrial plants lying idle. Some of the jobs that once fed
the people of Akron have fled to places like Gadsden, Ala. Or Oklahoma City, but
many others have been captured in the cold war of foreign trade.

Andonian hunched over a bar one afternoon after work and complained angrily,
''With obsolete machines in obsolete buildings, how the hell can you be
competitive? If I was young, I'd go to the Sun Belt, to California, some place
that's growing, not dying.'' Mobility, the frontier, the drive westward -
they've always been part of the American experience, but again, people like
Andonian are victims of success. When his ancestors came from Armenia with
nothing, they could go anywhere. But now he has seniority rights, a mortgage, a
community. All the things he's worked so hard for keep him rooted in Akron, an
industrial ghost town. ''The things that made this area so prosperous at one
time - the land and the climate and the water - are still here,'' he said. ''It
ought to be productive for somebody else.'' Perhaps. But like millions of
Americans in this election year, Paul Andonian sits at the bar and asks into his
glass: What happened?  Imports are only part of a much larger economic problem.
As Fred Dutton pointed out, the current gnashing of teeth sometimes drowns out
the fact that living standards have steadily improved from any longrange
perspective. But in reality, few people compare their status to their parents;
they compare it to their own expectations.  That's where the crunch often comes.
If the postwar world taught Americans to believe in their own military power, it
also taught them to believe in their own economic power. Living standards would
always grow, the future would always be brighter. When those things don't
happen, the result is yet another blow to national pride, another sign that
things are out of control.

''We're not satisified,'' said Estell Jones of Oklahoma City.  ''We've got so
much compared to other countries, and we've been lucky. If we saw something we
wanted, we went out and bought it - two, three cars per family. In a way we have
nobody to blame but ourselves. We've created a monster, because we expect
certain things now. The area we live in, the electricity goes off once in a
while, all of a sudden it puts you back. The whole world is geared to
electricity. My grandparents lived on a farm with coal, oil lamps and no indoor
plumbing.''

The monster of inflated expectations is chewing up people like Suzette Vari, a
bank teller in Dayton. ''Everybody is used to going out and getting what they
wanted, and, all of a sudden, they can't,'' she said one day over a hamburger at
Wendy's, one of the rare occasions that she didn't brown-bag her lunch. ''You
can't even go out to a movie; you just sit home and everyone gets depressed and
irritable. I stare at money all day at the bank, and I say, God, how I hate this
stuff.''

For Cheryl Rothenberger, a retail clerk in Dayton, Ohio, it was all so easy at
first. America optimism was her collateral, and she just spent money on credit,
sure that the next raise would cover everything. But now, Cheryl and her
husband, a purchasing agent for a trucking company, have to sell their house to
pay off their bills.  Instead of getting ahead, they find themselves slipping
backward. ''I know once we sell our house, it's going to be hard to get
another,'' said Rothenberger, who is 24. ''We want to build an A-frame, and have
some cows and horses. And it's depressing to think that your dreams won't come
true.''

There's a certain craziness to all this. A truck driver in Dayton named Jim
Haney talked with great anguish about the impact of inflation and the economic
troubles of his family. He had to sell his boat, he said, and his wife couldn't
afford to go to a figurereducing salon. His children never get to Kings Island,
a local amusement park. Any economy in which a truck driver has a boat to sell
most be doing something right. But it represents a profound change in American
life when people lose confidence in their dreams, when they don't think their
children's lives will be better than their own.

At the Wendy's in Dayton, Wanda Rogers and Sally Maddox, middleaged wives of two
successful professional men, were also having lunch. As we talked about the
economy, Mrs. Rogers said, ''I'm very concerned that it will be very difficult
for my own children to own a home.'' When I asked her to imagine her children's
lives, she answered, ''I don't think it will keep them from being happy, but
they have to get used to doing without the material things they've grown up
with.''

From the outset, this country was dominated by the Protestant ethic, which
tended to equate heavenly grace with earthly success, and even today, economic
disaster is usually seen as a sign of damnation. But it is particularly hard for
certain groups. One is the blue-collars workers who lose their jobs altogether.
In many industrial regions of the country, workers with 15 years of seniority -
even more in some cases - find themselves on the street, or facing dismissal. At
age 40, Tom Bateman has 17 years in at a General Motors subsidiary in Dayton,
but he's barely clinging to his job. One day at the union hall, he said, ''My
son always asks: 'Are you going to lose your job?' I say, 'Don't worry about
it.' But I never give a direct answer. I feel hurt. I feel like the bottom of my
stomach is falling out, but I try to hide it.''

Declining confidence in the economy is also devastating workers who retire on a
relatively fixed income during a time of high inflation and high interest rates.
Raymond Dixon, a G.M. worker in Dayton, was planning to quit work when he
finished 30 years of service last March, but he decided to stay on the job. ''I
was really looking forward to retiring at a young age,'' he said, ''but I know
if I retire I'll just get by. It's sort of disappointing, but the way times are,
I just have to accept it.''

Some of the hardest choices are forced on young mothers. Many are eager to work
outside the home, of course, and they consider careers to be a central part of
their lives. But many others work out of sheer necessity - and are forced to
leave their children with others. Jannessa Brown was window shopping during her
lunch hour one day in Nashville - the only sort of shopping she could afford. At
29, with two small children, she said she was working in an office and was
resenting every minute of it. ''I was brought up when everything was booming,''
she Mrs. Brown, whose husband runs an office-supply business. ''I was brought up
in an upwardly mobile suburban atmosphere. I acquired a home and two kids and
two cars and a swing set and gave dinner parties. I did all I was expected to
do, but working outside the home was not one of them. I really want to go home
and raise babies and watch soap operas and get fat.'' Women like Jannessa Brown
are so troubled these days not just because the economy seems out of control;
they also worry about losing control over their own children, about whether
their absence from the home will cause deep and lasting harm. It's an old story.
Parents have always launched their young into the world with fear and trembling.
But now family roles, and traditional values, seem to be changing so fast, that
their sense of confidence is under constant seige.

I talked one evening in Nashville to Jane and Tony Blocker, both in their late
30's, both out working - he as a bus driver, she as an assistant film producer.
They have two teen-age daughters, and being parents these days is a full-time
source of anxiety. ''My girls are very resentful that things can't be like they
were in the 60's, when we were teenagers,'' said Mrs. Blocker, whose children
are avid viewers of television shows that glorify nostalgia such as ''Happy
Days.'' ''They can't have the car as much as they would like, and it's mainly
because of the drug situation. We can't let them have the freedom. Not that we
don't trust them, but it's because of the environment.''

What did the children think was missing?  ''The easygoing life,'' Mr. Blocker
said. His wife picked up the theme: ''They grow up faster now; they have to.
We've been pretty lucky with our two so far. But I feel they might not hold out
when they go out in the world. I worry constantly about what will happen to
them, and I don't think it looks good.'' ''I don't think it looks good.'' When
Americans go into the voting booth on Tuesday, they will be measuring the
candidates against that mood, that standard. They seem to be trying to decide,
not which candidate will make things better, but which one will keep things from
getting worse.

Yet, hope for the future is an ingrained part of the American character and, as
John Sears suggested, the present gloom will not last forever. Indeed, some
voters, as they contemplate the year of the hostage now ending, think that there
is a lesson to be learned from the experience. ''We have to realize,'' said
Daniel Warshafsky, a New York consultant in telecommunications, ''that we're
part of a community of nations, that we're not the leader of the world in the
way that we used to be.'' Joel Fleishman, the Duke professor, adds, ''We may be
in the process of acquiring humility, which we've never, as a nation, been noted
for having before.''

If Americans need a leader who is mature and realistic about the future, who
sees the importance of setting priorities and making sacrifices -who will keep
things from getting worse - they also need a President who will revive their
sense of hope, who will restore their confidence, make them feel better about
themselves and dreams worth dreaming again. The most unfortunate thing about the
1980 election campaign has been that so many Americans are uncertain that any of
the candidates can do that.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Americans demonstrating for the hostages Photo
of a victim of Mt. St. Helens Photo of a riot in Miami Photo of a cattle rancher
and his herd in Texas Photo of Cuban refugees in Miami

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE POST IMPERIAL PRESIDENCY rescue attempt

BYLINE: By Joseph Kraft

SECTION: Section 6; Page 31, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5119 words


Lyndon Johnson gave up his office under fire. Richard Nixon was forced to
resign. Gerald Ford was repudiated in the election of 1976, and Jimmy Carter may
well lose his bid for re-election this week. But those last four Presidents have
been utterly disparate in personality and in politics, in regional base and in
religion. Their blasted hopes and narrow scapes cannot be ascribed to mere bad
fortune or idiosyncratic quirks of personality. As the country goes to the polls
in the 47th national election, the Presidency as an institution is in trouble.
It has become, as Vice President Mondale said in a recent interview, the ''fire
hydrant of the nation.''

The nature of the trouble lies in a mismatch between responsibilities and
resources, promise and performance, expectations and abilities. The American
successes of World War II and the immediate postwar era combined with the
national media to make the Presidency seem a powerhouse among powerhouses. Harry
Truman said in 1952 that ''neither Genghis Khan, nor Alexander the Great, nor
Napoleon, nor Louis XIV of France'' had as much power as the President.

But change at home and abroad has weakened the capacity of Presidents to muster
support through direct appeals to the public, through party leadership and
through the manipulation of interest groups. Every President since Eisenhower
has lost standing in the public-opinion polls. Jimmy Carter fell to a historic
low last July with 21 percent support in the Gallup ratings. In a famous speech
the year before, he implicitly blamed his troubles on a ''national malaise.''
Ronald Reagan, while only an aspirant for the office, is already talking of
''the limits of the Presidency.'' Richard Neustadt of Harvard recently confided
that the book he called ''Presidential Power'' in 1960 would today be entitled
''Presidential Weakness.'' What Arthur Schlesinger Jr. called in 1975 ''The
Imperial Presidency'' has, five years later, become the Post-Imperial
Presidency.

Such rapid changes, to be sure, have a distinguished pedigree.  Through most of
Presidential history the office has been the man, and the man has been hooked to
a pendulum. The patricians who held the job in the first decades gave way to a
populist, Andrew Jackson. The party boss who succeeded Jackson, Martin Van
Buren, set the stage for the steady decline of party discipline that contributed
to the Civil War. Lincoln's lonely eminence found its reaction in the period of
''Congressional Government.'' The scholar who made that phrase famous, Woodrow
Wilson, joined Theodore Roosevelt in reasserting the Presidenct's primacy over
Congress, only to lose to Congress in the League of Nations fight.

But beginning in 1932, there took place a sea change, expressed in a triple
success story, a historic hat trick. The Great Depression, World War II and the
cold war fostered a widely felt need for vigorous national leadership. Three
successive Presidents, operating against that background in widely different
ways, expanded the reach of their office enormously. Franklin Roosevelt
succeeded by virtue of extraordinary personal qualities. Harry Truman, a smaller
man, institutionalized the Presidential office by appending to it a Council of
Economic Advisers, a National Security Council, a powerful Bureau of the Budget
and a Central Intelligence Agency. Dwight Eisenhower, while not an activist,
gave the modern Presidency Republican sanction. Thus the White House became for
both parties the fount of domestic legislation and foreign policy.

With the Kennedy Presidency, television entered the field as the most important
dispenser of national news. The television camera, with its focus on person and
place, further exalted the Presidency and the White House. The central issues of
American life came to look like contests between the character of a President
and a national problem -Johnson versus Vietnam; Nixon versus Watergate; Ford
versus recession; Carter versus inflation. There developed what Thomas Cronin, a
professor of political science at the University of Delaware, called the ''cult
of the Presidency.'' It became possible for sophisticated Americans to say - as
Daniel Patrick Moynihan did say - that ''the President is the hope of America.''
But those great expectations have been mocked in the past few years by the
workings of the Constitution and the force of events. The Constitution makes the
President the quintessential national figure.  Apart from that appendage, the
Vice President, the President is the only American official elected by a vote of
all the people, the only official who can stand for the country as a whole in
the eyes of the world - and in the eyes of the American people. In that sense,
the President is this country's elected monarch, our kind of king.

But the framers of the Constitution had a horror of monarchy. For that reason,
they instituted a system of checks and balances. Among other things, the system
requires the President to share powers with the Congress. It makes the Congress
the tribune of regional interests - state interests in the Senate, local in the
House of Representatives.

In a crude sense, the President, representing the centralizing national
interest, and the Congress, representing particular interests, sit on opposite
ends of a seesaw. When one is up, the other is down. But around the President
and the Congress there has grown up a thicket of institutions and practices
unforeseen by the framers of the Constitution. They serve both to bridge the
separation of powers and to divide the executive and legislative branches from
within. The President governs through a vast bureaucracy headed by a Cabinet and
a White House staff. The Congress breaks down into leaders, members and staff.
The political parties provide connecting tissue between the White House and the
Capitol.  The press and television figure importantly, and so do lobbies and
interest groups. Between the Presidency and the Congress, accordingly, there is
a well-nigh chaotic intermingling, a ceaseless changing of sides and tipping of
balances, a constant process of colonization.

Until very recently the norm was for the Congress to hold the whip hand over the
President. Lobbies representing special interests thrived in Washington. Except
for a few newspapers, the press tended to be preoccupied with local concerns. So
did the impulse coming to the White House through the chain of party
organization.  Congressional leaders have at all times been highly responsive to
local influences. They have usually been able to capture many elements of the
Federal bureaucracy, sometimes even the Cabinet secretaries. Hence the famous
warning from Charles Dawes, the first director of what has become the Office of
Management and Budget, that Cabinet officers are the ''natural enemies of a
President.''

Breaks in that pattern have occurred in the past, particularly since the
unification of the country as an industrial nation and its emergence as a world
power. Major bursts of domestic legislation have taken place on three occasions
in this century: after Woodrow Wilson's election in 1912, after Franklin
Roosevelt's election in 1932 and after Lyndon Johnson's election in 1964. But in
each case, special - even peculiar - circumstances obtained. Wilson took office
in the aftermath of a Republican split that gave him 435 electoral votes to 88
for Theodore Roosevelt and only eight for the regular Republican candidate,
William Howard Taft. Franklin Roosevelt had going for him the sense of emergency
generated by the Great Depression. L.B.J. emerged from the election with a
formidable majority in the Congress and a Government community enfeebled in its
normal powers of resistance by the assassination of President Kennedy. Johnson
developed, if not a national consensus, what Professor Neustadt has called an
''in-house consensus.'' Politically, Johnson became the Toscanini of the
Washington Symphony Orchestra.

War or, more exactly, the existence of a recognized national enemy also works to
level the built-in resistance of the parts to the whole. Jefferson got away with
the Louisiana Purchase at a time when the nation was struggling against the
European powers. The Civil War made it possible for Lincoln to free the slaves
by proclamation.  Roosevelt, Truman and Eisenhower achieved the extension of
Presidential power in foreign policy thanks to the consensus built around World
War II and extended through the cold war. It is notable that Eisenhower's most
important domestic program - the Federal highway program - went through the
Congress as a defense measure.

Yet such successes seemed to mark the limits to which Presidential leadership
could take the nation. In World War II and its immediate aftermath, the United
States extended its foreign commitments to Europe and the edge of the Asian
mainland, but moves beyond those boundaries ran against the grain of public
opinion as soon as they began to cost in blood and money. The conflict in Korea
reduced Harry Truman's support to 23 percent in the Gallup poll and figured,
perhaps decisively, when he chose not to seek re-election in 1952.  Nobody was
able to generate the strong, long-term support required to hold on in Vietnam.
On the contrary, Vietnam became Exhibit A for the paradox of Presidential
activism: The more Presidents attempted in that war, the more they brought down
on their heads trouble - even to the point of self-destructive neurosis. John
Kennedy sought to reform the Saigon Government; the upshot was the assassination
of President Ngo Dinh Diem and a much greater American commitment. Lyndon
Johnson attempted to smuggle support of the war past the Congress and the
country in order to preserve his Great Society programs, but later he confessed
ruefully to the author Doris Kearns: ''I knew from the start that if I left the
woman I really loved - the Great Society - in order to fight that bitch of a war
... then I would lose everything at home. All my hopes ... my dreams.'' Richard
Nixon blamed public resentment of the war on his domestic political foes and set
in motion the spying, wiretaps and other dirty tricks that led to Watergate.

Insofar as Presidents used the argument of ''national security'' to justify
actions that outran consensus, moreover, they discredited the argument. The
Congress made the point unmistak-able by passing, over Nixon's veto, the War
Powers Resolution of 1973 that, at least purportedly, restricted the President's
power to commit American forces to combat. The Congress denied Nixon and Ford
funds they sought to maintain previous commitments to on-going struggles in
Vietnam and Angola. In the same spirit, severe limitations were placed on sales
of weapons abroad. The intelligence services were circumscribed, and Senate
opposition held up the strategic arms treaty with the Russians negotiated by
Presidents Ford and Carter.

Most significantly, perhaps, the Congress has shown its doubts about
Presidential authority in national-security matters by flexing its muscles in
exactly opposite directions against Ford and Carter.  It consistently cut Ford's
demands for more military spending. It consistently forced Carter to spend more
than he wanted.

The paradox of activism also found expression in the domestic achievements of
the most recent Presidents. The Great Society put the Federal Government in the
business of delivering services, as distinct from money or public works. But
Washington turned out to be less than spectacularly successful at improving the
quality of local schools or hospitals. Moreover, the new programs brought the
legislative committees of Congress into the business of doling out money. Unable
to negotiate with the legislative committees the kind of deals Presidents had
always been able to make with the relatively few members of the appropriations
committees, Nixon resorted on the grand scale to impoundment of funds voted by
the Congress. In 1974 the Congress passed, over his veto, the Congressional
Budget and Impoundment Control Act, which prohibited the practice and
theoretically obliged the Congress to live within a budget. Still, the outlays
for domestic programs continued to swell, casting into doubt a major achievement
of the Roosevelt years -management of the economy.

The New Deal had as a central premise the responsibility of Government to stop
depression and maintain prosperity. That commitment, formalized in the
Employment Act of 1946, became a significant source of Presidential strength.
The economy kept expanding through the 1950's and 60's, generating surpluses
that paid for defense, domestic programs and better living for most Americans.
Presidents could - and did - take the credit. By the end of the Johnson period,
even cautious economic advisers were speaking of having put an end to
recessions. ''In the early 1960's,'' Mark Willes, a former Government economist,
recently wrote, ''many economists - I, for one - believed that Government could
control business cycles.''

But in the 1970's, the United States -together with most other industrialized
countries - entered a period of slower domestic growth and rising inflation. It
became increasingly difficult for Presidents to find any prosperity to take
credit for. More and more, they had to fight inflation as Public Enemy No. 1.
More and more, big government spending was perceived to be an agent of
inflation. Instead of winning popularity and prestige by dispensing goodies, a
President had to divorce himself from government or risk being fingered as
Captain of the Bad Guys. As Ben Heineman Jr., a former official in the Carter
Administration, writes in a forthcoming book on the Presidency: ''Fifteen years
ago, the economy was a strong ally of Presidential power. It appeared to respond
magically to executive will, providing on a lavish scale the resources needed
for a long agenda of social reforms. Today, the economy is an adversary of
Presidential power - perhaps the greatest adversary. It appears to mock all
executive ministrations, provides insufficient resources for a host of
governmental objectives and vexes Presidents with choices between politically
unacceptable evils.''

The emergence of an energy shortage, in that context, burdened the Presidency
still further. Federal defense, housing and highway programs had worked with the
general prosperity to homogenize the nation. Whites moved out of the worst
pockets of rural poverty.  Blacks went north to the industrial centers. The
South, a chief beneficiary of Federal programs, became the Sunbelt. But when the
energy shortage developed, there was set up a sharp conflict of interest. The
producing states, chiefly in the South and West, were pitted against the
consuming states, chiefly in the old industrial centers around the Great Lakes.
Inevitably, that clash of regional interests weakened the centralizing power of
the President. The Congress found occasion for another display of muscle-flexing
in contrary directions. President Ford submitted an energy program that
emphasized higher prices through decontrol. The Congress stuffed down his throat
a program that emphasized conservation, including rationing authority. President
Carter submitted a national energy plan that featured conservation. The Congress
has forced on him a program that emphasizes decontrol and higher prices.
Probably most damaging to Presidential leadership was the impact on public
opinion of the long prosperity associated with the postwar period. Through most
of the history of this and other industrialized nations there has existed a
close connection between income and voting. As Seymour M. Lipset wrote, in a
classic sentence in his study, ''Political Man'': ''The most impressive single
fact about political party support is that in virtually every economically
developed country the lower income groups vote mainly for the parties of the
Left, while the higher income groups vote mainly for the parties of the Right.''
In the mid-60's, that basic rule of politics, the Lipset law, suffered a double
fracture.

At the upper end of the income scale there emerged from the elite universities a
sizable minority of young people less concerned with the accumulation of
material goods and the development of national power than with improvements in
the quality of life. They formed a potent network of constituencies for minority
rights, equality between the sexes, ecological balance and consumer-product
quality.  In the course of opposing the Vietnam War with Eugene McCarthy in
1968, many of them became political activists. They then entered - and reformed
- the Democratic Party. They now make up an important faction within that party,
voting their cultural interests even above their economic interests.

At the lower end of the income scale, working-class whites resented the
penetration of the Democratic Party by the new militants. Many rallied to the
older cultural values - country, family, church and neighborhood - that they
identified with the economic opportunities of the good old days. They expressed
their disappointment with the Democratic Party by supporting George Wallace in
1968. Thereafter, many migrated to the Republican Party.

That cultural revolution fragmented public opinion. There emerged a new set of
issues - crime, gun control, abortion, drugs, prayer in the schools - not
susceptible to resolution by Presidential leadership. Stalemates on these issues
combined with difficulties in foreign policy and the economy to breed a growing
national discontent and a loss of confidence in all institutions of leadership.

The general change in attitudes transformed the nature of the country's
political lobbies. In the past, virtually all lobbies represented identifiable
interest groups - business, labor, agriculture. As Washington agents, they
sought calculable monetary benefits for their clients - a subsidy, a tariff, a
minimum wage.  They cultivated connections among committee chairmen in the
Congress and among leading officials in the executive branch. They tended to be
in business for a long time, and they specialized in splitting differences.

The new recruits to the political process serve in lobbies that identify
themselves as expressions of public, or citizen, interest.  Far from being mere
agents, they tend to become genuine experts in particular policy issues -women's
rights, the environment, antiabortion, consumer affairs, the right to bear arms.
Indeed, Hugh Heclo, a professor of government at Harvard, has called them
''issue networks.'' Because their reason for being is a grievance, they are not
prone to compromise. That in itself complicates Presidential leadership some.
More important still, from the Presidential point of view, is the focus of the
new lobbies on single, discrete issues.  Today's interest groups are not the
stuff of which Presidents can weave enduring majorities.

The political parties and the Presidential nominating process have also been
hard hit by the cultural change. Party barons used to dominate the nominating
process. Professor Neustadt calculated that, until 1968, ''in each major party
some 50 to 100 men - state leaders, party bosses, elder statesmen - decided
nominations.'' Most, he pointed out, were ''too clever or conservative to launch
a national campaign by dumping their incumbent.'' So Presidents didn't have to
worry much about renomination.

The newer forces in the political process, however, entered the game as
supporters for outsiders seeking the Presidential nomination. They made
themselves experts in low-level organization and mail-order financing and in
defeating local organizations and their bosses in primaries and party caucuses.
As advocates of participatory politics, they have changed the convention rules
in both parties. Candidates have a much larger group to cultivate and appease in
winning the nomination. So to other concerns, a President now must add worry
about winning the nomination of his own party.

Congress, of course, has also changed in step with the political parties. The
leadership structure, including the committee chairmen, used to be agents of
party discipline. ''To get along, go along,'' was the old slogan. By following
the leadership, younger members of the Senate and House earned preferment until,
over the years, by the process of seniority, they too became committee chairmen
and took over leadership posts. In those conditions, a President could cut a
deal with the leadership, and be assured of results.

No longer. The growth of ''issue networks'' as key elements of party structure
has worked to make it more politically profitable for legislators to be
issue-oriented. They can show their capacity to think for themselves by parting
company with the leadership in visible ways.

In the House, today, a deal between the President and the leadership means
almost nothing. President Carter's tax proposals have repeatedly had the support
of Speaker Tip O'Neill; Jim Wright, the majority leader, and John Brademas, the
Democratic Whip. They have repeatedly been reported out of the Ways and Means
Committee by chairman Al Ullman - only to be upset on the floor of the House by
a coalition of Republicans and conservative Democrats.

The Senate majority leader, Robert Byrd, who is often accounted (after the
President) the second most powerful man in Washington, has enjoyed better
success, particularly in the foreign-policy area. But he gave the White House
fits during the fight between the President and Senator Kennedy for the
nomination. While staying technically neutral, Byrd sided with Kennedy on such
tough issues as the opening up of the Democratic National Convention. In the
end, he was more concerned about keeping the peace with his fellow Senators than
he was about supporting the President.

Cabinet members, in theory at least, operate as the President's men. They are
supposed to apply his policies, and in the past they tended to be weighty
figures able to sway interest groups or sections of the Congress on behalf of
the President. Thus F.D.R.  named Senator Cordell Hull of Tennessee Secretary of
State because of his standing with the Foreign Relations Committee. Douglas
Dillon, the Republican banker appointed Secretary of the Treasury in 1961, was
Kennedy's man in the business community.

But the emergence of issue networks has pushed to the foreground policy
professionals, often from academia, with special expertise in such matters as
foreign affairs, economics and health. President Ford's Cabinet at one point
included former professors at State (Henry Kissinger), Defense (James
Schlesinger), Justice (Edward Levi) and Agriculture (Earl Butz). The
professional - as distinct from political - figures initially named to the
Carter Cabinet included Cyrus Vance, a corporate lawyer, at State; Harold Brown,
a scientist, at Defense; Michael Blumenthal, a Ph.D. as well as a businessman,
at Treasury; Ray Marshall, and Juanita Krepps, both academic economists, at
Labor and Commerce respectively, and Schlesinger at the new Energy Department.

Policy professionals may be deeply loyal to a President, but they also care, and
care a lot, about their areas of expertise. Even as they go to the well publicly
with a President, they are usually beating upon him privately to edge closer to
the received views of the policy network. Often, such tensions come to the
surface in Congressional testimony or leaks to the press. Presidents tend to
take such things hard. President Ford dismissed Schlesinger as Secretary of
Defense because he sided with the military professionals and their allies on the
Hill in seeking a far bigger increase in defense spending than the President
wanted. President Carter unloaded Schlesinger because he sided with the energy
industry and against the liberal Democrats in the Congress in seeking decontrol
of oil and gas. Blumenthal was dropped from Treasury because he sided with the
financial community in favoring a tougher stance on inflation than the White
House. Vance quit as Secretary of State rather than endorse the military effort
to rescue the hostages held in Iran.

When Cabinet members can't be trusted, Presidents turn instinctively to the
senior White House staff - a collection of about 20 persons who work around the
Oval Office in the West Wing of the White House. Most of these senior posts are
filled by persons who have established intimate ties with the President in
campaigning for office. Relations tend to be not only tight but secretive. Thus,
the staff was known as the Irish Mafia in the Kennedy years, the Texas Mafia in
the Johnson years, the California Mafia in the Nixon years and the Georgia Mafia
in the Carter years.

In such company, any President can almost always find support for whatever he
wants to do - which is precisely the trouble. The kingpins of the California
Mafia, H.R. Haldeman and John Ehrlichman, egged Nixon on to the horrors of
Watergate. Press secretary Jody Powell, political adviser Hamilton Jordan and
then-counsel Robert Lipschutz advised Jimmy Carter to rally to the support of
Budget Director Bert Lance, even though the Treasury warned that his private
banking deals would not bear scrutiny.

Because of their exceptionally close ties to the President, moreover, staff
members tend to develop running feuds with Cabinet officers. The bad blood
obtaining between two recent Secretaries of State (William Rogers under Nixon
and Cyrus Vance under Carter) and their opposite numbers in the National
Security Council (Henry Kissinger and Zbigniew Brzezinski) is well known. Donald
Rumsfeld, Ford's chief of staff, was at odds with - even hated by - a large
number of the highest officials, including Vice President Nelson Rockefeller,
Treasury Secretary William Simon and Secretary of State Henry Kissinger.

The accretion of White House responsibilities, moreover, has worked to foster
the growth of large staffs under the senior advisers.  Stuart Eizenstat, for
example, has 60 people working for him on the domestic policy staff. The
second-string staffers often come from the issue networks and have more interest
in a partic-ular approach to their subject than in loyalty to the President. So
they go into business for themselves as volunteer press secretaries, leaking
inseason and out. It is the general feeling among Washington newsmen that most
leaks come from the White House staff. It is notable that President Nixon,
before wiretapping journalists, placed taps on members of Dr. Kissinger's
National Security Council staff.  The White House press corps, like everything
else connected with the President, has also undergone a dramatic transformation.
Until 1960, the action centered around the Presidential news conference, an
outgrowth of Franklin Roosevelt's twice-weekly background sessions with
journalists who trooped into his office and ranged themselves around his desk.
The big change came with the televising of press conferences, initiated by
President Kennedy. From that point forward, the news conference ceased to be
mainly a form of dispensing information to the press. It became a performance
for the public.

Inevitably, Presidents and their staffs have tried to shape the performance in
their own best interest. They have avoided press conferences during particularly
difficult times or in unfavorable settings. Lyndon Johnson practically stopped
regular meetings with the press during the worst days of Vietnam. Nixon invented
and Carter continued the device of regular sessions with the non-Washington -
or, as it is called in the Capital, provincial - press corps.

Inevitably, White House correspondents have reacted sharply to crude efforts at
manipulation by the President and his staff. They have become experts in the
credibility gap, contrasting myth and reality and questioning motives. Many take
the view that behind every announcement there is a secret and behind every
secret a dirty secret. During the Watergate period, they even came to challenge
the President directly.

Those inside Government have a different point of view. Here, for example, is
the judgment of Ben Heineman, a lawyer free of any crude bias against press and
television, in his book:

''Although the media have always been independent and critical of Government,
the basic change is that media attitudes are now unrelentingly adversarial. ...
Given the unremittingly critical perspective that the press brings to the
Presidency, there is indeed a substantial question whether any President can be
perceived as successful unless his Government victories are overwhelming.''

The deep mutual involvement of President and media has created a new
Presidential reality. The President receives unrelenting attention in the press
and on television. Not just Washington, but the whole country perceives him to
be at the center of the system.  Whether a big man or a small one, an active
leader or a passive pawn, he is made to look larger than life. While that may
give him great glory, it also leaves him no place to hide. It takes genuine
doing, real art, for Presidents to square the impressions of omnipotence
fostered by media attention with the limited capacity of the office.  As
President Carter remarked at a small private dinner after the Camp David talks
on the Middle East: ''When things go bad, you get entirely too much blame. And I
have to admit that when things go good, you get entirely too much credit.''

The widespread perception of Presidential weakness, while pleasing to some on
grounds of both political philosophy and self-interest, has inspired among those
partial to a strong Presidency several prescriptions. Many persons, including
the present White House legal counsel, Lloyd Cutler, have suggested
constitutional amendments that would give the President more power over the
Congress.  Constitutional reforms appear extremely unlikely, however. As a
temporary makeshift, accordingly, there has been developed, largely by Aaron
Wildavsky of the University of California at Berkeley, the concept of a
strategic retreat for the Presidency. The basic idea is that the President acts
to depersonalize his office, to share responsibility in a visible way with his
Vice President and Cabinet.

By those means, the President would be able to operate behind the scenes as a
kind of ''hidden hand.'' He could take credit where it was due but save his
office from the sure losers. The pivot of national politics would thus be
protected against the day when a new consensus develops, when a crisis demands
another burst of energy from the American people, acting, not in parts, but as a
whole - acting, that is to say, through the Presidency.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of President Carter at memorial services for men
lost in hostage

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A FILTHY LITTLE WAR

BYLINE: By PETER ANDREWS; Peter Andrews, a frequent contributor to these
snatches of Nietzsche, Nordstrand arrives in Africa pages, is contributing
editor to Saturday Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 5; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 728 words


HORN OF AFRICA By Philip Caputo.  487 pp. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
$12.95.

TALES of adventure set in Africa, with their prefabricated plots and pasteboard
heroes, have become so much the special preserve of hack novelists that the
genre has been all but spoiled for serious writers. Philip Caputo's story of
African gun running and clandestine warfare begins in such a conventional way
that it took me a few more pages than it should have to realize that it is the
genuine article: a real novel stuffed with excitement and filled with sharply
drawn characters, written by a tough, sinewy writer who has something more
important on his mind than finding a new tax shelter.

The plot, which takes more than a few vicious turns, involves a lunatic American
scheme to send a three-man team to equip and train a rebel African tribe from
the choking wastelands of Ethiopia who are fighting for causes they themselves
perceive only dimly. Initiated in duplicity and conducted in disarray, the
mission ends in disaster.

As is to be expected from the author of ''A Rumor of War,'' the finest memoir of
men at arms in our generation, the battle scenes are brilliant. Mr. Caputo knows
the muddled horror as well as the shameful exhilaration of combat, and he has
the skill to put you at the center of it and rub your nose in the stink of it.

More important, he knows how to create characters who fix themselves in your
mind. There is Colfax, a bureaucrat who hatches the scheme. Colfax is the Earl
of Warwick snatched from St. Joan's execution and brought up to date. Sitting at
his desk in a gray summer suit, he shuffles reports and dreams up missions no
one can accomplish. Cynical and self-serving, he knows everything and
understands nothing. There is Moody, a broken British ex-officer who is normally
in command of the incursion team but is palpably unfit for the job. Charles
Gage, an out-of-work American newspaperman and Vietnam veteran, goes along
because he has nothing better to do, and though the money is only fair, it's
better than he can earn as a freelance journalist in Cairo.

The principal character is Nordstrand, a giant Minnesotan turned soldier of
misfortune. Nordstrand is the grotesque personification of the old Army
sergeant's warning, ''Watch out for farm boys who read. They get you into
trouble.'' His brain filled with part Chinese Gordon, part Lawrence of Arabia
and part Kurtz from Conrad's ''Heart of Darkness'' - a volatile combination in a
240-pounder who sees himself as part of a new order of superheroes whose destiny
it is to rule over lesser men. Through the force of his character, Nordstrand
seizes control of the mission and leads it to its eventual destruction with the
ecstasy of a true fanatic.

Except for Gage, whose only cause is to have none, each character constructs an
elaborate rationale about why he is there. But the fact is, they all participate
in a filthy little war because each of them needs something out of the conflict.
Colfax needs a more important job better suited to his talents. Moody needs
redemption for past sins. Gage merely needs to know what it is that truly
frightens him.  Nordstrand needs to do battle on the last empty space left on
earth and fulfill his own vision of himself. Gage, who needs the least, survives
best.

Dealing with scenes that are at once so banal and so grand is hellishly
difficult for any writer. But Mr. Caputo - perhaps because this is his first
novel and he may not know how hard a job it is - wades in and brings it off
splendidly.

''Horn of Africa'' is far from flawless; Mr. Caputo is still finding his way as
a novelist. When he backtracks to give us Nordstrand's early history and show us
a monster in the making, his powers recede to the merely ordinary, and sometimes
less than ordinary. It is mostly a dose of pop psychology about an unhappy
childhood illuminated by minor injustices - as if Raskolnikov were the product
of a social worker's indifference. Mr. Caputo sometimes rushes in to drive home
a point the reader is capable of getting without tutoring; but saying that he
has written a book with some extremely rough patches is like complaining that
Pete Rose overruns a base now and again. That is the way he plays the game and
the source of his particular excellence. Philip Caputo has the talent to become
a major American novelist.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A RAFTS HOLIDAY ON THE RIVER KWAI

SECTION: Section 10; Page 1, Column 5; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2512 words


-------------------------------------------------------------------- HENRY KAMM
is chief of The New York Times bureau in Bangkok.

By HENRY KAMM

Lest Thailand be confirmed in the traveler's mind as a place for nothing but
pornographic tourism, let it be recorded that behind the front of commercial
exploitation of sexual impulses, which has made Bangkok attractive to hordes of
lecherous men, mainly European and Japanese, there lies a large Southeast Asian
country, which the pimps, shills and touts that hover about the hotels of the
capital do nothing to promote.

That country offers glorious beaches, ruins of a noble architectural past, large
stretches of paddy fields that glisten in all shades of green, trips through the
tropical jungle and all the bucolic sights of a largely agricultural land. There
is no trace of that in the sprawl of Bangkok; the popular tourist resort of
Pattaya offers the beaches but with a proliferation of crowded, concrete-slab
hotels and massage parlors, and the most visited ruins, those of the former
capital of Ayuthaya, are despoiled of anything of interest.

But not far from Bangkok it is possible to see and do things that would justify
the long journey from the West. With my teen-age son, Nicholas, I spent five
memorable days in two spots that helped me get over a surfeit of living in
Bangkok and showed him some of the beauties and pleasures of Thailand. One was a
rafts hotel tied up along a bank of the Kwai River; the other was a beach resort
at Wang Kaew on the Gulf of Siam.

For the visitor, Thailand's capital presents the hustle and bustle of a huge
metropolis - about five million people live in Bangkok and its immediate
environs - which is interesting and strong in colors, sounds and smells. It
offers ample shopping for bright-hued Thai silks and cottons, bronzes, wood
carvings and Asian curios, but beware of antiques, which are often of current
manufacture or difficult to export if genuine. A vast array of excellent
restaurants is also an attraction.

But sightseeing in Bangkok offers little beyond the not-so-ancient splendors of
the Grand Palace, a variety of Buddhist pagodas richly decorated and vivid in
color but of minimal esthetic distinction, the obligatory ride on the klongs,
the canals, which never fails to end in a hard-sell curio shop, and a couple of
Disneyland-like exhibition parks, which present the stage-decor sights of
Thailand in miniature. Bangkok's traffic and inadequate sidewalks make it a city
that deters strolling.

So Nicholas and I left Bangkok by car early one morning, and about four hours
later we were sitting on a raft on the Kwai River in the midst of a teak forest
enjoying a spicy and satisfying lunch. We had traveled about 200 miles west of
Bangkok on a road that was paved most of the way. Our bags were installed in our
room on a neighboring raft; we had washed the trip's dirt off under running
water in the adjoining bathroom and had tried the big double bed and found it
comfortable.

The raft was one of a row of five moored at the river bank. Each bore a long,
single-story cabin built of local materials, which was subdivided into units
much like a motel. The units consisted of a spacious room with double or twin
beds and a private bathroom with cold-water shower, sink and a squatting toilet
similar to those found in rural France.

The Kwai River was rushing along at a rainy-season high, birds were singing in a
forest so dense they could not be seen and monkeys were piercing our ears with
shrieks - even if they were only captives in a cage on the raft.

Jungle Rafts is the invention of an enterprising Frenchman, Jacques Bes. His
sturdy rafts, with 17 rooms, are moored on the Kwai, accessible by river or from
a trail that leaves the main highway into the teak reserve and ends on a high
bank at the river. Steps have been hewn into the embankment, but other than that
everything is as nature created it, and local people have adapted it to their
everyday lives. The rafts moored at the opposite bank were the same, except for
the absence of running water and flush toilets, and were the homes of country
people who make a scant living out of farming, fishing and working as timber
cutters.

Nicholas and I watched men casting dragnets and drawing up whirls of tiny fish,
while others paddled across the Kwai to go to work in the forest or to till
their land. The only mechanical noise in the forest was the rare passing of a
longboat with outboard motor, and the only fumes were the aromatic smells from
charcoal fires used to fry fish.

A waterfall a few hundred yards upriver cascaded into a still pool formed by a
bend in the river. It would have been an inviting place for a swim in any but
the monsoon season, which clouds the stream and makes the current dangerous. But
at any time other than June to September it would be difficult to resist diving
into the Kwai from the raft we were living on.

We spent the afternoon browsing through the countryside and visited a village of
Mon people a half hour's drive from the raft. The Mon, together with the Khmers
of Cambodia, were the strongest indigenous culture of continental Southeast Asia
in the first millenium of the current era, dominating the region from Burma on
the Bay of Bengal to Vietnam on the South China Sea. They remained strong in
Burma until the 18th century when they were defeated by the Burmese. Now they
have joined the ranks of vanishing minorities, and those living in Thailand are
being absorbed by the country's assimilation of ethnic groups that are
considered close enough to the Thai to represent no danger.

The village near the jungle rafts, however, is made up of recent political
refugees from Burma, whose Mon nationalism runs high and who cling to their
customs and language, dreaming some day not only of overthrowing Burma's
government but re-creating a greater Mon nation, which would encompass all lower
Burma, including Rangoon. The history of the Mon and their aspirations were
explained to us, in English, by hospitable monks of the village pagoda, over
many cups of tea, while tame gibbons ambled in and out.

The village is a typical large upland agricultural community, growing rice,
coconuts, cotton, sesame, chilies, ginger and vegetables. We walked about,
greeted by pleasant smiles everywhere, stopping to look into the shops selling a
few necessities - salt, dried fish and textiles - that are not produced by the
villagers and offering none of the knicknacks produced for tourists. No one
tried to sell us anything.

Dinner was French homecooking, skillfully executed by the Thai and Mon staff.
That lunch had been good was not surprising, since it was a typical local meal
of fragrant boiled rice with a traditional array of side dishes consisting of
vegetables cooked either with bits of pork or shrimp and a vegetable soup. The
only concession to foreign palates was that the cook had used the pungent Thai
spices with a light hand. But dinner was an accomplishment, a meal that would
have seemed perfectly in place anywhere in France - vegetable potage, an omelet
with onions, tomatoes and parsley, roast pork with saute potatoes, vegetables,
fresh fruit and - heaven knows where it came from on the banks of the Kwai,
where only rice is eaten - bread and butter.

After dinner the staff asked the 10 guests whether they wanted to see some local
dancing. When the visitors agreed to chip in $3.75 a person, a troupe of Mon
actors, musicians and dancers materialized quickly, disembarking from little
boats, and proceeded to put on an uncommonly good performance of traditional
Burmese theater. The jokes and mimicry, mixing together Burmese popular theater
and classical dances based on the Ramayana legend of gods, kings and princes
with low farce from contemporary everyday life, were broad enough to make a
point even to those speaking neither Mon nor Burmese. The dancing and acrobatics
by the cast of a dozen young men, women and children were fully professional and
the music exciting.  Encouraged by the applause, the performers went on far into
the night before changing out of their costumes and removing their makeup while
still on the open stage installed on the raft. Then they returned to the village
in their boats.

Sleep came easily with the rush of the river and the night sounds of the jungle
the only accompaniment. In the morning an elephant stood ready at the edge of
the teak forest to take Nicholas and me on an hour's ride for half a mile or so
along a logging trail, stopping whenever its considerable appetite led it to
seek out some young bamboo, which it expertly broke off with its trunk and
crunched noisily. The elephant man, who was perched on the animal's neck with
only an old rice sack for a saddle, apologized for the delays. We sat on a
bamboo box and enjoyed the respites in our teetering progress along the trail.

When we returned to the raft a longboat was waiting to take us upstream. Few
boats plied the river in this sparsely populated region, and the villages were
tranquil, with the grownups in the fields and the children in school. The
destination was a boat landing 20 minutes away, where a sign proclaimed in
English, ''Dowdung Cave.  Mr. Samlee, the discoverer, here for cave tour.'' The
discoverer was indeed there. In sign language he explained that he had made his
find recently and offered to show it to us.

It took half an hour on a rather stern uphill trail to reach the small opening
at the top of the ridge that led to an immense cavern populated by swarms of
bats hanging from the ceiling and flying into farther recesses when Mr. Samlee,
waving a kerosene lamp, approached. With discoverer's pride, Mr. Samlee patted
stalactites and stalagmites while explaining in deft sign language the
resemblances that he saw. Many of the formations reminded him of Buddha in one
or the other of his ritual positions.

Similar trips are possible, among them an all-day excursion on elephant back for
two, including a picnic in the jungle, for $50. The River Kwai bridge, built by
Allied prisoners of war of the Japanese, and the cemeteries of the thousands who
died of mistreatment, is 60 miles away outside the province capital of
Kanchanaburi.

An evening in Bangkok gave impetus for a trip to the shore.  Thailand has a long
shoreline, both on the Gulf of Siam and the Strait of Malacca, and its beaches
are sandy. But the visitor is caught between resorts with ample facilities and
hordes of travelers, such as Pattaya and Phuket in the south, or beaches so
deserted that both lodging and personal security are problems.

Wang Kaew, about two and a half hours from Bangkok near the fishing port of
Rayong on the east coast of the gulf as it winds down toward Cambodia, is the
happiest of mediums. Developed by a group of conservation-conscious Thais, rare
in a country where the bounties of nature are used with profligacy, the vast but
simple resort offers several wide arcs of beach with a hinterland of gentle
hills that slope toward the sea and are covered with tropical plants, flowers
and cactus. The nearby island of Thalu is accessible by the resort's boat. A
picnic lunch can be provided, and snorkeling gear should be brought along.

The beauty of Wang Kaew lies in what the developers have not done to the site:
no nightclubs, no neon signs, no canned music. If in the restaurant one of the
staff turns on a cassette player or radio, he will instantly silence it if so
requested, and nobody urges anybody to do anything. The staff consists of
smiling maids and pleasant waiters striving to improve their English. The
restaurant, an almost wall-less building with views in all directions, offers
some Western food but mainly exquisitely prepared Thai dishes, making use of the
riches of the sea. It might be well to advise the waiter to go easy on the
chilies, which are lavished on most dishes.

Accommodations are in neat cottages that sleep from 2 to 10 persons and average
$30 a night without meals. A rental car, obtainable in Bangkok, is indispensable
because even if bus service is available the bus will not get visitors from
their cottage to the remoter beaches or to the restaurant.

Wang Kaew invites dolce far niente and got it from us. Even a trip to Thalu
Island seemed too much of an effort although memories of snorkeling off its
shore and watching swarms of bright tropical fish among the coral made it a
temptation. It was successfully resisted.  Watching the flotilla of fishing
boats on the horizon, with no other human in sight and thinking of the
population pressure of Jones Beach, the Riviera or Agadir while frequently
wading into the gentle surf or swimming beyond it into the clear Gulf of Siam
was holiday enough.
If You Go ...Thailand is much in the news because at its frontier with Cambodia
the woes of Indochina are palpable. They have on occasion brought insecurity to
border spots, and travelers would do well to avoid remote regions in that area.
Moreover, the south - although not the resort town of Phuket - is a region of
banditry and insurrections. Road travel is not recommended. Similarly, some
mountain areas north of Chiengmai present security problems. But the country is
large, and the Kwai River region is stable and safe.  Driving after dark on some
country roads should be avoided, as much for the recklessness of Thai drivers as
for banditry. The towns and cities of Thailand are as secure for solitary
nighttime strollers as those of the United States, suggesting similar caution.

Writing ahead to Jungle Rafts and Wang Kaew for reservations is a good idea. The
Jungle Rafts office is at the Narai Hotel, Silom Road, Bangkok. The cost of a
three-day, two-night, all-inclusive trip, with round-trip transportation from
Bangkok, is $85 a person. The Wang Kaew office is at 155/19 Soi Mahadlekluang 1,
Bangkok.

Hertz, Avis and smaller companies rent cars in Bangkok. A car with driver is not
ruinously more expensive than self-drive and is recommended because of erratic
motoring habits, compounded by driving on the left-hand side of the road,
inadequate road signs and the language problem. Avis offers an all-inclusive
daily charge of $77.50 with driver, with 7 1/2 cents a kilometer after 200
kilometers.  Without driver, the cost is $42.50 plus gasoline and 15 cents a
kilometer. The distance to Wang Kaew from Bangkok is about 150 miles. - H.K.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Kwai River (page 19) map of Thailand (page 19)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKSHELF;
THE ODYSSEYS OF A LITERARY GENERATION

BYLINE: By SARAH FERRELL

SECTION: Section 10; Page 5, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2161 words


Sometimes travel is flight. Only consider the Diaspora chronicled by Paul
Fussell in ''Abroad: British Literary Traveling Between the Wars'' (Oxford,
$14.95). During the decades in question, it seemed, the best and brightest of an
entire literary generation took up a banner inscribed ''I Hate It Here,'' and
fled from an England that had turned gloomy and corrupt - a country that had, in
Ezra Pound's phrase, slipped into ''utter dithering deliquescence.''

This exodus is Mr. Fussell's primary concern, but it is by no means his only
one. ''This book is about travel writing,'' he says, ''but it is also about
travel, so I have dealt not just with books but with ships and trains, passport
photographs and national borders and small French seaport towns, hotels and
cafes and beach resorts, architecture ancient and modern, food and drink, nude
sunbathing, and sex, both procreative and recreational ...But I have done all
these things to imply the context of travel writing from 1918 to 1939, to
suggest what it felt like to be young and clever and literate in the final age
of travel.''

Who were the young and clever and literate? Mr. Fussell names dozens of authors
and hundreds of books, but any short list must include: Graham Greene, off in
Africa on a ''Journey Without Maps.'' Robert Byron, now little known, whose
''The Road to Oxiana'' Mr.  Fussell proposes as the ''Ulysses'' and ''The Waste
Land'' of travel books (it is now out of print). D. H. Lawrence, who, having
reached abroad, found that he hated it there, too, although he nonetheless
managed to write the joyous ''Sea and Sardinia'' as well as the Dark God-ridden
later works. Peter Fleming in China, Christopher Isherwood in Berlin and
California. George Orwell, in Burma and Catalonia and down and out in Paris and
London. Norman Douglas, although Douglas evades Mr. Fussell's categories in
several ways - he left England in 1916, to escape morals charges, and his ''Old
Calabria'' and ''South Wind,'' a travel book thickly disguised as a novel, were
written well before the end of the war (''South Wind,'' with its images of the
sun and of pagan freedom, was, Mr. Fussell relates, handed around in the
freezing trenches). Evelyn Waugh, atypical in his stubborn John Bullishness and
cultivated xenophobia - although Waugh's travel books, as Mr. Fussell points
out, show him as a much nicer person than do his journals.

Mr. Fussell's last chapters are elegiac. He quotes Waugh, whom he describes as
''shocked and embittered by a war which, by destroying Europe and the Orient and
multiplying controls on people and producing the jet aircraft engine,
effectively ended travel in the old sense.'' Waugh, writing in 1946, had looked
back over his travel works to discover that: ''Each book, I found on re-reading,
had a ... slightly grimmer air as, year by year, the shades of the prison house
closed.''

Mr. Fussell is John De Witt Professor of English Literature at Rutgers and a
contributing editor of Harper's and The New Republic.  He writes so much like an
Englishman that it comes as a surprise to learn that he is, in fact, a
Californian.


Michael Schiffer was young, and if his first book be admitted as evidence,
clever and literate, when he fled the United States of the 1960's and the
Vietnam War and, like many of his knapsacked compatriots, took off for parts
unknown. Although the ground he covers has been covered many times before, his
''Lessons of the Road: An Overland Journey to the East'' (Kenan Press, $10.95)
is almost continuously interesting and an exception to the rule that what must,
for want of a better term, be called hippie memoirs are dumb and boring.

Mr. Schiffer was a Harvard graduate and a law-school dropout when he took up
jewelry-making for a living. He was hawking his wares on San Francisco's
Fisherman's Wharf when he was taken up by a French girl named Marie (this is one
of those books in which no one has a last name) and swept off to her family's
estate in Burgundy to teach her the trade. Marie had just broken off with
Richard, the brother of Michael's off-and-on girlfriend Cheryl, when they met.
After the French interlude, the four of them regrouped (as two couples, Michael
and Cheryl and Marie and Richard again) and set off overland, on the cheap, from
Greece to Nepal, the mystic goal of the international youth of the era.

''Lessons of the Road'' has about the usual amount of dope and sex in it, but
Mr. Schiffer is a clear-eyed journalist - unlike many others who followed the
overland route, he was never too stoned to know where he was. He and his
traveling companions did the usual hippie-kids-on-the-road stuff, throwing
around a Frisbee while waiting to get through customs, playing on a pickup
basketball team in Kabul, climbing mountains in Earth Shoes. They traveled on
local buses or hitched rides on trucks, they slept in wretched hovels and they
ate dreary food, ending up malnourished in malnourished India.  Their total
bills came to $700 a person, for seven full months of travel.

All of which we have heard before. Two things distinguish Mr.  Schiffer's book,
however. He is able to look back at his experiences with some wryness - Iran in
the last days of the Shah looked fine to him - and he can turn a phrase. There
is, for instance, his account of heading toward Rezaiyeh in a shared Iranian cab
at sunset: ''As we roll on, our driver starts singing and the three men with him
in the front seat join in, chanting the sun down. They really should stop the
car, get out, spread their carpets and kneel (the bus drivers and all their
passengers do), but it's late and we'll just make it by dark as it is, so they
do the next best thing, turn this funky old cab of a car into a shrine, a
tabernacle on wheels. The road adds vibrato and urgency to their voices as we
downshift hard and strain up hills. They wring each worshipful note for emotion,
shaking down the quarter tones like dogs with old shoes. They're not singing for
our benefit, but we can't help feeling blessed.''

Lyric evocations of peoples and landscapes are punctuated by little Abbie
Hoffmannesque jokes - one waits to see what Mr. Schiffer will give us now that
he is grown up.

''Lessons of the Road'' is beguiling in its lack of pretentiousness - the
author's nods toward finding himself are blessedly perfunctory. This is a good
book for people who used to be kids.


Jessamyn West set off for Europe in 1929, when she was 26 years old and green as
grass. She had never traveled, and she had never known anyone who had. What,
then, was she doing boarding a train at Pomona, Calif., for a journey to England
and beyond, without her close and loving family and without her husband of five
years?  Homesick from the moment of departure, she wondered herself.

''Double Discovery: A Journey'' (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $11.95) is Miss
West's account of that adventure, prompted by her reading, 50 years later, the
documents that her mother had preserved in a box labeled ''Jessamyn's letters
from Europe, 1929. Precious. Save.'' The discovery is indeed a double one - that
of Europe and that of self - but the voices that figure in the narrative are
three. The young woman who wrote the letters, the young woman who, at the same
time, kept a complementary and sometimes contradictory journal, and the mature
novelist - best known for ''The Friendly Persuasion'' - all have their say.

The letter-writer first. Miss West took care that her letters to her parents and
her husband should be chatty, informative and, whenever possible, cheerful - she
owed them a vicarious good time.  She admits to a few tears on the train, but
she gives more space to perky little descriptions of the countryside (''Iowa,
yesterday, was jungly green with rivers hopping along unhampered by California
dams''). She disguises her innocence with a false sophistication, guessing, for
example, that a fellow train passenger is a ''lady of easy virtue'' (but how
would she know?). But travel is, in fact, teaching her about life as well as
about manners and monuments, and by the time she has toured the cathedral
cities, visited Scotland and Ireland, attended lectures at Oxford and gone off
for a look at Paris a new woman has emerged. (That she was again reduced to a
quivering jelly by an unfortunate letter from her husband is beside the point.)

The journal keeper has a secret, unvoiced even to herself: She is going to
England because she wants to be a writer and England is the land of letters. If,
as the mature writer reflects, admitting such an ambition was ''a sign of
madness; as preposterous as a poor loony's belief that if he jumps off a
building, wings will sprout from his shoulders to support him,'' at least the
young woman could take nourishment from the ground that had nutured writers.
''However unconsciously,'' the Miss West of 1980 writes of the Miss West of
1929, ''she was choosing the life many a would-be writer has chosen.  If you
can't do it yourself, get to the place where books and writers are valued. Live
in that atmosphere.'' The ambition was less mad than it seemed; this is Miss
West's 18th book.

''Double Discovery'' is a multiple pleasure. There is the fun of reading someone
else's mail, the charm of a travel memoir and the coziness of a confidential
conversation with a trusted senior aunt.  Although, as Miss West remarks early
on, ''Today's twelve-year-old could circumnavigate the globe more easily than
I,'' young girls should especially enjoy the book. More than that - if they have
any spunk, they will find it inspirational.


Finally, two charming oddities. ''The Royal Tour, 1901: Or the Cruise of H.M.S.
Ophir,'' by Petty Officer Harry Price (Morrow, $20.95), is a facsimile of an
illustrated journal in which that seaman and artist recorded the voyage of the
then Duke and Duchess of York (later King George V and Queen Mary) to the
scattered outposts of Empire. What a cruise it was, from Portsmouth to Malta,
then through the Red Sea to Ceylon and Singapore, calling at ports in Australia
and New Zealand before doubling back to Mauritius, South Africa, the West Indies
and eventually Canada - only India was omitted.

As might be expected, each port brought festivities. Australia, particularly,
went all out to welcome the royal guests, erecting arches in the shape of
pagodas and towers built entirely of boxes of butter. All are illustrated in
little watercolor vignettes. Then there are the sketches of exotic birds and
plants and peoples, the accounts of shipboard entertainments (crossing the line,
the future king gets barbered and dunked just like every other greenhorn), the
dinner menus and concert programs, the texts of songs sung by welcoming
schoolchildren.

But ''The Royal Tour'' is also, as its subtitle states, ''A Lower Deck
Account,'' a rather jolly view of the sailor's life. At Halifax, for instance,
the crew stayed on board to paint the ship while the royal couple went ashore;
the text simply records that, but the accompanying picture shows the men dueling
with loaded brushes. Three hearty cheers for all of them.

Another royal voyage is the concern of ''The Secret Life of Queen Victoria,'' by
Jonathan Routh (Doubleday, $20), which purports to be drawn from the Queen's
missing diaries of 1871. Where was Victoria at that time? The highly unlikely
answer, according to Mr. Routh, is that she was touring Jamaica incognito, under
the pseudonym ''Mrs.  King.''

It was, to say the least, an action-filled holiday. If we are to believe Mr.
Routh, ''Mrs. King'' not only undertook such activities as dancing the limbo and
sending postcards to her family and to John Brown (but none to ''the Wretch
Gladstone''), but also took up with a circus, was shot from a cannon, made a
series of balloon ascensions and, on a side trip to Haiti, was briefly
imprisoned after a brawl in an establishment of dubious reputation.

Mr. Routh has, for reasons only he can know, made something of a career out of
painting Queen Victoria, and there are dozens of fullpage color illustrations of
the antic situations in which the Queen finds herself. Index, map and footnotes,
one of which cites the two weeks that, en route back to England, the monarch
apparently spent in New York. Her diaries for that soujourn have not come to
light - yet. A nice piece of sustained silliness.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Now, Back To the World

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 853 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Nov. 3


Whatever the outcome, the end of America's election campaign is a relief for
other governments the world over.  After the long pause that irritates and
exhausts, Washington can get back to the business of facing problems directly,
without electoral undertones.

A series of questions that need decision has accumulated, and they will bring
opportunities and dangers for whoever takes over the Presidency in January. The
first task, if the country is to stop lurching unhappily from crisis to crisis,
will be an overall review of foreign policy objectives.

This is a time to renew long-term planning, a period almost as critical as the
late 1940's when the postwar era was shaped and America's basic role was
established for more than a generation.  Mistakes were made, but the world
structure held together longer than it had in the period between the two World
Wars.

It broke down in the past decade for a variety of reasons, some having to do
directly with American policy, as in Vietnam; others resulting from changes
elsewhere, as in the Persian Gulf. In any event, the transition period for the
United States in the aftermath of the Vietnam War has come to an end. Now it is
essential to assess the new world scene and devise a fundamental American
strategy for the rest of the century.

The first priority must inevitably be Western security and the prevention of
nuclear war. That involves relations with the Soviet Union, with China, with
Western Europe and Japan, as well as with the turbulent third world.

The allies are virtually unanimous about what they want from the U.S. They all
want, as a Western ambassador to China put it, ''a moderate but firm and
predictable U.S. policy.'' Nuclear arms control agreements are not just a matter
of American inclination or skepticism. It is doubtful that the West Europeans
would support a return to the cold war and a new arms race unless Washington
clearly demonstrated a reasonable and determined effort to avoid them through
negotiations with Moscow.

Despite China's attack on Soviet-American nuclear agreements, restraints on the
arms race would also be in Peking's long-term interest. There are flickers of
evidence here that China's leaders are beginning to understand the concept of
deterrence as opposed to their official view that war is inevitable.

There is a contradiction between that orthodoxy and their new campaign of
modernization. While economic progress would strengthen China's defense
capacity, modern economies are more vulnerable to modern warfare and the
emphasis on civil defense here has receded.

In any case, a framework needs to be devised for a balanced American stance on
China and Russia. Western allies and Japan are already beginning to worry that
the U.S. will carry its step-by-step China tilt too far, with the risk of
provoking real Soviet fears and being maneuvered by Peking beyond actual Western
interest.

It is not possible to envisage an effective U.S. security system without allied
cooperation. It is important to remember America's need for the allies just as
it is important to remember that the strategic sensitivity of the Persian Gulf
and the Middle East is due more to allied than to U.S. dependence on its oil.

The fragile politics of the region are bound to create recurrent crises in the
coming years, and the U.S. needs a steady policy of trying to maintain some
stability there, even if that means leaning one way and then the other as the
temblors of upheaval shift. For example, quite apart from the issue of hostages,
the U.S. cannot wish to see Iraq establish supremacy in the Gulf and therefore
has an interest in helping Iran resist clear defeat.

The meaning of China's drastic internal changes is still ambiguous, but they
probably offer a new chance for practical exchanges with the third world
generally. Maoism had an enormous influence in elevating romantic rhetoric over
possible progress everywhere, even in the U.S. a decade ago. Now, if Washington
can seize it, there is an opportunity to show that the U.S. is willing and able
to help people who would rather produce than wage ideological warfare, which
Peking itself is renouncing as destructive and sterile.

These are global questions, interlocking every part of the world.  The American
economy, affecting the strength of the dollar and trade policy, will help
determine what the next Administration can do.

Grounds for optimism can be found in the very awareness of dangers ahead,
providing they lead to a careful new focus on general goals.  The American
President next year, new or familiar, will need to start over with a fresh look
at the changing world and a conscious effort to develop and explain a global
policy.

The effort at redefinition, to put bits and pieces of reaction to events back
into a coherent American attitudinal pattern, can be more decisive for the
future than the name of the winner.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

KEY POSTS IN CONGRESS AT STAKE TODAY

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1258 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 3


Several key Congressional chairmanships and leadership posts that influence
national policy are at stake tomorrow, when voters will elect 435 members of the
House of Representatives and 34 of the 100 senators.

Although most political analysts consider it unlikely, Republican leaders harbor
hopes of gaining control of the Senate, but virtually everyone expects the House
to remain under Democratic control.  However, expected Republican inroads would
mean smaller Democratic majorities in a more conservative Congress.

Senator Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the Republican leader, reached by
telephone at his cabin in Huntsville, said this morning that ''we've got a 50-50
chance'' to make a net gain of nine seats in the Senate, ending 26 years of
Democratic rule.

Prediction on Victories

''The states we have to win, and the states we're going to win, are Washington,
Indiana, New Hampshire, Vermont, Colorado, Georgia, Florida, Alaska and South
Dakota,'' Mr. Baker said.

Mr. Baker did not mention Iowa, where John C. Culver, the Democratic incumbent,
has been waging an uphill campaign against Representative Charles E. Grassley.
Nor did he mention Idaho, where another Democratic incumbent, Frank Church, has
been locked in a tight race against Representative Steven D. Symms.

In the House, Republicans expect to pick up 15 to 25 seats. Of 13 governerships
at stake this year, Democrats hold 10 and Republicans only three. Little change
is expected, however, and Republicans would do well to pick up two additional
governerships.

KEY SENATE RACES

The Senate races mentioned by Mr. Baker involve the following contests:
Washington. Senator Warren G. Magnuson, a Democrat, who will be 75 years old
tomorrow, seeks a sixth term against the state attorney general, Slade Gorton,
52. Mr. Magnuson, chairman of the Appropriations Committee, demonstrated his
clout by bringing home $951 million in disaster relief after eruptions at Mount
St.  Helens. Mr. Gorton charges that the Senator is an unreconstructed liberal
big spender.

Indiana. Senator Birch Bayh, 52, a Democrat targeted by conservative and
antiabortion political action groups, is in a close race against Representative
Dan Quayle, 33, a Republican serving his second term in the House. No Indiana
senator has ever served more than three terms, and Ronald Reagan's expected
victory in the state is likely to help Mr. Quayle.

New Hampshire. Senator John A. Durkin, a 44-year-old Democrat, who narrowly won
election to his first term, faces Warren Rudman, a 49-year-old Republican, who
is the former state Attorney General. Mr. Durkin is a liberal who vigorously
supported Senator Edward M.  Kennedy's Presidential bid but placates
conservatives by attacking Russian expansionism.  Mr. Rudman, who established a
consumer protection division, portrays himself as a ''good government''
candidate.

Vermont. Patrick J. Leahy, the first Democratic Senator to be elected in
Vermont, is opposed by Stewart Ledbetter, 47, a moderate Republican. Mr.
Ledbetter, a former banker, seeks to identify Mr.  Leahy with the Carter
Administration. The Senator's chairmanship of the Agriculture subcommittee on
rural development has bolstered his prestige in the rural state.

Colorado. Senator Gary Hart, 42, a Democrat elected to his first term as a
liberal and a foe of the Vietnam War, is using testimonials from Senator Barry
Goldwater and William F. Buckley, the conservative journalist, in his
re-election campaign against Mary Estill Buchanan, 45, a moderate Republican.
Mrs. Buchanan opposes a tax reduction until the budget is balanced. She also
opposes a crash program to develop synthetic fuels, for environmental reasons.

Georgia. Senator Herman E. Talmadge, 67, a Democrat ''denounced'' by the Senate
for financial misconduct and who also went through a highly publicized divorce
and a public admission of alcoholism, is opposed by Mack Mattingly, 49, a former
state Republican chairman.  Mr. Talmadge is chairman of the Agriculture
Committee and the ranking Democrat on the Finance Committee.

Florida. Bill Gunther, 46, the State Insurance Commissioner, who defeated
Senator Richard Stone in the Democratic primary, faces Paula Hawkins, 53, a
Republican who is a former state Public Service Commissioner. Mrs. Hawkins
combines a reputation as a consumer advocate with conservative stands on social
and fiscal issues. Mr.  Gunther, a moderate Democrat, is a strong campaigner in
a state in which Republicans have won only one Senate race this century.

Alaska. Former State Representative Clark S. Gruening, 37, won an upset victory
against an incumbent, Mike Gravel, in the Democratic primary. Mr. Gruening faces
Frank H. Murkowski, 47, a banker. Mr.  Murkowski seeks to portray Mr. Gruening
as too liberal for Alaska.

South Dakota. Senator George McGovern, 48, the Democratic Presidential nominee
in 1972, seeks a fourth term against Representative James Abdnor, a conservative
Republican. Mr. McGovern is a prime target of national conservative groups.

In addition, there are open seats in Connecticut, where Christopher Dodd, a
Democrat, is facing James L. Buckley, a Republican, for the seat vacated by
Abraham Ribicoff, and in Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Illinois and North Dakota. In
addition, incumbents lost primaries in Alabama, Alaska, Florida and New York,
although in New York the incumbent Republican, Jacob K. Javits, is running on
the Liberal Party ballot line.

KEY HOUSE RACES

In the House, both the majority leader, Jim Wright, Democrat of Texas, and the
majority whip, John Brademas, Democrat of Indiana, face vigorous Republican
challenges. Mr. Wright is opposed by Jim Bradshaw, and Mr. Brademas by John P.
Hiler. Both Republicans seek to portray the Democrats as ultra-liberal.

Similarly, Representative Harold T. Johnson, Democrat of California, chairman of
the Public Works Committee, is in a tight race against State Assemblyman Eugene
A. Chappie, a Republican. And Representative Morris K. Udall, Democrat of
Arizona, and chairman of the Interior Committee, is in a tight race against
Richard H. Huff, a real estate developer.

Representative James C. Corman, Democrat of California, and a senior member of
the Ways and Means Committee, faces a vigorous challenge by Bobbi Fiedler, a
member of the Los Angeles School Board and a foe of busing, which is the
principal issue.

KEY GOVERNOR RACES

In the governership races, John D. Rockefeller 4th, a Democratic incumbent, is
waging a lavishly financed campaign against former Gov. Arch A. Moore, a
Republican.

In Missouri, Gov. Joseph P. Teasdale, a Democrat, is in a close race against
former Gov. Christopher S. Bond, a Republican.  In Washington state, James A.
McDermott, who defeated the incumbent, Dixy Lee Ray, in the Democratic primary,
is in a close contest against King County Executive John Spellman, a Republican.

And in New Hampshire, there will be a rerun of the 1976 contest in which Meldrim
Thomson Jr., a conservative Republican, was defeated by Hugh J. Gallen, a
Democrat.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 5, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REPUBLICAN MAJORITY IS POSSIBLE IN SENATE, THE FIRST TIME IN 26 YEARS

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1101 words


Bolstered by a conservative tide and a sweep by Ronald Reagan, Republicans cut
deeply into the Democrats' Senate majority yesterday and appeared within
striking distance of ending 26 years of Democratic control.

''If this trend continues, we may very well control one house of the Congress
for the first time in a quarter of a century,'' Mr.  Reagan told cheering
supporters in a victory speech early this morning.

The changing party alignment and the lingering effects of tough reelection
campaigns were expected to give a more conservative coloration to the incoming
97th Congress. That could affect the outcome of hitherto close votes on military
spending, social programs and the controversy surrounding Federal abortion
payments.

Party control of the Senate could well rest with Harry F. Byrd Jr.  of Virginia,
an independent who has previously cast his lot with the Democrats, and with
Edward Zorinsky, Democrat of Nebraska, formerly a Republican.

It was a disastrous day for liberal Democrats, women who had won major party
nominations and some veteran members of Congress.  In three contests that
attracted national attention, Senators Birch Bayh of Indiana, George McGovern of
South Dakota and John C. Culver of Iowa went down to defeat, all by conservative
Republicans. They and other liberal Democrats had been designated for defeat
last spring by national conservative groups and opponents of the Medicaid
abortion payments.

Mr. Bayh was ousted by Representative Dan Quayle, Mr. McGovern by Representative
James Abdnor, and Mr. Culver by Charles E. Grassley.  In Idaho, Frank Church, a
Democrat who is chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, and who also was
designated for defeat by the conservative groups, was trailing Representative
Steven D. Symms, another conservative Republican.

Senator Warren G. Magnuson, Democrat of Washington, who turned 75 years of age
on Election Day, also was defeated, at the hands of the State Attorney General,
Slade Gordon, a Republican.

Mr. Magnuson, who came to Washington in l937 as a House member, had stressed the
advantages of seniority in his quest for a seventh Senate term. He is chairman
of the Appropriations Committee, which helps control Federal spending.

Another elder statesman of the Senate, Barry Goldwater, the conservative who is
regarded by many as the founder of the modern Republican party, was locked in a
tight race against Bill Schulz, a Democrat.

A Nine-Seat Target

The Senate is now made up of 58 Democrats, 4l Republicans and one independent. A
switch of nine seats would thus give Republicans control of the chamber.

Of the five women who had won nominations, only one, Paula Hawkins, a
conservative Republican in Florida, had won. She defeated Bill Gunter, the
Democratic candidate.

Her victory will double the number of women in the Senate, since there is now
only one, Nancy Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas.  Three others were defeated -
Elizabeth Holtzman in New York and Mary Gojack in Nevada, both Democrats, and
Mary Louise Foust in Kentucky, a Republican.

The fifth woman who had won a major party nomination, Mary Estill Buchanan, a
Republican, was in a close contest against Gary Hart, the Democratic incumbent
from Colorado.

In Alabama, Jeremiah Denton, a retired admiral who was a prisoner of war in
North Vietnam, and a Republican who had the strong support of the Moral
Majority, defeated Jim Folsom Jr., son of the former Governor.

In Oklahoma, State Senator Don Nickles, a conservative Republican who was also
backed by the Moral Majority, defeated Andy Coats, a Democrat, in a contest for
the seat being vacated by Henry Bellmon, a Republican.

In Maryland, Senator Charles McC. Mathias Jr., a liberal Republican, won easily
in his quest for a third term.

Incumbents Re-elected

Democratic incumbents who were re-elected included Herman E.  Talmadge of
Georgia, chairman of the Agriculture Committee, who had been denounced by his
colleagues for financial misconduct; John Glenn of Ohio; Wendell H. Ford of
Kentucky and Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina.

In addition, Illinois elected its Democratic Secretary of State, Alan J. Dixon,
to the seat being vacated by Adlai E. Stevenson 3d, a Democrat, who is expected
to run for Governor.

In Connecticut, Christopher J. Dodd, a Democrat, won a seat over James L.
Buckley, former United States Senator from New York.  The political realignment
in the 97th Congress is expected to stress practical approaches rather than
ideology.  ''The Democratic Party is redefining itself,'' said Representative
Morris K. Udall, Democrat of Arizona, himself in a tough fight for re-election.
''You'll see a generation of problem solvers, not ideologues.''

At a Republican victory party in the ballroom of the Washington Hilton, Senator
Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee, the minority leader, predicted a Republican
majority in the Senate. Calling the vote results ''the biggest, most historic
political event of this century,'' Mr. Baker declared amid great cheering, ''I
smell a landslide.''

34 Seats at Stake

Of 34 Senate seats at stake in yesterday's election, 24 are now held by
Democrats and 10 by Republicans. Incumbent Senators chose not to seek
re-election in Connecticut, Illinois, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania and North Dakota.
In addition, incumbents lost party primaries in Alabama, Alaska, Florida and New
York, although in New York Senator Jacob K. Javits was on the Liberal Party's
ballot line.

On the other hand, in the House the Republicans could only hope to build for a
takeover in 1982 or 1984. All 435 seats in that chamber were at stake in today's
elections. Democrats held 273, Republicans 159, and there were three vacancies,
all of them from seats that were Democratic.

Targets of Conservatives

In the Senate races, attention focused on the liberals, who were accused of
being out of step with their constituents. A few elder statesmen such as Mr.
Magnuson also were under attack, accused of having outlived their usefulness.

The National Conservative Political Action Committee had pledged a
million-dollar advertising campaign against six Senators: Mr. Bayh, Mr. Church,
Mr. Culver and Mr. McGovern; Alan Cranston of California, the majority whip, and
Thomas F. Eagleton of Missouri.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 5, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

RIVAL YOUTH GANGS BLAMED FOR JAPAN'S RISING VIOLENCE

BYLINE: By HENRY SCOTT STOKES

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 632 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Nov. 4


Last week a group of masked men in helmets attacked five members of a rival
student group in broad daylight on a quiet Tokyo side street and beat them to
death with iron bars and heavy hammers.

After a furious two-minute assault, the killers fled, and members of the extreme
leftist Chukaku group later phoned newspapers to claim responsibility for the
murders. Both groups have hundreds of members and were founded in the late
1960's, at the height of student demonstrations against the Government and the
Vietnam War.

So far, 80 students have been killed and 4,496 injured in 11 years, a
significant number in a nation where violence is rare. A Justice Ministry report
said there were 10 times as many murders in New York as in Tokyo in recent
years.

But there has been an increase in killings of and by students since the
mid-1970's and, although the police solve the vast majority of other murder
cases, there have been few arrests in the student killings. In 26 murder cases
involving the radical groups since 1976, only one arrest has been made.

Leaders Without Specific Aims

The turning toward violence came in the late 1960's, after the failure of the
huge demonstrations led by the leftists, whose student leaders were arrested and
replaced by a new generation of leaders without specific political aims. These
new leaders began to concentrate on battles for power such as that between the
Chukaku group and its main rival, the Kakumaru, and a third group called
Kakurokyo.

The killings began in 1969 when Chukaku members tortured a student from a rival
group and left him dying, from injuries apparently inflicted with awls or
similar instruments, on the steps of a Tokyo hospital.

The struggles have been marked by extraordinary brutality, as in the hard winter
of 1971-72, when leftists hiding in the mountains north of the capital staged
several ritual killings, some involving the murder of a brother or sister.

The police, unable to halt the killings, have concentrated on defending the
targets, for the leftists still sometimes unite in their attacks. For example,
the opening of Tokyo's new international airport two years ago inspired violent
demonstrations in which radicals and local farmers were pitted against thousands
of helmeted riot policemen in battles lasting several weeks.

No Plan to Reduce Guard

A spokesman for the police said there was still no plan to reduce the guard. The
first sight that greets travelers after they leave the airport by bus is of
policemen armed with staves and silhouetted against bamboo groves. Large
yellow-and-black barriers partly block the expressway, and the police stand
ready to cut off access to the airport with armored buses if radicals renew the
attack.

Another concern of the police is the possibility of renewed action overseas or
in Japan by the Red Army, a group formed in Beirut, Lebanon. The army's last
major action, the hijacking of a Japan Air Lines plane three years ago, resulted
in the Government paying a ransom of $6 million and freeing several Red Army
leaders from prisons.

''Since then, things were quiet,'' said a former police official, ''but we are
concerned that they may quietly plan something, like an attack on a member of
the imperial family or hijacking of a plane into Narita airport.''

The police fear further action by the Red Army, which is said to have a score of
active members, financed mainly by Libya. The police also worry about urban
guerrilla attacks, such as the bombing of the headquarters of the Mitsubishi
industrial group in 1974, by isolated groups that do not belong to known student
factions like the Chukaku.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 5, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HANDLING OF HOSTAGE ISSUE ALTERS U.S. IMAGE ABROAD

BYLINE: By WILLIAM BORDERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1100 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Nov. 4


The hostage crisis and the way it has been handled have brought about basic
changes in the way the United States Government is viewed by its friends abroad.

In ministries and embassies all over the world, diplomats and Government leaders
were expressing relief today at the signs from Teheran that the long ordeal
might be entering its final phase. But at the same time, they look back over the
past year with uncertainty.

Among the major powers, in particular, there has been sympathy for the United
States' plight and admiration for its restraint in dealing with the provocation.
But there is also widespread anxiety, which a South American diplomat accredited
to London expressed this way:

''With the hostages, we have seen American frustration and failure even more
clearly than we did in Vietnam. The whole affair has made us question some
standard assumptions about the way the world is ordered.''

Some Common Themes Emerge

One year after the takeover of the American Embassy, interviews by
correspondents of The New York Times in various parts of the world indicate a
reaction that is still quite varied. But these common themes emerge:

- Apprehension about the seizure of diplomats as a growing tactic of terrorism,
since the Iran crisis has shown that it can be highly effective.

- Doubt about the reliability of the United States as the guardian of world
peace, especially after the failure of the rescue attempt in April.

- Concern that American foreign policy, especially in the Middle East, is being
dominated by the hostage question.  ''We realize that the matter of the hostages
is the last concern of the American President on going to bed at night and his
first concern on getting up,'' a European said. ''That couldn't help but affect
the way he looks at the rest of the world.''

Giving voice to a feeling that seems to be widely shared, Lord Carrington, the
British Foreign Secretary, has openly expressed frustration at his inability to
convince the Americans that the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan last
December was of far greater geopolitical significance - and a much greater
threat to world peace - than the seizure of the hostages the month before.

''Of course the American preoccupation is entirely understandable and we deeply
sympathize with it,'' said a British diplomat. ''But we just think that it has
been wrong, and even dangerous, if it blinds the Americans to the real danger
posed by what happened in Afghanistan.''

A Western diplomat in Madrid speculated that one reason United States reaction
to the Soviet move into Afghanistan was not swifter and bolder was that the
Americans were, at the time, quietly bargaining for Soviet help on the hostages
and did not want to upset the talks.

Warnings of Overreaction

In France, Raymond Aron, the writer, observed that ''if the President makes his
main object the health of 50 of his compatriots rather than the prestige and
authority of his republic, he necessarily condemns himself to semiparalysis.''

And even the Iranian revolutionaries, as ignorant of the depth of feeling in the
United States as the average American is of the depth of anti-Shah sentiment in
Iran, view President Carter's concern for the hostages as an overreaction.

''The hostages! The hostages!'' an Iranian diplomat in Asia said with
irritation, berating an American journalist for raising the question. ''All you
people think about is the hostages! Why not let that issue rest a while, and we
will talk instead about the crimes committed against our people by the Shah.''

In the past few days, officials of governments friendly to the United States
have heartily welcomed the increasing signs that the long ordeal might be almost
over, not just for humanitarian reasons but also so that they could get back to
other international concerns that have been overshadowed by the hostage crisis.

''It will be a relief not to think of America and Iran always in terms of this
particular problem,'' said an Asian diplomat who tries to maintain good
relations with both sides.

This fall, in the weeks since war broke out between Iran and Iraq, Arab
diplomats have been expressing concern about any deal that the United States
might be about to make to supply Iran with military spare parts after the
hostages are released. In this view, new cooperation between Washington and
Teheran would amount to involvement in the war against Iraq and would be another
indication of President Carter's tendency to judge everything in terms of the
hostages.

''Any substantial American arms deliveries to Iran could lead to more Soviet
arms going to Iraq,'' warned the London weekly The Observer. And that, it said,
could upset the entire region.

In a statement published in Baghdad last week, Iraq warned that it would
consider any arms deal between the Americans and the Iranians to be a sign that
the United States had abandoned its neutrality in the war, ''irrespective of the
excuses given to cover such an act.''

''What concerns Iraq is that the superpowers maintain their neutrality,'' said
Foreign Minister Saadun Hamadi.  Over the last year, it has generally been the
smaller, less powerful countries that have derided American inaction as a sign
of weakness. Thus in Pakistan, President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq and the generals
who help him rule make little secret of their contempt for President Carter's
policy of caution and restraint.

By contrast, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain says, both in public
and in private, that the United States has shown strength by not being bellicose
and threatening in the crisis. And she speaks privately of lying awake at night
wondering what she would do if she were in the position of President Carter.

''The Americans are our friends, and when your friends are in trouble, you do
what you can to help,'' Prime Minister Thatcher has said several times about the
hostage crisis. She is known to have been deeply disappointed that the British
Parliament refused to impose on the Iranians economic sanctions as tough as
those that she first proposed.

Mrs. Thatcher also declined to join some other world leaders in criticizing the
United States for the attempt to rescue the hostages in April, or for not
consulting its allies about it in advance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 5, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HIGHLIGHTS OF KEY RACES FOR THE UNITED STATES SENATE

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words


(COLORADO)

Senator Gary Hart, 42, a Democrat elected to his first term as a liberal and foe
of the Vietnam war, is using testimonials from Senator Barry Goldwater and
William F. Buckley, the conservative journalist, in his re-election campaign
against Mary Estill Buchanan, 45, a moderate Republican. Mrs. Buchanan, a
maverick who won a primary election with relative ease, opposes a tax reduction
until the budget is balanced and, for environmental reasons, a crash synthetic
fuel program.

With reports from 75 percent of the state's precincts, the tally was:

Hart429,793 Buchanan413,600

(FLORIDA)

Bill Gunter, 46, the state insurance commissioner who defeated Senator Richard
Stone in the Democratic primary, faces Paula Hawkins, 53, a Republican who is a
former state public service commissioner. Mrs. Hawkins, one of several female
Senate candidates, combines a reputation as a consumer advocate with
conservative stands on many social and fiscal issues. Mr. Gunter, a moderate
Democrat, is a strong campaigner in a state in which Republicans have won only
one Senate race this century.

With reports from 90 percent of the state's precincts, the tally was: Hawkins
Gunter

(IDAHO)

Senator Frank Church, 56, a liberal Democrat who is chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee, is opposed in his bid for a fifth term by Representative
Steven D. Symms, a conservative Republican.  Senator Church is one of the
targets of the national conservatives' campaign against liberals. Mr. Symms was
accused of being pro-Libyan because of his promotion of sales of Idaho products
to Libya and of being too closely linked with Nelson Bunker Hunt, the silver
speculator who resigned from Mr. Symms's finance committee.

With reports from 64 percent of the state's precincts, the tally was:

Symms126,039 Church113,585

(INDIANA)

Senator Birch Bayh, 52, a Democrat who is a prime target of conservative
political action groups in his quest for a fourth term, is opposed by
Representative Dan Quayle, 33, a Republican serving his second term in the
House. Mr. Bayh, a liberal, is pitted against one of the House's most consistent
conservatives. No Indiana Senator has served more than three terms, and Ronald
Reagan's popularity in the state is expected to help Mr. Quayle. Mr. Bayh ran a
strong campaign but was unable to break the three-term jinx.

With reports from 90 percent of the state's precincts, the tally was: Quayle

Bayh899,897

(IOWA)

Senator John C. Culver, 48, a Democrat, has campaigned across the state as an
unabashed, unashamed liberal, against Representative Charles E. Grassley. Mr.
Culver, a prime target of national conservatives, showed a 17-point deficit in a
poll last June by The Des Moines Register. Since then, however, his vigorous
campaign style was given credit for closing the gap. Mr. Grassley and Mr. Culver
represent one of the most clearcut conservative-versus-liberal contests anywhere
in the nation.

With reports from 83 percent of the state's precincts, the tally was:

Grassley626,768 Culver534,454

(NEW HAMPSHIRE)

Senator John A. Durkin of New Hampshire, 44-year-old Democrat who narrowly won
election to his first term, faces Republican Warren Rudman, 49, the former state
Attorney General. Mr. Durkin, an occasionally unpredictable man, is a liberal
who strongly supported Senator Edward M. Kennedy's Presidential bid, but
placates conservatives by attacking Soviet expansionism and big oil. Mr.
Rudman, who set up a consumer protection unit, portrays himself as a ''good
government'' candidate.

With reports from 81 percent of the state's precincts, the tally was:

Rudman145,717 Durkin131,586

(PENNSYLVANIA)

In an east-west contest, an open Senate seat in Pennsylvania has pitted Pete
Flaherty, 55, a Democrat who was the Mayor of Pittsburgh and serrved as Deputy
Attorney General, against Arlen Specter, 50, a Republican who was District
Attorney of Philadelphia. Mr. Specter seeks to identify Mr. Flaherty with the
Carter Administration, while the Democrat seeks to link the Republican to Ronald
Reagan.

With reports from 91 percent of the state's precincts, the tally was: Specter
Flaherty

(SOUTH DAKOTA)

Senator George McGovern, 58, the Democratic Presidential nominee in 1972, seeks
a fourth term against Representative James Abdnor, a conservative Republican, in
a state that is considered conservative in its outlook, Mr. McGovern is a prime
target of national conservatives. His support of federally funded abortions has
hurt him with the state's Roman Catholic voters, who make up 20 percent of the
population. Mr. Abdnor once had a lead of 25 points in polls, but this margin
had apparently been declining.

With reports from 77 percent of the state's precincts, the tally was:

Abdnor123,006 McGovern 88,274

(VERMONT)

Patrick J. Leahy, 40, the first Democratic Senator to be elected in Vermont, is
opposed by Stewart Ledbetter, 47, a moderate Republican. Mr. Ledbetter, a former
banker, has charged Mr. Leahy with voting to weaken the nation's defense and
supporting the President's economic policies. Mr. Leahy contends that he has
merely opposed waste and inefficiency in the Pentagon. The Senator's
chairmanship of the Agriculture Subcommittee on Rural Development has bolstered
his prestige.

With reports from 85 percent of the state's precincts, the tally was:

Leahy 76,858 Ledbetter 75,030

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 6, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Favorable Reaction in Israel

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 234 words

DATELINE: TEL AVIV, Nov. 5


Official Israeli reaction to Reagan's election was discreet but the result was
widely viewed as ''good for Israel.'' Moshe Arens, chairman of Parliament's
Foreign Affairs and Security Committee, said that ''the elections ended the
post-Vietnam era of instability, of suspicion of Government and Washington, of a
desire to look at the world through rose-colored glasses, not to recognize the
true threat of the Soviet Union, not to recognize the implications of the energy
crisis, to look at the Middle East through rose-colored glasses and not to
recognize the true nature of the Arab world.''

In an interview, Prime Minister Begin refused to say whether the election
results were good for Israel.  In a formal message of congratulations, Mr. Begin
wrote to Mr.  Reagan, ''We believe in your friendship to Israel and look forward
to close and fruitful cooperation between our countries for the cause of liberty
and peace.''

To President Carter he wrote expressing thanks for his ''friendship, great
contribuzion to Israeli security and the incessant efforts to bring about peace
in the Middle East.''

Mr. Begin is going to United States next week unofficially and will see Mr.
Carter in Washington Wednesday. The Israeli Embassy has been asked to explore
the possibility of a meeting with Mr. Reagan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 6, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SIX OF THE MANY NEW FACES THAT WILL BE SEEN IN THE NEXT SESSION OF CONGRESS

BYLINE: By Steven V. Roberts

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1837 words


Paula Hawkins

When Paula Hawkins is asked to explain her opposition to the proposed Federal
equal rights amendment, she has a stock answer: ''Women already have the upper
hand.''

That was certainly true today, at least in Mrs. Hawkins's case. As a result of
her strong victory in Florida, she will become the second woman in the United
States Senate, joining Nancy Landon Kassebaum of Kansas on the Republican side
of the aisle. Moreover, Mrs. Hawkins is the first woman in the Senate's history
to be elected to that august body whose career was not based on her relationship
to her husband or a male relative.

At a news conference today, the Senator-elect said that women ''can identify
with me as a leader.'' This was rejected by feminist groups at the capital, who
view her election with alarm. But Paula Hawkins clearly fits into the mainstream
of Reagan Republicanism. She stressed at the news conference her support for
more military spending, less government red tape and a ''sunset law'' that would
require government agencies to justify their existence periodically.

Mrs. Hawkins, who was born in Salt Lake City 53 years ago, has six
grandchildren. She is also stunningly photogenic, and observers of capital mores
are already tabbing her as a coming star on the Washington social scene.

Only eight years ago, her big role at the Republican National Convention at
Miami Beach was to organize a social event called the Cuban Calypso Carnival.
But she moved on to weightier matters when she was elected chairman of the
Florida Public Service Commission, where she built a reputation as a zealous
consumer advocate.

When Mrs. Hawkins, who will be Florida's second Republican Senator since
Reconstruction, was asked today how women's rights could be advanced, she had a
ready answer: ''Elect more women to the Senate.''

Jeremiah Denton

It is fashionable to say that America has no heroes anymore. But consider
Jeremiah Andrew Denton Jr.  As a Navy flier in Vietnam, he was shot down early
in the war and spent more than seven years as a prisoner of war. Once, when he
was interviewed for a Japanese television program, Mr. Denton blinked his eyes
in Morse code to spell out the word ''torture.'' When the first group of
prisoners was released in 1973, they chose Mr. Denton as their spokesman, and as
he stepped off the plane in the Philippines he electrified the country with his
first words: ''God bless America.''

On Tuesday Jeremiah Denton, who never ran for political office before, was
elected to the Senate as a Republican from Alabama. The Senator-elect, backed by
The Moral Majority, is likely to add a strong voice in Washington in support of
one of Ronald Reagan's major themes: a return to traditional family values.

After returning home from Vietnam, Mr. Denton ran the Armed Forces Staff College
for a while, then resigned and formed a group called Coalition for Decency. The
organization tried to get television sponsors to back programs that the retired
admiral considered decent and religious. Despite accusations by some people that
he was trying to be a ''self-appointed censor,'' he remained undeterred.

Several other former prisoners of war have tried to convert their celebrity into
political success, but Mr. Denton is the first to succeed. His brand of
fundamentalism clearly appealed to many voters. And he was probably helped by
the hostage crisis in Iran, which served to remind voters what he had endured in
enemy hands.

In the campaign Mr. Denton played heavily on his hero image, in a manner
reminiscent of Dwight D. Eisenhower's campaign in 1952. And when he becomes
Alabama's junior Senator, Mr. Denton will not have to blink his eyes to transmit
his message.

Arlen Specter

No one can accuse Arlen Specter of losing heart easily.  Mr. Specter ran for
Mayor of Philadelphia in 1967 and lost. He ran for Pennsylvania's Republican
senatorial nomination in 1976 and lost. He ran for his party's gubernatorial
nomination in 1978, and he lost again.

But last spring, Arlen Specter's luck changed. He won the Republican nomination
for the United States Senate, and wound up facing Peter F. Flaherty, a former
Democratic Mayor of Pittsburgh, who also was a three-time loser. Somebody had to
win, and yesterday Mr. Specter did.

While Mr. Specter's politics are somewhat more moderate than Ronald Reagan's,
the 50-year-old Senator-elect made his reputation as a hard-nosed prosecutor in
Philadelphia and should not feel out of place if he takes a seat on the
Judiciary Committee under the possible chairmanship of Senator Strom Thurmond of
South Carolina.

Sensing victory in the Pennsylvania race, the Republicans poured hundreds of
thousands of dollars into the Specter cause, and the perennial loser was
suddenly admired by the same people who had been scorning him for more than a
decade.

Mr. Specter adapted well to his new-found popularity, campaigning diligently for
such Republican principles as a quick tax cut and reduced government regulation.

As a Jew, Mr. Specter was also able to cut into the traditionally Democratic
Jewish vote in the Philadelphia area, and his election means that five Jews will
sit in the Senate next year. In the last session there were seven, but three are
leaving: Senator Abraham A.  Ribicoff of Connecticut, who is retiring; and
Senators Richard Stone of Florida, who lost in a Democratic runoff last month,
and Jacob K.  Javits of New York, who lost Tuesday when he ran on the Liberal
Party line.

Mervyn Dymally It is always a small landmark in American politics when a
Congressional district elects a black candidate for the first time.  For more
than a generation there were only two black Congressmen, representing Harlem and
Chicago's South Side. That started to change in the mid-1950's, and when the
Voting Rights Act was adopted in 1965 black representation increased
substantially. In the last Congress 15 districts had black Congressmen, but only
one - California's Eighth Congressional District, represented by Ronald V.
Dellums - did not have a black majority.

Now two districts that are mainly white have sent a black to Washington. In
Tuesday's Congressional elections California's 31st District, which covers
southern Los Angeles County, chose Mervyn Dymally to replace Representative
Charles H. Wilson. But it was not the first time that Mr. Dymally had ridden
white votes to victory.

Mr. Dymally, a native of Trinidad who immigrated to the United States in 1946,
became California's first black Lieutenant Governor in 1974, and bigger things
were expected of him. But his reputation as something of a financial
wheeler-dealer dimmed his image, and he lost his re-election bid four years
later.

But Mr. Dymally was always regarded as an effective politician, and his own
legal problems paled significantly when Mr. Wilson was implicated in a kickback
scheme during the primary campaign earlier this year, resulting in his censure
by Congress.

When Mr. Dymally takes his seat in Congress next January he will be joined by
three other black freshmen, Harold Washington and Gus Savage, both of Chicago,
and George Crockett of Detroit. Like Mr.  Dymally, Mr. Savage replaces a white
lawmaker, and the Congressional Black Caucus will have 17 voting members next
session, an increase of two.

Don Nickles

Don Nickles did not exactly work his way up through the political ranks. ''I
laughed when he announced for the Senate,'' admitted one chastened Oklahoma
lawyer, ''but I'm not laughing today.''

Mr. Nickles, who is only 31 years old and is serving his first term in the
Oklahoma Senate, evoked considerable hilarity when he entered the Republican
senatorial primary against two better-known and better-financed rivals. But Mr.
Nickles sensed the groundswell of conservative outrage that was running through
the country long before it crested, and in Tuesday's elections he rode that
tidal wave to Washington.

The Senator-elect eptiomizes what has been called the ''blow-dry generation'' of
rising Republican politicians -handsome, articulate, rigidly conservative in
ideology but ultramodern in his use of advertising and news media technqiues.
Although he is a Roman Catholic, Mr. Nickles attracted the strong support of the
state's many fundamentalist Protestant churches. At times he seemed to imply
that he had the endorsement of the Supreme Being.

In his campaign this fall, some of the state's more established churches signed
a statement objecting to what they regarded as the extreme, religiously based
appeals of the Nickles camp. A backlash was expected, but it never amounted to
much; Oklahoma went back to the basics.

Mr. Nickles, a native of Ponca City in northern Oklahoma, returned home after
college, refurbished a small family business and plunged into politics. Like
many young Democrats of recent years, he realized that that there was no need to
court party professionals or wait his turn as long as he could find a way to
appeal directly to the voters. In his one term in the State Senate, Mr. Nickles
aligned himself with the extreme right, working actively for a constitutional
amendment to ban abortion and advocating the repeal of a vast number of Federal
programs.

Lynn Martin

Not every Republican newcomer to Congress will be a hard rightwinger, and,
fittingly enough, one of the more moderate freshmen is a woman, State Senator
Lynn Martin of Illinois. She will represent Illinois' 16th Congressional
District, succeeding Representative John B. Anderson, the Republican who ran for
the Presidency as an independent candidate and who often swam against the tide
of his own party. Mrs. Martin seems ready to do the same.

For example, she supports the proposed Federal equal rights amendment and
Federal funds for abortion, two positions that are opposed by her party's
platform. But anybody who knows Lynn Martin does not expect that to stop her.
''She's a very straight-talkling, tough woman, but not offensively so,'' said
one political expert who helped raise money for her. ''And she's very savvy.''

However, when asked to describe herself recently, Mrs. Martin mentioned her
other career, as the mother of two daughters (she is now divorced). ''It made
caring a part of my life,'' she said. One female politician who heard that
comment said, ''Men don't ever say anything like that.''

The Representative-elect, who will be 41 years old next month, started out as a
teacher in Rockford, Ill. Mrs. Martin, the daughter of Irish Democrats in
Chicago, turned Republican and started her political career by running for the
County Council in 1972. Election to the State Legislature followed quickly. When
she announced her candidacy for Mr. Anderson's seat, feminist organizations in
Washington helped her win a tough primary election.

Mrs. Martin said recently that, as a moderate Republican and as a woman, she had
always been an ''outsider'' in politics. But when she gets to Washington, she
intends to shout loud enough to be heard inside the halls of power.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Paula Hawkins photo of Jeremiah Denton photo of
Arlen Specter photo of Mervyn Dymally photo of Don Nickles photo of Lynn Martin

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 6, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CHURCH, CHIEF OF SENATE FOREIGN RELATIONS PANEL, DEFEATED

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 604 words

DATELINE: BOISE, Idaho, Nov. 5


Senator Frank Church, whose 24-year career in the Senate ended in defeat early
this morning for want of 4,316 votes, stood in his backyard amid falling amber
leaves today and conceded the election.

''The conservatives are in charge now,'' Mr. Church said softly to a small group
of bleary-eyed supporters. ''This is what they wanted, and the people have given
it to them.''

Bolstered by the Ronald Reagan landslide, a surge of statewide conservatism and
a group of right-wing organizations that poured thousands of dollars into Idaho,
Representative Stephen D. Symms, 42 years old, a four-term conservative
Republican, defeated Mr. Church, the 56-year-old liberal chairman of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, with 49.7 percent of the vote to 48.7. Larry
Fullm@er, the Libertarian candidate, a businessman from Pocatello, received 1.6
percent of the vote.

Long, Nasty and Expensive Race

The race was the longest and most expensive political campaign in Idaho's
history. Senator Church and Representative Symms spent a total of almost $4
million. Mr. Church spent $360,000 in his 1974 re-election campaign.

Both sides attributed Mr. Symms' squeaky victory to the heavy turnout for Mr.
Reagan, who captured about 76 percent of the popular vote here. ''After 70
percent, the Reagan vote was the decisive factor - even in this ticket-splitting
state,'' said Forrest Church, one of the Senator's sons.

J. Phil Reberger, Mr. Symms' campaign manager, agreed but added that the voters'
''message went far beyond Jimmy Carter.'' ''People voted their pocketbooks,'' he
said. ''They were tired of printing-press money, high interest rates and
inflation, they thought it was time for a change in the Congress.''

Blitz by Conservative Groups

Mr. Church attributed his defeat in part to a pre-election weekend blitz by
conservative groups. Antiabortionists distributed pamphlets urging his defeat at
churches. And conservative groups blanketed television and newspapers with
anti-Church advertising.

Mr. Church was forced to open his re-election bid in January, 1979, after
several of these groups designated him and five of his liberal colleagues for
defeat. For 21 months, he was under an incessant barrage from, among others, the
National Conservative Political Action Committee, which spent about $278,000 on
advertising here. Much of the advertising, Church supporters contended,
distorted Mr. Church's record.

Mr. Reberger dismissed Mr. Church's charges that Mr. Symms and his allies had
waged the dirtiest campaign in state history.  ''The martyr role is a favorite
of his,'' he said of Mr. Church.  ''Anytime you talked about his record, he
claimed it was a dirty campaign.''

Precarious Political Lifestyle

Mr. Church, a moderate liberal, has long been something of an anomaly in Idaho,
one of the most conservative states. The first Democrat to be elected to the
Senate from Idaho, Mr. Church was reelected three times even though he
frequently took stands that were unpopular at home, such as his opposition to
the war in Vietnam. Some analysts thought that the Reagan landslide had finally
caused Mr.  Church's precarious political lifestyle to catch up with him.

Mr. Church mourned the defeat of many liberal Democratic colleagues.  ''But it's
somewhat consoling,'' he said today, ''to go out in such good company.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Frank Church photo of Steven D. Symms

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 6, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'FIFTH OF JULY,' TALLEYS 33 YEARS LATER

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1311 words


LAST season, when Lanford Wilson won universal acclaim for ''Talley's Folly,''
some theatergoers wondered what the excitement was about. The play was a
charming two-character waltz - perfect perhaps, but also kind of small. No such
charge can be leveled against ''Fifth of July,'' the Wilson comedy that arrived
on Broadway last night. Mr. Wilson has poured the full bounty of his gifts into
this work, and they are the gifts of a major playwright. ''Fifth of July'' is a
densely packed yet buoyant outpouring of empathy, poetry and humor, all shaped
into a remarkable vision. That vision is Mr.  Wilson's own,
morning-after-Independence Day dream of a democratic America - a community with
room for everyone, an enlightened place where the best ideals can bloom.

Indeed, ''Fifth of July'' is so rich that it makes unusually rough demands on
those who stage it. In 1978, Marshall W. Mason, the foremost interpreter of Mr.
Wilson's work, directed an exemplary production of the play at the Circle
Repertory Company. Mr. Mason is also in charge of the new, somewhat tightened
version at the New Apollo, but he has not again delivered a fully realized
''Fifth of July.'' To put it bluntly, Mr. Mason has made some serious casting
errors, starting with Christopher Reeve in the pivotal role originated by
William Hurt. While the play's beauty and giddy spirit are still evident, an
upsetting measure of passion has been lost.

The play is part of a projected trilogy about the Talley family.  Though written
first, ''Fifth of July'' takes place in 1977, 33 years to the day after
''Talley's Folly.'' The setting is the Talley farmhouse in Lebanon, Mo., which
has been resplendently designed by John Lee Beatty. This expansive,
weatherbeaten homestead blends the sensibilities of Chekhov and Mark Twain - and
so does the play. The atmosphere of Mr. Wilson's comedy is suffused with the
idyllic sounds of heartland America, from the murmur of crickets to the snapping
of holiday fireworks. The dialogue flies on flaky, latter-day crackerbarrel wit.
Yet, for all this festiveness, Mr. Wilson is speaking of survival and salvation,
loss and hope, birth and death.

The characters are the dispossessed of an era - veterans of the Vietnam War, the
drug culture and the 1960's revolution that failed.  ''Fifth of July'' is about
what happens when the current Talley scion, Kenny (Mr. Reeve), decides to sell
his deteriorating house.  Kenny is a paraplegic Vietnam hero and a homosexual.
His potential buyers, who wish to convert the house into a recording studio, are
two long-lost ex-cronies of his from Berkeley in the 60's: a wealthy aspiring
rock singer, Gwen (Swoosie Kurtz), and her ice-cold husband, John (Jonathan
Hogan). As these old pals along with assorted Talleys reunite and reminisce, it
soon becomes clear that not only the house and the future are at stake, but also
the past. Ken's maimed body, Gwen's drug-sotted dizziness and John's emotional
detachment are all rooted in the political and sexual passions of their tortuous
college menage.

Though these old wounds are all opened, Mr. Wilson always takes a long and
charitable view of both his people and their country. By the end, each lonely
and alienated character has somehow transcended his pain to face a more hopeful
future. And one knows that the Talley legacy, the play's unifying myth, will
survive, too. Mr. Wilson has provided one young character, Kenny's illegitimate
13-year-old niece (Amy Wright), who will grow up to further the family; he has
also given Kenny a botanist lover (Jeff Daniels) who will work to rebuild the
farm. A crowning image of continuity is provided by Aunt Sally (Mary Carver),
the heroine of ''Talley's Folly'' and now a widow in her 60's. When she spreads
her late husband Matt's ashes over the land, the Talley family saga becomes a
life cycle.

On Broadway, it is the play's airborne jokes, rather than its deepest
undercurrents, that fare best. Mr. Wilson's stoned reveries for his most wacky
characters are uproarious, and Miss Kurtz's utterly nutty Gwen almost takes over
the play. Once a haphazard radical who firebombed her family's own copper
company, she is now a madcap hedonist who drips jewelry and spews forth
foul-mouthed, jaded and surprisingly wise opinions on everything from sex to the
Bermuda Triangle. Miss Kurtz nails every laugh.

Yet it's typical of this production that even this gifted actress isn't cast
quite properly. Gwen is not just a source of fun, but also a woman who has
survived a lifetime of ''milestone medical operations.'' Because the hearty Miss
Kurtz looks anything but ravaged, her climactic Act II triumph over her hard
knocks loses dramatic force. A similar problem crops up in the casting of Miss
Wright as the evening's second-generation flower child. Though this actress
delivers her precocious, wise-kid speeches with flair, she is no 13-year-old. As
a consequence, her innocence, pointedly the only innocence in the household,
must carry an unwanted layer of artifice.

In the more sober roles, some of the actors do quite well. The stand-out is Jeff
Daniels as Kenny's tender lover, a doleful, quiet man whose simple love for the
hero gives the play its warm and stable center. As Kenny's sister, another
former Berkeley firebrand, Joyce Reehling captures the conflicts of a radical
who knows her battle is long lost but refuses to relinquish her idealistic
yearnings. Miss Carver's Sally is also sardonic and impassioned, though she
lacks the spark that Trish Hawkins brought to the younger Sally in ''Talley's
Folly.''

But it is Mr. Reeve who should dominate. Kenny is a man who went to Vietnam to
die and who still wants to die. ''Fifth of July'' is most of all the story of
his gradual recommitment to living - as a schoolteacher to children who ''don't
even know where Vietnam is.'' Mr. Reeve works earnestly, and in the later scenes
he lets us see some of Kenny's pain. But by then it's too late. His placid face
never suggests someone who has lost his legs in the hell of Southeast Asia, and
his voice lacks presence and maturity. At most, he gives us the wry surface of
the character.

The fallout of this weightless performance is severe, but it's still hard to
imagine any theatergoer passing up ''Fifth of July.'' Even with a hole in its
center, this evening has more to offer than most. And while it's sad that Mr.
Wilson has been shortchanged in this production, he'll get his due in the long
run. When a writer creates a play like ''Fifth of July,'' he can be sure of many
more productions to come.

The Dispossessed
FIFTH OF JULY, by Lanford Wilson; directed by Marshall W. Mason; setting by John
Lee Beatty; costumes, Laura Crow; lighting by Dennis Parichy; sound by Chuck
London. Presented by Jerry Arrow, Robert Lussier and Warner Theater Productions
Inc. At the New Apollo, 234 West 43d Street.  Kenneth Talley Jr.
..................Christopher Reeve Jed Jenkins
..............................Jeff Daniels John Landis
............................Jonathan Hogan Gwen Landis
.............................Swoosie Kurtz June Talley
............................Joyce Reehling Shirely Talley
.............................Amy Wright Sally Friedman
............................Mary Carver Weston Hurley
............................Danton Stone

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

2 EX-F.B.I. OFFICIALS ARE FOUND GUILTY IN BREAK-INS CASE

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1170 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 6


Two former officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, W. Mark Felt and
Edward S. Miller, were found guilty today of conspiring to violate the
constitutional rights of American citizens by authorizing Government agents to
break into homes secretly, without search warrants, in a hunt for bombing
suspects in 1972 and 1973.

The defendants, standing with their attorneys and facing the jury, showed no
emotion as the foreman announced the verdict in Federal District Court. The jury
of eight women and four men reached its decision after deliberating yesterday
and today for a total of about eight hours.

The maximum penalty for the offense is 10 years in prison and a $10,000 fine.

Test of Bureau Policies

William B. Bryant, chief judge of the Federal District Court here, who presided
over the seven-and-a-half-week trial, set sentencing for Dec. 15. Defense
attorneys said they intended to appeal.

Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller were the highest-ranking officials of the bureau to be
tried on criminal charges since J. Edgar Hoover became Director of the agency in
1924.

The trial had broader significance as a symbolic test of bureau policies and
procedures over nearly three decades with regard to Government power in the
legally murky areas of ''national security'' and ''foreign intelligence.'' The
bureau has adopted rules and guidelines in the last four years aimed at assuring
greater attention by Federal agents to the right of privacy and the civil rights
of individuals.

Defendant Is 'Disappointed'

Mr. Felt, leaving the courtroom, said he was ''very disappointed.'' Mr. Miller
said he doubted that the verdict would send a ''message'' to agents in the
bureau today. ''This is really no surprise,'' Mr.  Miller said. ''You always
have to anticipate this kind of a possibility. It's a tight legal problem.''

Mr. Felt, 67 years old, served in the bureau more than 31 years and was acting
associate director, the second highest official in the bureau, at the time of
the break-ins. Mr. Miller, 56, had a 24-year career in the bureau and was
assistant director in charge of the intelligence division when he authorized the
break-ins.

Mr. Miller reported the break-ins, also known as ''black bag jobs'' or
''surreptitious entries,'' to Mr. Felt in memorandums marked ''Do Not File.''
The memorandums were initialed at the time by both men.

Defense attorneys portrayed their clients as victims of changing times and
changing standards. The prosecutors said that they had tried the case in order
to uphold the Fourth Amendment, which protects individuals against unreasonable
searches and seizures.

L. Patrick Gray 3d, Acting Director of the bureau at the time of the break-ins,
was indicted with Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller on April 10, 1978. Mr. Gray is
awaiting a separate trial on the same conspiracy charge. He has denied approving
the break-ins.

A Justice Department spokesman acknowledged three months ago that the case
against Mr. Gray then seemed ''substantially weaker'' than when he was indicted.
Alan I. Baron, an attorney for Mr. Gray, said today that no new evidence had
come out at the Felt-Miller trial that would strengthen the Government's case
against his client.

Opens Way for Damage Suits

The verdict opens the way for courts to hear civil damage suits filed against
Mr. Felt, Mr. Miller and the Federal Government by people who contend that the
searches violated their civil rights.  Evidence used in the criminal trial may
be sought by plaintiffs in the civil suits. In those suits, Government lawyers
may find themselves in the position of having to defend some of the actions that
the prosecutors denounced in the criminal case.

The one-count indictment accused Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller of approving nine
break-ins at five different addresses in New York and New Jersey, the homes of
relatives and acquaintances of members of the Weather Underground, a militant
antiwar organization. The organization claimed responsibility for bombings at
the United States Capitol, the Pentagon, the State Department and other public
buildings in the early 1970's.

Teams of Federal agents entered and searched the homes without warrants,
photographing any documents with possible clues to the whereabouts of the
fugitives. Prosecutors emphasized that the people who occupied the premises had
not themselves been suspected of crimes. The defense attorneys said that the
Weatherman radicals had many connections with hostile foreign powers, including
Cuba and North Vietnam, and that break-ins had been secretly used by the bureau
for 30 years in foreign intelligence investigations.

Several agents testified that the break-ins did not lead to the capture of any
fugitives.

Question of Authorization

In his instructions to the jury, Judge Bryant appeared to accept many of the
prosecutors' legal arguments. He said that search warrants were required unless
the break-ins were part of a foreign intelligence investigation in which each
entry was personally approved, in advance, by the President or the Attorney
General.

However, Judge Bryant said that the jury could acquit Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller if
it found that the defendants had made an honest ''mistake of law,'' believing
''reasonably and in good faith'' that the President or the Attorney General had
given the F.B.I. Director authority to conduct break-ins as he saw fit in
national security investigations.

The judge also said that, for the break-ins to be legal, the persons whose homes
were searched must all have had a ''significant connection'' with a foreign
power or foreign agents. In most of the break-ins there was apparently no
evidence of such a connection.

Former President Richard M. Nixon and five former Attorneys General tetified at
the trial. Mr. Nixon said that Presidents since Franklin D. Roosevelt had
delegated authority to the head of the bureau to use break-ins while conducting
foreign intelligence and counterespionage investigations.

Huston Plan Recalled

Mr. Nixon said that he had approved the use of break-ins to collect domestic
intelligence in July 1970, when he approved the socalled Huston plan, named for
an aide in the Nixon White House, but the former President said he revoked his
approval four days later because of objections expressed by Mr. Hoover.

Former Attorneys General Herbert Brownell Jr., John N. Mitchell and Richard G.
Kleindienst testified that a President could delegate such authority to the head
of the F.B.I. Mr. Kleindienst, who was Attorney General for most of the time
covered by the indictment, said that if he had known about the break-ins, he
would have required the bureau to obtain his approval in each instance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Edward S. Miller and W. Mark Felt, former
F.B.I. officials

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S BIPARTISANISM--A PROMISING START

BYLINE: By Karl D. Jackson and Paul Seabury

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 881 words

DATELINE: BERKELEY, Calif.


To his credit, Ronald Reagan has correctly perceived that his landslide victory
provides a rare opportunity to create a bipartisan foreign policy coalition, and
has wasted no time in moving in that direction. The 1964 and 1972 elections were
landslides, too. Everyone expected that foreign policy consensus would be
substantial and enduring, yet in a matter of years support vanished. The moral
of '64 and '72, as Mr. Reagan understands, is that a landslide is no time for
''politics as usual.''

Foreign policy has been in crisis since 1968. Watergate and Vietnam produced a
house divided against itself. In the 12 years of confusion, major political
figures and members of the foreign policy Establishment have devoured each
other's ideas rather than sought a solid consensus around which to build
coherent policy. The discord has led to a dangerous decline in credibility
abroad. Our allies question whether we have the will, internal unity, and
consistency required of a mature great power. Other powers question whether
agreements can be consummated with Washington, given the White House's inability
to deliver the goods when treaties reach Congress.  Smaller countries assume
that American commitments will be dependable - if at all - only in the short
run. Friend and foe have correctly perceived our foreign policy as unstable,
unpredictable, undependable. Since Vietnam, Presidents, Cabinet officers, and
national-security advisers have been blamed for this drift and decline. But that
is myopic.

The magnitude of the crises in Iran, Iraq, and Afghanistan, and Americans'
desire for united leadership should enable Mr. Reagan to easily re-establish
executive control over foreign policy - to ''rebuild a bipartisan base for
American foreign policy,'' as he said yesterday. This could be accomplished by
creating, with maximum publicity, a government of national unity. The new
President should staff both the State and Defense Departments and the National
Security Council in a truly bipartisan manner. The overriding aim should be to
create a national coalition incorporating support from non-McGovernite
Democrats, independents, as well as Republicans. This is fundamental. Without
substantial support from the party that lost the election, foreign policy
consensus would soon evaporate; the acid of fratricidal criticism again might
begin its work almost as soon as the Reagan administration took office.

Mr. Reagan must not repeat the Carter Administration's mistakes.  The
parochialism, arrogance, and amateurism of the Georgian ''outsiders'' of 1976
proved self-destructive. Professionalism, competence, bipartisanship,
experience, and a willingness to accomodate the new Congressional establishment
should be hallmarks of the promised ''new beginning.'' To govern successfully,
Mr. Reagan must enlarge his coalition by moving toward a center that shares his
concern about restoring America's credibility in the world. At least several
Democrats of national stature should be in the Cabinet.  Senators Henry M.
Jackson (whom Mr. Reagan has named to his foreign policy advisory committee),
Sam Nunn, Ernest F. Hollings, and Daniel Patrick Moynihan immediately come to
mind as Secretaries of State or Defense. Their perspectives are within reach of
the Presidentelect's; they would bring to the new administration the best
Congressional experience of the party that has dominated Washington for most of
the last half-century. Although some Republican faithful certainly would be
disgruntled, Mr. Reagan's heightened standing in the public-opinion polls would
amply compensate. Bipartisanship is good politics as well as good policy.

Mr. Reagan might further emphasize unity by creating an informal council of
elder statesmen consisting of former Presidents, Secretaries of State and
Defense, national security advisers, and directors of intelligence agencies -
that is, a higher-level group than the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board that
served some recent Presidents. Such a group would be consulted when major
foreign policies are being shaped, and informed in advance about major
initiatives. We do not advocate the devolution of Presidential authority but
seek instead its reinvigoration. Bipartisanship is not a luxury but a necessity.
Experience counts; such a council might help avoid serious early blunders like
the Bay of Pigs. Mobilizing such prestige and expertise, Mr. Reagan could
assemble the power necessary to pursue a foreign policy supported by significant
segments of both parties on Capitol Hill and throughout the country.  If Mr.
Reagan, with his overwhelming mandate, indeed does everything possible to show
bipartisan unity in foreign policy, as he said yesterday that he would, he will
be able to uphold and defend our national interests effectively.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Karl D. Jackson and Paul Seabury are professors of political science at the
University of California, Berkeley.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COURT IN AUSTRALIA CURBS 2 NEWSPAPERS

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 421 words

DATELINE: SYDNEY, Australia, Nov. 8


Acting on a Government request, the High Court handed down its first press
injunctions since World War II today to prevent two newspapers from publishing
secret details of Australia's alliance with the United States.

The injunctions ordered the two newspapers, The Sydney Morning Herald and The
Age of Melbourne, not to print excerpts from a forthcoming book containing
confidential information that could harm Australia's relations with other
countries, a Government attorney said.

Much of the book, titled ''Documents on Australian Defense and Foreign Policy
1968-75,'' concerns Australia's relationship with the United States,
particularly during the Vietnam War.

The book, written by George Munster and Richard Walsh, is scheduled to be
released next week and it was not immediately clear whether the Government,
which refused all further comment in the case, would take action to prevent its
release.

The two newspapers appeared on stands today with blank spaces where the excerpts
were to have been printed.  Both newspapers denied that the articles threatened
national security and the editor of The Age said he would challenge the
injunction, which remains in force until Tuesday.

Other Documents Also Affected

The court order also banned publication of documents on Australia's strategic
defense bases prepared in 1968 by the Department of Defense and of a 1975
regional outlook on Southeast Asia by the Department of Foreign Affairs.

Mr. Munster said that the book included details on the Anzus Treaty, a military
pact involving Australia, New Zealand and the United States. It also examines
Australia's involvement in the Vietnam War.

''On the basis that the material to be published included confidential
Government information, the publication of which would be prejudicial to
Australia's international relations, the Government sought an interim injunction
from the High Court,'' said Attorney General Peter Durack.

''We shall be taking the matter to court at the earliest opportunity,'' Michael
Davie, editor of The Age, said. ''There is no doubt in my mind that the
publication of these documents is in the public interest.

''The documents we proposed publishing in no way would have damaged Australian
security, in our view, though they might perhaps have embarrassed a few public
service employees,'' Mr. Davie said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DISPUTE ON RELIGION RAISED BY CAMPAIGN

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 31, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words


The political campaigns this fall touched off a dispute between religious groups
that goes far beyond the ballot box to central questions of how Christians
should define biblical ethics and how to shape a theology of citizenship. The
debate is expected to continue through many more political seasons.

Early this year, the Christian right, led by such conservative television
evangelists as the Rev. Jerry Falwell and the Rev. James Robison, started a
drive to organize fundamentalists behind candidates who espoused moral
principles that agreed with their own.

A counterattack began in the late stages of the campaign as various spokesmen
and ad hoc groups denounced the assumptions that spurred the conservatives
toward political action.

Political action groups, including Mr. Falwell's Moral Majority, registered
voters and urged the nation to adopt a moral platform built of such planks as
opposition to the proposed Federal equal rights amendment, abortion and civil
rights for homosexuals. Only by legislating the country back to righteousness,
these preachers have declared, can God's judgment be avoided.

Delay in Opposition

Opposition to this outlook was slow in developing for several reasons. For one
thing, liberal churches have been occupied with internal troubles, including a
drop in membership and loss of cohesive purpose. Many once joined in efforts to
fight segregation and end the Vietnam war, but these actions produced a backlash
in the churches and many activists got burned out. In recent years, many have
been dispirited, poorly organized and spread too thinly among a multitude of
causes that congregants often did not well understand.

But the conservatives have raised liberal hackles and a response to the
television preachers has been taking shape in statements, sermons and ecumenical
campaigns to blunt the conservative message.

The counterattack appears to have gained wide public backing. In the latest
Gallup Poll, two out of three respondents said they believed it was wrong for
religious groups to seek the defeat of candidates whose positions on certain
issues did not agree with their own. By the same margin, they said that they
thought Humberto Cardinal Medeiros, Archbishop of Boston, was wrong to tell
parishioners that they should not vote for candidates who favor abortion. Roman
Catholics and Protestants agreed in about the same proportion.

Joy Over Election Results

Tuesday's election results, however, prompted expressions of pleasure from
leaders of evangelical groups. Gary Jarmin, political director of Christian
Voice, said the election ''points to the beginning of a new era,'' and Mr.
Falwell called the results ''the greatest day for the cause of conservatism and
American morality in my adult life.''

Many liberals were initially offended simply by the political slant of the
conservatives and tended to suggest that Mr. Falwell and others were somehow
violating the constitutional guarantee of separation of church and state. But
the arguments shifted away from legalities toward the far more enduring issues
of the correct way to construct a ''Christian'' outlook on moral and political
issues.  While they now concede that the conservatives have a right to try to
influence the elections, they disagree with the presuppositions behind the
activism.

Basically, the liberals, aided by Jewish leaders and key evangelicals who agree
that their fellow evangelicals are a threat, contend that the new Christian
right improperly labels its own views as the only ones that are validly
Christian and therefore implies that its opponents are apostates. It is a
variation of the ''one true church'' complaint once made often against the Roman
Catholic Church.

The liberals also charge the conservatives with an overly simplistic reading of
the Bible. The Washington Interreligious Staff Council, composed of
representatives of 40 religious groups that maintain lobbying offices, said,
''Many in the religious right make claims to knowledge of God's will for our
nation that no Christian is entitled to make.'' It accused the conservatives of
''arrogance, manipulation and subterfuge.''

The Episcopal Bishops of America, in an October pastoral letter, also asserted
that the endorsement of ''particular candidates in the name of God distorts
Christian truth and threatens American religious freedom.'' The bishops added,
''We speak out because the silence of the conventional churches is partly to
blame for the impact of this new coalition of strident voices.''

Southern Baptist Criticism

Similar criticism has come from several well-known evangelical sources. At a
recent interfaith news conference called to combat the conservatives, a former
Southern Baptist Convention president, Jimmy Allen, said that the Christian
right had illegitimately identified ''their political solutions as the Christian
answer and reject as un-Christian those who address the problems' solutions in
another way.''

The National Council of Churches, which represents Protestant and Eastern
Orthodox groups, has also jumped into the fray, declaring, ''There can be
discerned no exclusively 'Christian vote,' nor can 'single issue' political
pressures serve the interests of our total society.''

The faculty of the liberal Union Theological Seminary sounded the most
frequently heard theological basis for opposition. Affirming the obligation of
religious groups to ''act upon the meaning of their faith for political life,''
the faculty added, ''We believe that no church or religious groups has an
exclusive claim upon Scripture interpretation, ethical insight, or political
wisdom.''

Many consevatives, in response, accuse the liberals of forgetting the extent to
which they conducted political campaigns in the past.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MURDER OF A DAUGHTER, AND A FIGHT FOR GUN CONTROL

BYLINE: By LEONARD BUDER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 55, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 591 words


When the telephone rang early on a Saturday morning in their Manhattan
apartment, Odile Stern's first thought was that a patient of her husband, a
dentist, must be calling about a sudden problem.

But the caller identified herself as a dean at Emory University in Atlanta,
where the Sterns' youngest daughter was a student. From the tone of the caller's
voice, Mrs. Stern immediately knew something terrible had happened. The dean
told her that the body of 18-year-old Michele Louise had just been found - she
had been abducted, raped and shot to death.

''At first it was unbelievable,'' Mrs. Stern said last week. ''We felt
devastated. It was not even anger, it was just as if everything had suddenly
drained out of us.''

The murder took place on Nov. 11, 1978. The pain of her loss is still felt in
the family's apartment at 239 Central Park West, where last Friday a candle cast
a soft light on a photograph of Michele.

An Interfaith Service

On Tuesday, the second anniversary of her death, an interfaith service will be
held at 6 P.M. at St. Matthew's and St. Timothy's Episcopal Church, at 26 West
84th Street, in memory of all victims of handgun violence - an issue with which
they have become deeply involved.

''With Michele's death,'' Mrs. Stern said, ''we first became aware of the
epidemic of handgun violence in the United States. We learned that every day 24
persons are killed by such weapons - that during the peak years of the Vietnam
war more Americans were killed with handguns in this country than were killed in
combat.

''Every time we hear of a tragedy involving a gun, we feel the pain and share
the grief of the victim's family. Nothing can be done now about Michele's
senseless killing, but there is so much that all of us can do to prevent other
senseless killings.''

The 'Saurday-Night Special'

Mrs. Stern and her husband, Richard, became active in Handgun Control Inc., a
nationwide Washington-based organization that advocates measures to curb handgun
abuse, including the banning of all commerce in the so-called ''Saturday-night
specials'' - the cheap, easily accessible handguns that are often used in
criminal acts. The organization's chairman is Nelson T. Shields, a former
marketing executive, who came involved after his 23-year-old son, Nick, was
fatally shot while waiting for a friend on a San Francisco street in 1974.

Mrs. Stern, a former teacher of French, is now a director of the organization,
and in Dr. Stern's dental office there is, along with the usual waiting-room
literature, brochures on handgun control.

Letters to 2,000 People

In the last two years the Sterns have written to more than 2,000 friends,
relatives, public officials and others urging support for handgun control.

The couple, with the support of many people they know and many others they do
not know personally, have established the Michele Stern Memorial Fund at St.
Matthew's and St. Timothy's Neighborhood Center, at the West 84th Street
address, to support youth counseling activities.

Mrs. Stern works with elderly people at the center and is a volunteer at the
American Museum of Natural History. But her work in behalf of effective gun
control, she said, ''is my major activity and it is an important activity for my
husband.''

''It is not an obsession,'' she said. ''We believe it is something we owe
Michele.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JOHN LENNON: MUST AN ARTIST SELF-DESTRUCT?

BYLINE: By ROBERT PALMER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1937 words


''Is it possible to have a life centered around a family and a child and still
be an artist?'' asked John Lennon. For Mr. Lennon, widely regarded as the most
thoughtful and outspoken of the four Beatles during their heyday in the 60's,
the question is far from rhetorical. Together with his wife, Yoko Ono, and their
5-year-old son, Sean, the 40-year-old Mr. Lennon has been engrossed in a settled
family life since dropping out of the music business five years ago.  Now, with
Miss Ono, he is reentering the pop mainstream with a new album, ''Double
Fantasy,'' which will be in the stores this week.

In a series of candid conversations that took place in a recording studio during
the making of the album, and at the Lennons' New York apartment after its
completion, both artists talked at length about the demands of making music
versus the demands of a family. ''In a way,'' Mr. Lennon said, ''we're involved
in a kind of experiment.  Could the family be the inspiration for art, instead
of drinking or drugs or whatever? I'm interested in finding that out.''

At the door of the family's apartment in the Dakota, Mr. Lennon greeted me,
smiling broadly, one hand on his heart, the other arm outstretched, like a 30's
crooner. ''Pardon me,'' he sang, ''if I'm sentimental ...'' The Warner
Brothers-distributed Geffen label had just released a single, ''Starting Over,''
backed with Miss Ono's ''Kiss Kiss Kiss,'' from the album. I'd written the
preceding week that while Mr. Lennon's pop craftsmanship was intact, the song's
lyrics seemed a bit obvious and sentimental. Since then I'd heard the complete
album and been struck by the contrast between Mr. Lennon's generally adoring and
plain-spoken songs (though his crunching, bluesy ''I'm Losing You'' is
considerably more potent) and the mystery and bitterness in several of Miss
Ono's pieces. The latter sound remarkably like the music of certain new wave
rockers, many of whom (the B-52's, for instance, and surely Lene Lovich) were
inspired by her experimental vocal techniques of the late 60's and early 70's.

We sat down at a plain wooden table in the middle of a spacious kitchen that had
a stereo, a large video screen, and a couch and lounging area at one end. There
were Italian cookies and pastries on the table, and Mr. Lennon brewed a pot of
coffee. ''I've heard 'Starting Over' hundreds of times now,'' Miss Ono said,
''but I still get choked up and cry sometimes when I hear it, because ... well,
in the 60's, we went through this thing with everybody feeling that we were
going to be free. And it turned into a big orgy; in the end, the women realized
that all the sexual liberation was really just for men. And now here's a guy,
John, saying to a woman, let's start over again, let's try. These are times when
women are still bitter about these things, and I think men have to make that
first move.'' ''The 60's,'' Mr. Lennon said with a smile, sitting down with the
coffee.  ''When I met Yoko, we were two poets in velvet cloaks - almost
literally - both full of positive ideas for the world, but for ourselves those
ideas didn't count. We were both self-destructive; I'd come up thinking of
myself not so much as a musician, you know, but as a writer, and big examples in
England were Dylan Thomas and Brendan Behan. I'd just naively accepted the idea
that an artist had to self-destruct in order to create. And we both came out of
that through the gift of having the baby.

''By 1975 I wasn't really enjoying what I was doing anyway. I was a machine that
was supposed to produce so much creative something and give it out periodically
for approval or to justify my existence on earth. But I don't think I would have
been able to just withdraw from the whole music business if it hadn't been for
Sean. I gave him five years, taking care of him while Yoko ran our business
affairs, but it's going on, and I feel it should go on. When I look at the
relative importance of what life is about, I can't quite convince myself that
making a record or having a career is more important or even as important as my
child, or any child.''

Mr. Lennon lit a cigarette and pushed a tempting chocolate cake to the far end
of the table. ''Another thing those five years did for me,'' he said, ''was to
move a lot of intellectual garbage out of the way and allow whatever it is in me
that wants to express itself to do it naturally. This is a digression, but going
back to the beginnings of rock and roll, Elvis and Jerry Lee Lewis and so on
were workingclass entertainment; they were working class. The Beatles were
slightly less working class; for Paul McCartney and me, at least, going to
university was a possibility. I had all this artsy stuff in me anyway, so we put
a little more intellect into our music, just because of what we were. And
gradually, expectations for the Beatles became educated, middle-class
expections. And I tended to get too intellectual about pop music. I had this
sort of critic John Lennon sitting over me saying, 'You did that already, you
can't do it again. You can't say it that simply.' Now the music's coming through
me again.''

The ''Double Fantasy'' album, subtitled ''A Heart Play,'' isn't going to be
accused of being overly intellectual. Mr. Lennon's songs are direct and, in
their celebrations of enduring love and the pleasures of home and hearth, they
will undoubtedly strike some listeners as simplistic, finely crafted though they
are. Miss Ono's songs tend to have more bite, though ''I'm Your Angel,'' a piece
of 30's-style whimsy, wouldn't sound out of place in a Walt Disney movie. ''For
me,'' Mr. Lennon said, ''a lot of the so-called avantgarde in pop is pseudo
intellectual - which is something I contributed to. Basically, you just want a
good record, right? You can enjoy it no matter what level it's on, whether it
makes you want to dance or makes you want to lie down and think about the
universe.''

''I'm not impressed by pop that plays a lot of intellectual games,'' Miss Ono
added. ''The more you intellectualize, the more you get lost.''

At work at a recording console in New York's Hit Factory, bracing himself with a
strong cup of coffee, Mr. Lennon looked trimmer than he had in the late 60's and
early 70's; and in his black jeans, black work shirt and wire-rimmed glasses, he
seemed more like John Lennon, pop star, than like a ''house husband,'' as he's
taken to calling himself. Miss Ono, a founding member of the 60's performance
art vanguard known as the Fluxus movement (other participants included John
Cage, La Monte Young and Nam June Paik) - was sitting at the console too, and
they were both listening to Mr. Lennon's song ''Starting Over,'' which was to be
the first selection and the first single from their new album. ''I don't think
you should put another voice on it, John,'' she said as she lit a cigarette. The
song already boasted a rich mesh of voices, some provided by backup singers and
some by Mr. Lennon, whose reedy tenor and personal inflection are still
immediately recognizable.

''Mother,'' he said in measured tones - he often calls Miss Ono ''Mother,''
apparently with a great deal of respect - ''I don't want to double the same
part, I'm hearing another harmony that I want to try.'' Mr. Lennon turned to
explain. ''Back when we were doing Beatles records, I used to want to
double-track my voice on everything, mostly to make it stronger. Now'' - he
waved his arm to indicate the expanse of blinking, whirring equipment, some of
it computerized - ''you don't have to do that.'' He downed the rest of his
coffee and walked out into the studio, glancing on the way at the large color
photograph of Sean that hung from a monitor speaker.  ''I'll bet,'' he mused
aloud, ''that I miss him a lot more than he misses me.''

Recording studios have changed a great deal since the Beatles recorded ''Sgt.
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band'' on a four-track machine - for that matter,
they've changed since 1975. Helping the Lennons explore the possibilities of new
technology were Jack Douglas, who had worked for them as an engineer in the
early 70's and now produces popular rock groups like Cheap Trick, and the
engineer Lee DeCarlo, a burly Vietnam veteran with a dreamy, bearish smile.
''They've been a big help,'' Miss Ono said as the two busily adjusted settings
and Mr. Lennon cleared his throat into a microphone. ''But the two of us are
very headstrong. For the final word on my songs I always look to John, and the
final word on his comes from me.''

Mr. Lennon practiced singing along with the track, which had been recorded in an
intensive series of sessions that began on Aug. 8. It was melodious, loping tune
with a 50's backbeat, and the more he ran over it, the more scraps of Beatles
songs he was able to insert, just for fun. ''Why don't we do it in the road,''
he sang, echoing the title line from one of his songs on the Beatles' ''White
Album'' when he should have been singing ''why don't we take off alone.'' But
soon he turned serious and was able to perfect his harmony part after only a few
tries. It made the song sound uncannily like a Beatles record, though the
backing band was composed of New York studio professionals.

Miss Ono had been taking care of business details while Mr. Lennon sang.
Periodically, a Japanese assistant would bring her hot tea and a pad with
telephone messages in Japanese characters - from photographers, journalists
asking for interviews. record company representatives (the album, and the
Lennons' immediate future as recording artists, hadn't yet been assigned to any
company, and the bidding was intense). She'd gone into a room adjoining the
studio to return the most important calls. ''Well, Mother,'' Mr. Lennon said,
plainly elated that his work was going so well, ''I'm done for now.  Time to
work on one of your songs.'' He stretched out on a nearby couch and went to
sleep.

After hearing Mr. Lennon's melodious pop, Miss Ono's song ''Give Me Something''
was a little startling. Propelled by a serpentine chromatic guitar figure from
the former David Bowie sideman Earl Slick and clocking in at a brisk one minute
and 38 seconds, it offered a vision that was considerably bleaker than Mr.
Lennon's reassuring ''Starting Over.'' ''The food is cold,'' Miss Ono sang,
tunefully but piercingly, ''your eyes are cold/the window's cold/the bed's
cold.'' There was a screaming solo from Earl Slick and the song abruptly crashed
to a halt.

''You know what I listened to for the last five years?'' Mr. Lennon asked after
his nap. ''Muzak! For the kind of chores I was doing around the house, it was
perfect. I know people are going to say, 'Oh, that's because he's got to be 40
and got soft.' Well, it might be that; it's irrelevant to me. The attitude is
that when you change when you get older, there's something wrong with that, but
the world is stupid enough as it is; if the young were running it, it would be
really dumb. Whatever changes I'm going through because I'm 40 I'm thankful for,
because they give me some insight into the madness I've been living in all my
life.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Lennon and Yoko Ono

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMIC AFFAIRS;
IT'S REAGAN'S CONGRESS NOW;
by Ralph G. Penner

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1166 words


IT is not easy to imagine a world without Senator Russell B. Long as chairman of
the Senate Finance Committee. And it is only slightly easier to imagine a world
in which Al Ullman is neither Chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee nor
for that matter even a Congressman. Indeed, what will the Senate be like without
a Warren Magnuson or a Jacob Javits or the House without the likes of John
Brademas, Thomas Ashley, James Corman, and Joseph Fisher?

It will, in fact, take weeks, if not years, to digest what the voters wrought on
Nov. 4. Clearly, we shall be living in a new, strange world that will keep
Washington lobbyists confused through February.

Conservatives are generally hostile to the process, thinking that it has done
more harm than good by encouraging activist, proinflation, counter-cyclical
policies. But they now have a chance to capture the process, at least on the
Senate side with the able Pete Domenici as probable chairman of the Budget
Committee, and it could become a powerful tool for implementing conservative
strategies.

In the House, the Democratic leadership faces a dilemma. Robert Giaimo, chairman
of the House Budget Committee, has retired. Should he be replaced with a
conservative, like James Jones who is master at gaining the cooperation of
Republicans and moderate Democrats, or with a liberal, like David Obey who might
fight more passionately for the programs dear to the hearts of Thomas O'Neill
and James Wright?

In either case, the budget process will face extraordinary difficulties.
Recently Senate budgets have tended to be more conservative than House budgets.
This has created problems in joint conferences. As a result of this election,
the swing to the right in the Senate is nothing short of astounding. The swing
to the right in the House, though significant, was not as extreme. One can thus
expect a growing divergence between the two bodies, and it will take skillful
bargaining to reach timely agreements.

Whether or not the budget process survives, the Congress will have to deal with
issues of entitlements, those benefits to individuals that will be growing
rapidly if current law is not changed.

If it is assumed, as President-elect Reagan promised, that defense spending must
grow at a real rate exceeding the growth rate of the economy, it will be very
difficult to slow long-run spending growth unless entitlement programs that are
indexed to the inflation rate are modified. Since candidates of both the right
and the left promised not to change Social Security - the biggest indexed
entitlement of all - the outlook seems grim.

Nevertheless, there may be a shift on such issues. No one will cut Social
Security, but its growth might be slowed. Even this seems unlikely given current
attitudes, but I would suggest that changes in general attitudes toward
entitlements would be only a bit more surprising than recent changes in the
attitude toward unemployment.  We all remember when an unemployment rate above 4
percent was considered to be a serious national problem. Now a rate in the
neighborhood of 7 1/2 percent seems to be tolerable.

While entitlements will remain a serious budget problem in the long run, there
is not much that can be done about them in the short run.  Indeed, Mr. Reagan
cannot do much about any spending in the short run, since it will be President
Carter who will present the 1982 budget and spending plans will be firm by the
time the new President is inaugurated.

H OWEVER, Mr. Reagan's overwhelming victory, the Republican takeover of the
Senate, and the more moderate gains in the House may scare the remaining
Democrats into acting more like Republicans. It is quite conceivable that Reagan
will have more success at chipping away at 1981 and 1982 spending totals than
would most new Presidents. He will probably be working closely with moderate
Senator Mark Hatfield, the likely chairman of the Senate Appropriations
Committee, and Chairman Jamie Whitten of the House Appropriations Committee, who
certainly is not a big-time spender.

Oddly enough, the election may have less impact on future tax policy than on
other public policy issues - primarily because there is such a broad consensus
on what has to be done. Both Democrats and Republicans wish to reduce
disincentives to work, save and invest.  Both have attached high priority to
improving depreciation deductions.

With Reagan's huge victory the final bill may contain many of Kemp-Roth's
features, that is to say, the eventual income tax reduction may be broader and
deeper than if he had won only a narrow victory. (Senator Bob Dole, the new
chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, has proposed that the Senate
immediately pass a major tax cut that has already been backed by Senator Long,
but since action is unlikely in the House, this is probably irrelevant.)

In the longer run, it is unlikely that the House will swallow all of Kemp-Roth.
Both parties will feel constrained by the deficits projected by Mr. Carter in
January, and it is quite likely that they will be larger than the numbers now
being used in Congressional deliberations.

Saying that there is a broad consensus on tax policy is quite different from
saying that the issues will be resolved quickly. With much debate over details,
it could be well into the summer before any tax cut affects our pocketbooks.

Perhaps the most fascinating question involves the future relationship between a
Republican President and a House and Senate ruled by different parties. The
influence of the Presidency over economic policy waned with Vietnam and
Watergate and almost disappeared entirely with the philosophical incoherence of
the Carter Administration.

The pendulum may well begin to swing the other way. The Congress has learned
that 435 Representatives and 100 Senators have grave difficulty formulating a
coherent economic strategy. They may appreciate the fact that Mr. Reagan will
approach them with a more or less predictable, consistent philosophy, even if
they do not agree with all of its features. If he combines this with the
willingness to compromise, the Presidency may yet again become important in
economic policy-making.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Rudolph G. Penner is Resident Scholar at the American Enterprise Institute for
Public Policy Research in Washington. He served under President Ford as
assistant director for economic policy in the Office of Management and Budget.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Robert Dole, Mark Hatfield, Pete Domenici

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
ROGER STAUBACH'S POLITICAL FOOTBALL

BYLINE: By Dave Anderson

SECTION: Section 5; Page 7, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 825 words


NOW that he is no longer a quarterback with a sense of drama, the real Roger
Staubach has stood up as a politician with a sense of humor.

For too many years Roger Staubach was thought of merely as an automaton who
threw touchdown passes in the last two minutes for the Dallas Cowboys on strict
orders from Tom Landry, the computerized coach. Not many people knew that Roger
Staubach once pretended to jump out the window of the 11th-floor office of Tex
Schramm, the Cowboys president; he landed safely on a nearby ledge. And on the
sidelines once, he watched Tom Landry stare at the sky through the oval opening
in the Texas stadium roof as the coach pondered what play to call next.

''I always wondered,'' the quarterback told him, ''where you got the plays.''
Tom Landry never even heard him. But now that Roger Staubach is a CBS
commentator, people are paying more attention to what he says instead of what he
does. Maybe too much attention. He discovered that last Sunday during the
telecast of the Cowboys-Cardinals game in St.  Louis.

''Do me a favor,'' he had said to the play-by-play announcer, Frank Glieber,
before the game. ''Ask me what the Cowboys have to do to stop the Cardinals.''

From his own experience, Roger Staubach knew that Mel Gray, the Cardinals' wide
receiver, had terrorized the Cowboys defensive unit through the years by
catching a total of 12 touchdown passes. After the broadcast began, Glieber
asked the question that Roger Staubach had suggested.

''I talked to my daughter, Amy, this morning about it,'' Roger Staubach replied.
''And she said the No. 1 problem was the bomb.'' His remark, of course, was a
takeoff on President Carter's line during his debate with Ronald Reagan
regarding the fears of the President's daughter, Amy, about nuclear
proliferation. As a father of five who really does have a 4-year-old daughter
named Amy and as a Reagan supporter, Roger Staubach insists he was only trying
to be funny. But a voice in the CBS truck was not laughing.

''I was told,'' he says, ''to take it easy on the Amy stuff, but CBS has never
slapped my hands. They took it as a funny line.''

Most viewers also apparently accepted it for what it was - a funny line from an
ex-football player at a football game. But other viewers took it seriously. Or
perhaps they take football too seriously. Some of the offended phoned the CBS
outlet in Dallas, others phoned the Dallas newspapers. When the news of the
remark reached the White House, a Carter aide phoned CBS to demand that Staubach
apologize.

''You're having enough trouble with Reagan,'' a CBS executive suggested. ''Do
you want to take on Staubach, too?'' Quickly, the Carter aide backed off. But
shortly after Roger Staubach returned to his suburban Dallas home Sunday night,
his phone rang. A reporter for The Dallas Morning News informed him that their
switchboard operators had received what were described as ''irate'' calls.

''You've got to be kidding me,'' Staubach said. ''Are people really that
sensitive?'' In the middle of page one the next day, The Dallas Morning News had
a short story headlined, ''Staubach Hurls TV Bomb.'' That day the Cowboys'
switchboard handled 21 phone calls from viewers - 13 critical of Staubach, eight
supporting him. His real-estate office handled about 20 phone calls that day,
''most of them supportive,'' his secretary, Roz Cole, reports. In the days that
followed, his office also received 24 letters - 21 for him, 3 criticizing him,
Mrs. Cole says. But as an ex-quarterback who always knew how to scramble, Roger
Staubach did not run out of bounds.

''My daughter Amy,'' he has been saying all week, ''knows as much about football
as Amy Carter does about nuclear proliferation.''

The controversy flared, primarily because Roger Staubach openly supported Ronald
Reagan during the campaign. He even stumped in southern Texas for the
President-elect in the months before last Tuesday's election.

''I was concerned about the country for three reasons,'' Roger Staubach
explains. ''One, that a government that governs less governs best. Two,
inflation; people are really suffering. And three, on military defense.''

Roger Staubach, a Heisman Trophy winner at Annapolis, was a naval officer for
four years (one in Vietnam) before joining the Cowboys.  ''My classmates at the
Naval Academy are commanders of ships now,'' he says. ''They tell me that the
government is deceiving us if it tells us we're still strong militarily. Peace
is achieved through strength. I would not want another weapon to be built if the
Soviets did not have any weapons, but they do. I believe that Reagan will cut
the fat out of the government and increase our defense. I pray that happens.''

Spoken like any quarterback who appreciates his defensive unit. But the election
result relieved him of one concern.  ''For the next four years,'' Roger Staubach
says, ''I don't think I have to worry about being audited by the I.R.S.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Roger Staubach

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BOOK REVIEW

SECTION: Section 7; Page 4, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 611 words


November 9, 1980
NONFICTION
ALIENATION AND CHARISMA: A Study of Contemporary American Communes. By Benjamin
Zablocki.  16 AMERICAN MYTH, AMERICAN REALITY.  By James Oliver Robertson.  16
THE ART OF THE GREAT HOLLYWOOD PORTRAIT PHOTOGRAPHERS 1925-1940. By John Kobal.
13 BIRTH AND FORTUNE: The Impact of Numbers on Personal Welfare. By Richard A.
Easterlin.  7 CRITICISM IN THE WILDERNESS: The Study of Literature Today.  By
Geoffrey H. Hartman.  11 DOUBLE BILL. By Alec McCowen.  12 FIRST REACTIONS:
Critical Essays 1968-1979. By Clive James.  11 FLIGHT INTO EGYPT. By Amos Elon.
3 GREAT EXPECTATIONS: America and the Baby Boom Generation.  By Landon Y. Jones.
7 THE MAKING OF A STORMTROOPER. By Peter H. Merkl.  22 RECONSTRUCTING APHRA: A
Social Biography of Aphra Behn.  By Angeline Goreau.  24 SWANSON ON SWANSON. By
Gloria Swanson.  12 WALT WHITMAN: A Life. By Justin Kaplan.  1 WHEN GOVERNMENTS
COLLIDE: Coercion and Diplomacy in the Vietnam Conflict 1964-1968. By Wallace J.
Thies.  16
FICTION
THE ALPHA LIST. By Ted Allbeury.  26 ANGEL LANDING. By Alice Hoffman.  14 AS
SUMMERS DIE. By Winston Groom.  14 CANDACE & OTHER STORIES. By Alan Cheuse.  15
A CHANGE OF LIGHT: And Other Stories. By Julio Cortazar.  9 FREE FLIGHT. By
Douglas Terman.  26 THE GLASS HOUSE. By Laura Furman.  15 HEARTS. By Hilma
Wolitzer.  15 JACK IN THE BOX. By William Kotzwinkle.  14 THE LAKE OF DARKNESS.
By Ruth Rendell.  26 A PRESENCE WITH SECRETS. By W.M. Spackman.  14 SHERLOCK
HOLMES: THE PUBLISHED APOCRYPHA.  Edited by Jack Tracy.  26 STILLNESS. By
Nicholas Delbanco.  14 THE VERY RICH HOURS OF COUNT VON STAUFFENBERG.  By Paul
West.  14
FEATURES
REMEMBERING JOHN DOLLARD. By Daniel Patrick Moynihan.  7 SPECIAL CHILDREN'S
BOOKS SECTION.  47-71
DEPARTMENTS
BEHIND THE BEST SELLERS. By Nan Robertson.  40 BEST SELLERS.  38 BOOK ENDS. By
Herbert Mitgang.  45 CRIME. By Newgate Callendar.  26 EDITORS' CHOICE.  38
LETTERS.  43 NONFICTION IN BRIEF. By Robert Asahina.  16 PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS.
42 PAPERBACK TALK. By Ray Walters.  41 PAPERBACKS: NEW AND NOTEWORTHY.  41

Picture Credits:40. Nancy Crampton. 43. Nicholas Anderson.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LIVING IN A LOST GENERATION

BYLINE: By E.J. DIONNE; E.J. Dionne, a reporter for The New York Times, covers
polls and elections.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1068 words


BIRTH AND FORTUNE The Impact of Numbers on Personal Welfare.  By Richard A.
Easterlin.  205 pp. New York: Basic Books. $11.95.

GREAT EXPECTATIONS America and the Baby Boom Generation.  By Landon Y. Jones.
380 pp. New York: Coward, McCann & Geoghegan. $15.95.

THE pressing question for theologians some centuries ago was how many angels
could dance on the head of a pin. Today's demographers would pose the question
somewhat differently. What is important to them is the population density of the
pinhead and the relative size of the generations of celestial creatures as they
gyrate across the top.

We are about to be inundated with secular versions of such a mode of analysis.
America's 1980 Census, troubled as it was by angry mayors who thought their
cities had been undercounted, is now finished. For the next year or so,
demographers and journalists will churn out books and articles about all the
changes America has undergone in the last decade. They will include much
discussion about the implication of these numbers for the future of American
life.  Under the guise of ''just the facts, ma'am,'' a lot of writers will be
pushing their agendas, hidden and unhidden, through a forest of charts and
tables.

The two books at hand are the first of the wave, written before the 1980 numbers
were in. Both try to focus our attention on a particular demographic fact, the
enormous number of babies - 75 million - born in the United States between 1946
and 1964, when the birth rate went up by about a third. Both books try to prove
that much of what has happened to us in the last decade or so happened because
all these people appeared on the earth at the same time and in the same place.
Like most demographic efforts, the two books carry the analysis further than
most of us would be prepared to go - even an occurrence as startling as the baby
boom could not have caused all the things Richard Easterlin and Landon Jones say
it did. But in keeping with demography's nobler traditions, they do point to a
lot of events that might be better explained by demography than by the sort of
pop sociological theorizing based on a few conversations in bars and coffee
houses.

''Birth and Fortune'' is a clever piece of academic pamphleteering. Mr.
Easterlin, a professor of economics at the University of Pennsylvania, argues
that we can explain our economic troubles, our mating habits, our divorce rates,
our suicide rates and even our rates of malaise by looking at the size of the
generation born in the baby boom. Mr. Easterlin's hypothesis is wonderfully
simple: People born as part of a small generation are lucky and can count on
many of life's good things; people born in a large generation might as well pack
it in. Members of a large generation, like the baby boom, will end up struggling
with one another over a limited number of jobs in their early years. All their
lives, they will find themselves running behind the expectations they built up
as the children of parents fortunate enough to be born in a small generation,
for which the Darwinian struggle was less acute.

Mr. Easterlin's most interesting thesis concerns why we can't seem to get
inflation and unemployment under control any more.  Traditionally, he argues,
governments confronting an economic downturn could stimulate the economy to
encourage the production and purchase of more goods, which would in turn produce
more jobs. The problem, he says, is that these policies assume a relatively
constant supply of skilled workers. As it happens, our economy is now replete
with a mass of young unskilled workers who are not able to meet employers'
demands for skilled labor. Manufacturers cannot hire enough workers to produce
all the goods the stimulated economy is now asking for. Limited output plus
increased demand means inflation. And our young unemployed are still unemployed,
meaning stagflation. The conclusion, and it seems a wise one, is that in our
economic policies, we need to pay more attention to underlying demographic
factors and less to the allegedly immutable laws of theoretical economics.

Mr. Easterlin's other hypotheses move increasingly further afield.  Because
large generations have it rougher in the economic sphere, they tend to do things
like postpone marriage, postpone children and, when things get really bad,
commit suicide. What's useful about this line of thought is that it shows how
quick we are to draw sweeping conclusions about the decay of traditional values
or the liberation of women without considering narrower causes of these events,
such as population trends. Mr. Easterlin, who is a clear thinker and writer, is
willing to accept other than demographic explanations of things.  He's written a
book designed to provoke, and provoke it does.

Indeed, ''Great Expectations'' was probably provoked by the ideas of
demographers like Mr. Easterlin, whom Mr. Jones quotes frequently. If ''Birth
and Fortune'' is a short and careful set of arguments, ''Great Expectations'' is
a sprawling saga - The Adventures of the Baby Boom. A senior editor at People
magazine, Mr. Jones traces it all, from birth in the suburbs, through
television, rock 'n' roll, the Vietnam War and the Me Decade.

There are a lot of interesting facts in this book. Why was there a youth craze?
Well, says Mr. Jones, a television viewer ''exposed to 300 speaking characters
over a week would meet only seven over 65'' years old. A local poll asking
couples their leading cause of marital discord found that 25 percent said it was
arguments over which show to watch on television. Have women been liberated?
Half of all working women are still in job categories that are 70 percent filled
by women, who thus form, says Mr. Jones, ''the Pink Ghetto.''

There is much fun to be had here, and the book probably would make a good
television series (moderated, perhaps, by Jerry Mathers of ''Leave It to
Beaver,'' another baby boomer.) Mr. Jones, unfortunately, has adopted a
''this-is-the-most-important-thing-inthe-world'' tone. Designed to make his
point, it sometimes encourages disbelief.

At the very least, Mr. Easterlin and Mr. Jones offer some offbeat clues about
why we're doing some of the things we're doing. In that sense, the arcane labors
of demographers may yet prove to be more useful in this secular time than
theologians arguing over the population of pinheads proved to be during the Age
of Faith.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC:  Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NONFICTION IN BRIEF;
by Robert Asahina

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1785 words


ALIENATION AND CHARISMA A Study of Contemporary American Communes.  By Benjamin
Zablocki.  455 pp. New York: The Free Press. $22.95.

Reminiscent of Charles Nordhoff's famous ''The Communistic Societies of the
United States'' (1875), this study by a Rutgers sociologist will be recognized
as a classic about the communal movement. Benjamin Zablocki presents a
longitudinal survey of 120 American communes that he studied in depth from 1965
through 1978.  Along with this enormous data base, he offers some intriguing
theories about the relation of self to society.

To Mr. Zablocki, communes are defined by their dedication to the achievement of
consensus. The pretentious-sounding title is in fact merely descriptive of the
two factors that he claims give rise to communes: alienation, understood as an
individual's inability to participate in collective decisions, is overcome by
charisma, understood not as a form of authority but as the power to absorb
individuals into a collective self.

Starting with these definitions, Mr. Zablocki takes us on a tour of the communes
that flowered and withered so suddenly in our recent past. Like its 19th-century
forebears, the communal movement of the mid-60's to mid-70's was, he argues, a
''quest for authenticity through reduction of scale'' in a period characterized
by the ''breakdown of traditional meaning and value systems.''

Some of Mr. Zablocki's findings confirm popular stereotypes: ''Married people,
Protestants, and blacks (were) underrepresented (and) college graduates and Jews
(were) overrepresented,'' and ''nowhere have the attitudes of commune members
been more diametrically opposed to those of the general American population than
with respect to the work ethic.''

On the other hand, Mr. Zablocki discovered that, in the period covered, rural
communes were outnumbered by urban communes (including one that spread through
six apartments in a luxury, door-manned New York high-rise), and that ''the
typical communitarian grew up in a close-knit nuclear family with two parents
and at least one sibling.''

Still other findings will distress those who believe that human nature is easily
changed through social arrangements. Despite the prevalent egalitarian and
liberationist communal ideology, Mr.  Zablocki did not find ''a single example
of a commune without a power hierarchy or of one in which the men did as much of
what has traditionally been called 'woman's work' as did the women.'' Even more
distressing, he found that each of the ''levels of alienation and charisma'' in
the communes studied had its corresponding ''cognitive manifestation'' in common
neurotic disorders (paranoia, for instance, or hysteria).

From his mountains of interviews, participant-observer reports and
questionnaires, Mr. Zablocki concludes that communes are inherently unstable
because the charisma required to achieve consensus reduces ''interpsychic
distances beyond the limits of the humanly tolerable.'' He also speculates about
how communes degenerate into cults, how ''what began as voluntary
self-estrangement may become perpetuated as totalitarian dictatorship.''

If I have any complaint about this fascinating book, it is that Mr. Zablocki
doesn't speculate often enough. He merely states, for example, that ''it is
difficult to understand why'' sex roles are not eradicated in communes, without
attempting any explanation. In the best tradition of careful social science,
however, he ends his book with a call for ''further research'' -which will be
possible only because of Mr. Zablocki's impressive groundwork.
WHEN GOVERNMENTS COLLIDE Coercion and Diplomacy in the Vietnam Conflict
1964-1968.  By Wallace J. Thies.  446 pp. Berkeley, Calif.: University of
California Press. $20.

A decade after the universities played host to the peace movement, academe has
embraced the Vietnam War as yet another research topic.  At the front of what
will undoubtedly be a wave of scholarship is this detailed analysis of the
decisions leading to ''Rolling Thunder,'' the program of overt American air
strikes against North Vietnam that opened the larger war in early 1965 and
escalated through early 1968.

Mr. Thies, who teaches political science at Berkeley, argues that Washington
made three key assumptions in deciding to begin the bombing: (1) That gradually
intensifying overt pressure could cause Hanoi to ''cease its support and
direction of the insurgency in the South''; (2) that the United States could, in
the words of one spokesman, '' 'negotiate' by an optimum combination of words
and deeds''; (3) that the ''bombing could be turned on or off, up or down at
will, and that if it did not work it could always be stopped.''

By 1968, when formal peace talks began, each of these assumptions had been
proved wrong. Mr. Thies contends that Washington's error lay in its accepting
the Herman Kahn-Thomas Schelling-William Kaufmann view of war as a ''bargaining
process'' involving the ''expressive'' use of force to convey ''signals.''
Neither Hanoi nor Washington, Mr. Thies claims, corresponded to the ''unitary
rational actor'' presupposed in that view. He offers an alternative
''bureaucratic conflict'' model, which was in academic fashion when this book
was still in its original form of a doctoral dissertation.

Yet his work should actually be titled ''When Government Collides With Itself,''
since Mr. Thies is much more persuasive concerning ''bureaucratic conflict'' in
Washington than in Hanoi. Based on his close reading of the ''Pentagon Papers''
and other Government documents, he argues convincingly that American officials
did collide over whether the target of the bombing was Hanoi's political
''will'' or its military capability, and that the policy of gradual escalation
evolved as a compromise to ensure consensus. But to support his notion that
''bureaucratic conflict'' also shaped Hanoi's response to Washington's
''signals,'' Mr. Thies, who lacked access to North Vietnamese sources, has to
rely on newspaper stories and the diplomatic history found in the ''Pentagon
Papers.''

This is obviously not totally reliable evidence, and Mr. Thies himself
''suspects that even a brilliantly 'orchestrated' campaign would still have
resulted in failure'' because of Washington's ignorance about the nature of
Hanoi's commitment to the insurgency in the South. So much for ''bureaucratic
conflict'' as the chief cause of Washington's failure to communicate.

Still, no one can argue with Mr. Thies's ''plea for realism on the part of
officials contemplating an attempt to coerce another government.'' In its
details if not in its theory, ''When Governments Collide'' is valuable as a
sober piece of scholarship concerning an epoch that was, until recently, largely
the domain of angry polemics.
AMERICAN MYTH, AMERICAN REALITY By James Oliver Robertson.  398 pp. New York:
Hill & Wang. $16.95.

In the hands of a Leslie Fiedler, the concept of ''myth'' is a sharp scalpel
that slices to the cultural core. In the hands of a James Oliver Robertson, it
is a blunt instrument that flattens American history into a cartoon landscape.

Mr. Robertson, who teaches American history at the University of Connecticut,
argues that myths ''explain the world'' and thus merit attention so that
''Americans might be able more clearly to see and understand the structure and
implications of their inherited beliefs and ideals.'' He raises some weighty
questions: ''What is the purpose of America? What is the place of the
individual? What is the nature of community? And what is power for?''

Yet the four sections in Mr. Robertson's book corresponding to these four
questions offer no answers, or even any myths, only one cliche after another.
Suburbanization, the Myth of Progress, the Puritan Ethic, Manifest Destiny, the
Consumer Society, the Melting Pot are all trotted out, accompanied by
appropriate quotes from a slew of savants (John Kenneth Galbraith, Joan Didion,
Christopher Lasch). It's like watching endless reruns of ''The Dick Cavett
Show.''

When Mr. Robertson descends from his lofty and sometimes wild generalizations,
which are in any case untainted by evidence (''Americans frequently voice the
fear that their world is falling apart''; '' 'Rugged individualism' has come to
be identified with corporate capitalism for most Americans''), he forces us to
accompany him on a painful journey through the details of Mythland. The story of
George Washington and that famous cherry tree, for example, which Mr. Robertson
calls ''a clear statement of a logical and moral proposition,'' is variously
interpreted as ''a parable of Oedipal feelings,'' as symbolic of the taming of
the wilderness and as representing the severing of the colonies' ties with
England.

Yet somehow Mr. Robertson doesn't even manage to get his details right. The name
of the television show, for instance, that he finds so revealing of the
''patterns of modern heroic life'' is not ''Starship Galactica'' but
''Battlestar Galactica.''

None of this would matter were it not for Mr. Robertson's obvious sincerity in a
commendable enterprise: debunking the recent crop of revisionist historians who
have taken such glee in debunking American myths that no one ever took literally
anyway. ''The study of American myths will not make us any better able to
predict the future,'' he writes. ''But it should enable us to know better who we
are and what makes the reality of the present world.'' A worthy enough task - if
only we had a better guide.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DUMPING INQUIRY PLANNED

BYLINE: By LEO H. CARNEY

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 1, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words


LAKEHURST THE discovery that 20,000 gallons of aviation fuel was poured into the
ground at the Naval Air Engineering Center here has raised the question of how
much hazardous material has been dumped or stored over the years at military
installations in the environmentally sensitive Pine Barrens.

The fuel dumping at the Naval Center some years ago was discovered by Federal
Environmental Protection Agency investigators last March.  The agency said last
week that it still was not certain whether the fuel, which contains tetraethyl
lead, posed a danger to the underground water supplies of nearby communities.

However, both the E.P.A. and the state's Department of Environmental Protection
said they would investigate published allegations by former employees at the
center that other toxic chemicals had been regularly poured into the ground
here.

''Given the nature of what has been said and the nature of the Lakehurst area,
something definitely should be done,'' said Ann Miller, director of the E.P.A.'s
Office of Federal Facilities.

The Navy has repeatedly declined to answer specific questions about the dumping
of hazardous chemicals at the center, part of a 42,894-acre expanse of
contiguous military installations that includes McGuire Air Force Base and Fort
Dix.

Environmental officials said that toxic chemicals from World War II and the
Korean and Vietnam wars might have remained at these installations, but they
were unable to estimate the quantities or precise whereabouts of the substances.

Although the state's environmental agency has no easy way of knowing what
chemicals have been dumped or stored at these facilities in the past, it has
had, since May 1978, a ''manifest system'' for tracking the whereabouts of such
substances.

The system requires private and governmental concerns to report regularly the
quantities of hazardous chemicals leaving the premises and where they are being
shipped for legal disposal.

Navy spokesmen maintained last week that the Lakehurst facility ''complies with
all regulations'' regarding hazardous chemicals.  However, computer readouts of
the state's manifest system showed that such mandatory reports had not been made
regularly by the Naval Center, McGuire Air Force Base, Fort Dix or other
military installations in the state.

For example, although records for the Naval Center show shipments of toxic
substances, including mixed solvents, acids and oil sludges, leaving the
facility between January and June of this year, no records exist for 1978, 1979
or the remainder of 1980 to date.

Ralph E. Pasceri, chief of the state agency's Bureau of Hazardous Waste, said in
an interview that he was not sure why records for the center - as well as for
McGuire, Fort Dix, the Picatinny Arsenal or the Naval Weapons Station at Earle -
were incomplete.

''Right now, our tracking is inadequate,'' Mr. Pasceri said.  The bureau is
converting to a new Federal manifest system and his current staff of 38 will be
increased soon, he added.  The E.P.A. said last week that it had only two
investigators for all of its Region 2, which covers New Jersey, New York, Puerto
Rico and the United States Virgin Islands. These investigators are responsible
for several categories of enforcement, including spill prevention and water
quality.

The fact that the agency's investigators discovered the dumped aviation fuel
last March - and admitted that, as of last week, they had not returned to
monitor the potential problem - is illustrative of the inadquate staffing.

''It's an impossible job,'' said one Federal employee engaged in enforcement
matters.  The Naval Center and its environs in Ocean and Burlington Counties are
situated atop the Cohansey Aquifer, a vast natural underground reservoir that
hydrologists say is the largest of its kind east of the Mississippi River.

This was one reason that state and Federal officials took steps in recent years
to protect and preserve the Pine Barrens, whose residents daily draw millions of
gallons of water from this source.

The aquifer, hydrologists contend, is ''recharged'' mostly by rainfall that is
easily absorbed by the area's permeable sandy soils. However, the same soil also
readily transports foreign substances, such as toxic chemicals, from the surface
with little filtering action. Thus, the aquifer is extremely vulnerable to
contamination.

The Pine Barrens has been subjected to pollution from various other sources.
Jackson Township and Plumstead Township, both of which border on the military
installations, have had serious pollution problems from toxic chemicals.

In its master plan for the Pine Barrens, the state's Pinelands Commission noted
in a report last June that ''significant concentrations'' of hazardous chemicals
were being found in ground water.

''The vast areas of unpopulated countryside allow 'midnight dumpers' to dump
undetected,'' the report said in part. ''Because there are no registered
hazardous-waste sites in New Jersey and because it is costly to transport the
material elsewhere, illegal dumping frequently occurs.''

Some examples of hazardous wastes that have been moved off military
installations in New Jersey, according to computer printouts of the state's
Department of Environmental Protection, follow. The figures give no indication
of the use or age of the hazardous wastes, or of the amounts of these or other
substances stored or dumped at the installations.

- Naval Air Engineering Center, Lakehurst (January to June 1980): Asbestos,
40,000 pounds; oil and oil sludges, 34,500 gallons; mixed solvents, 510 gallons,
and acids, 300 gallons.

- Picatinny Arsenal (for all of 1979): Acids, 120,000 pounds; organic and heavy
metal residues, 47,500 pounds; other heavy metal residues, 6,400 pounds; ester
alcohol, glycol and fatty acids, 1,700 pounds; oils and oil sludges, 108,000
pounds; peroxides, 450 pounds; distillates, 3,000; mixed solvents, 5,000 pounds;
laboratory chemicals, 25,740 pounds, and asbestos, 66,000 pounds.

- McGuire Air Force Base and Fort Dix (January to June, 1980): Oil and oil
sludges, 99,000 pounds.

- Naval Weapons Station, Earle (January to June, 1980): Oil and oil sludges,
90,000 pounds.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AUSTRALIAN COURT BLOCKS PUBLISHING OF BOOK WITH U.S. ALLIANCE SECRETS

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 374 words

DATELINE: SYDNEY, Australia, Nov. 9


The Australian Government won a court order today blocking publication of a book
containing secrets of the nation's alliance with the United States.

The interim injunction by Australia's High Court followed a similar order
yesterday that stopped two newspapers from printing excerpts from the book,
''Documents of Australia's Defense and Foreign Policy 1968-1975,'' written by
Richard Walsh and George Munster.

The first court order, which arrived after early editions of The Sydney Morning
Herald and The Melbourne Age had been packed into delivery trucks, was the first
such action involving the press since the censorship of World War II.

The two papers reported recovering all of their first editions.  Later editions
ran with half a blank page in place of the article.  The injunction against the
papers also covered documents written by the Defense Department in 1968 and the
Foreign Affairs Department in 1975, including secret information on the United
States-Australian alliance.

Foreign Minister Defends Orders

Foreign Minister Anthony A. Street defended the injunctions, saying the
Government acted to preserve national interests, not just to avoid publication
of material that could cause embarrassment.

The book includes previously undisclosed details of Australia's alliance with
the United States, including a discussion of the Anzus military pact between
Australia, New Zealand and the United States.

Spokesmen for both papers said they would be present Tuesday when the High Court
is scheduled to consider the case. Both injunctions are in force until then.

Mr. Munster said his book includes the ''bureaucracy's view'' of the Anzus
treaty and examines ''how good and how not so good their advice has been on such
subjects as Vietnam, New Guinea and East Timor.''

The editor of The Melbourne Age, Michael Davie, said, ''There is no doubt in my
mind that the publication of these documents is in the public interest.''

''The documents we proposed publishing in no way would have damaged Australia's
security, in our view, though they might perhaps have embarrassed a few public
service employees,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE;
A Change in Fortune for the Winner's Daughter

BYLINE: By David Bird

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 192 words


When her father was Governor of California, Patricia Davis opposed the Vietnam
War, which he favored. She still differs with him philosophically, vehemently
opposing the development of nuclear power, which he favors.

Professionally, she used the maiden name of her mother, Nancy, because, as she
said earlier this year, ''I felt I'd have a better chance of having my work
judged by its own merit if people weren't constantly reminded of who I was.''

But despite her Davis name things changed radically when her father became
President-elect Ronald Reagan last week.  The struggling 28-year-old actress,
singer and songwriter said that since Tuesday she had received offers from three
movie studios, a television network and five independent producers. She has been
told a recording contract will follow soon.

''I wouldn't be honest if I didn't admit that the extra exposure will help my
career,'' Miss Davis said over the weekend. ''But I think I can deliver. I've
been working a long time at my art and my craft.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LOW TURNOUT TREND HURTS DEMOCRATS

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1011 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 9


Before the election last Tuesday, many Democrats were saying that the results
could well hinge on how many people actually went to the polls. As Dan Horgan,
President Carter's campaign manager in Pennsylvania, put it, ''The first three
things I worry about are turnout.''

Preliminary evaluations of the voting patterns give some justification to those
fears. About 52 to 53 percent of the eligible voters cast ballots in the lowest
turnout since 1948, according to Curtis B. Gans, director of the Committee for
the Study of the American Electorate, a nonpartisan organization that studies
voting patterns. And although President Carter was defeated so decisively that
that turnout was not most important in the Presidential race, the low
participation rate hurt many Democratic candidates on the state level.

Peter Hart, a Washington poll taker who advises Democrats, said that turnout
made a ''major difference'' in half a dozen states where Democrats lost Senate
seats by narrow margins, including New York.  The Republicans won control of the
Senate by only three seats and Mr. Hart said he believed that the Democrats
could have kept numerical control of the Senate, had more people voted.
Generally, higher turnouts have helped the Democrats because groups that are
less likely to vote, such as the poor and uneducated, have leaned toward the
Democrats.

Mr. Gans pointed out that less than half the potential electorate cast ballots
for one of the two major-party candidates and that President-elect Ronald Reagan
received the support of only 26 percent of the potential electorate.

Downtrend Began in 1964

The trend to lower voter turnout began with the national elections of 1964.
Political scientists have offered many reasons for the decline in voter
participation, from an influx of younger voters to a rising disaffection for
politicians and the political process. This year the trend might have been
accelerated by a lack of voter enthusiasm for the Presidential candidates,
especially among those who usually vote the Democratic ticket.

In Philadelphia, for instance, voter turnout was down by 5 percent from 1976,
and President Carter's winning margin in that city dropped to 178,000 this year
from 255,000 four years ago.

''I attribute the fallout to disinterest in Carter's candidacy,'' said David
Glancy, chairman of the city's Democratic organization, ''if not downright
hostility in some areas.''

According to Mr. Gans, voter turnout rose in only one area of the country, the
South, which remained the nation's most conservative region. ''What seemed like
an unpalatable choice in other areas,'' he said, ''amounted to an affirmative
choice in the South.'' In the West, many potential Democratic voters apparently
stayed home when President Carter conceded the election before the polls closed.


Young People as Nonvoters

Another major element in the decline of voters was the attainment of voting age
by people born in the post-World War II ''baby boom.'' Young people vote in much
lower numbers than any other group, in large part because they have less
stability in their lives and less of a stake in the election outcome, according
to political analysts.

''I didn't register. I guess I was too lazy,'' said Jennifer Ladner, an
18-year-old college student in North Carolina. ''With school and everything, I
didn't know much about it. And I don't think any of the choices are that good
right now. They're not going to change the world or anything.''

Education is another important determinant in voter participation.  Political
analysts say that less educated voters are more intimidated by the mechanics of
voting and the decline of political parties. And straight-ticket voting has made
the whole process more confusing to those with less schooling.

''Parties were a mobilizing force, an educating force, a means of public
involvement,'' Mr. Gans said. ''They're no longer that.'' A Democratic Party
strategist added, ''The organizations are dying all over - you can't count on
them for much.''

The High Turnout in 1960

According to analysts of voting patterns, it was no accident that voter turnout
hit a high point in 1960, with the election of John F.  Kennedy, and then
started dropping after the electorate was battered by a series of disillusioning
events: from assassinations and inflation to Vietnam and Watergate.

Austin Ranney, a political scientist at the American Enterprise Institute, a
public-policy research organization, feels that television has contributed to
this disaffection by conveying an ''antipolitician bias'' in its coverage.
''Time after time'' he said, ''politicians are portrayed to us as self-seeking,
stupid, lying and hypocritcal.''

Many nonvoters interviewed this year seemed fearful of the responsibility of
voting and did not want to be duped by whomever they helped elect. ''Whoever
gets in, no matter how honest they look, they don't do a thing right,'' said
Gerry Lautenbacher, a southern New Jersey truck driver. ''A prime example is
Richard Nixon. The whole country voted for him, but millions of Americans were
wrong. He snowed everybody. If I vote for someone, and he screws up, I'd have no
one to blame but myself.''

J. Merrill Shanks, a professor of political science at the Berkeley campus of
the University of California, said that the ''degree of enthusiasm'' for the
available candidates was critical in determining turnout and this year, he said,
enthusiasm seemed to be lower than ever.

Accordingly, many of the 75 million adult Americans who did not vote last week
apparently agreed with Cheryl Deuter, 25, a secretary in Philadelphia: ''I don't
feel there's any candidate worth voting for. I just feel that Carter or Reagan
would not make that much of a difference on the economy or world affairs or
anything like that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 11, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOR SUSAN SONTAG, THE ILLUSIONS OF THE 60'S HAVE BEEN DISSIPATED

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 5, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1542 words


THE sensibility that resides in this particular town house is an eclectic one
indeed. Although the 8,000-book library, neatly arranged by historical epoch
from the Egyptians and Greeks through Fascism and Communism, encompasses the
disciplines of philosophy, literature and history, the walls are adorned with
artifacts from popular culture - photographs of Greta Garbo and Gary Cooper and
Fred Astaire, and a large pop art poster of a typewriter. The record collection
spans Wagner to the Beatles, Schubert to Patti Smith. Over Susan Sontag's desk
hang the pictures of five writers she admires and who presumably serve as her
resident muses: Marcel Proust, Oscar Wilde, Simone Weil, Virginia Woolf and the
critic Walter Benjamin.

At the age of 47, Miss Sontag is still preoccupied with the questions that have
animated her writing from the beginning - the relation of the esthetic and the
ethical, the shifting boundaries between popular culture and ''high'' art, and
the meaning of ''the modern.'' As she discusses her latest book, ''Under the
Sign of Saturn'' - a collection of essays recently published by Farrar Straus &
Giroux - her low, resonant voice glides from subject to subject, emending
phrases for precision and effect. Strewn with literary allusions and quotations,
her conversation, like her essays, resembles an ongoing interior dialogue.

Intellectual Celebrity

In the early 60's, when Miss Sontag first began writing such essays as the
famous ''Notes on Camp'' in Partisan Review, she quickly achieved a kind of
intellectual celebrity. To many, she seemed the very avatar of radical
intellectual taste, and she was heralded in the press as ''the Natalie Wood of
the U.S. Avant-Garde'' and as Mary McCarthy's successor as the ''Dark Lady of
American Letters.'' Concerned with the underlying structures of thought, her
essays were influenced by the French intellectual tradition, and in turn were
influential in shaping contemporary criticism. For instance, in ''Against
Interpretation,'' one of the most important and widely read critical documents
of the 60's, she defined a new formal estheticism, arguing that art and morality
have no common ground, that it is style, not content, that matters most of all.

Although she maintains that her current attitudes are not inconsistent with her
former positions, Miss Sontag's views have undergone a considerable evolution
over the last decade and a half.  In 1965, her celebration of style at the
expense of moral analysis led her to declare that Leni Riefenstahl's Nazi films
''The Triumph of the Will'' and ''Olympiad'' were ''masterpieces.'' ''Because
they project the complex movements of intelligence and grace and sensuousness,''
she wrote, ''these two films transcend the categories of propaganda or even
reportage.'' In an essay in her new book, however, she attacks ''Triumph of the
Will,'' calling it ''a film whose very conception negates the possibility of the
filmmaker's having an esthetic conception independent of propaganda.''

Exactly what brought about this change? ''I've become more aware of what a
historical perspective brings,'' she said. ''A decade-long residence in the
60's, with its inexorable conversion of moral and political radicalisms into
'style,' has convinced me of the perils of overgeneralizing the esthetic view of
the world.''

Political Views Changed, Too

Her political views too, it seems, have experienced a similar sea change. A
decade ago, she was speaking at Students for a Democratic Society rallies,
demonstrating against the Vietnam War, and making such observations as, ''the
white race is the cancer of human history.'' But in the recent Presidential
election Miss Sontag was engaged in what she called ''the most minimal political
aspiration of all - hoping that Carter would be re-elected.'' And, looking back
at the 1960's, she feels that ''while the justice of the protests (against the
war) was undeniable, there were also illusions and misconceptions about what was
possible in the rest of the world.''

''It was not so clear to many of us as we talked of American imperialism how few
options many of these countries had except for Soviet imperialism, which was
maybe worse,'' she went on. ''When I was in Cuba and North Vietnam, it was not
clear to me then that they would become Soviet satellites, but history has been
very cruel and the options available to these countries were fewer than we had
hoped. It's become a lot more complicated.''

But if politics are more complicated now, Miss Sontag feels that at least the
climate for artistic creation has improved: ''We now have a situation where
people are denied the hectic consolations of being part of movements,'' she
said. ''Now there are just individuals doing their work. That's important. The
people whose work is very good are usually people who are very singleminded, who
are quite separate.  Kafka said once you could never be too alone to write, and
in the end the life of a writer is very solitary.''

Work-Oriented Life

In Miss Sontag's case, the life is not exactly solitary - she spends the hours
when she is not at the typewriter going to movies and rock concerts - but it is
willfully work-oriented nonetheless.  Somehow the work and the play eventually
become one: she has said she can appreciate a Patti Smith concert because she
has read Nietzsche, and no doubt one day Patti Smith will appear in one of her
philosophical essays.

Because she is a slow, painstaking writer - some of the pieces in ''Under the
Sign of Saturn'' took as long as a year to write - Miss Sontag feels anxious
when she is not working. She always worries, she says, that there is not enough
time. That sense of urgency, of course, was further heightened several years ago
when she learned that she had cancer. Although her prognosis is now quite
bright, in the beginning it was not, and she says she felt she had ''crossed
some threshold in relation to death.'' ''Death becomes quite real to you,'' she
explains, ''and you never return to that more innocent relation to life you had
before. It really makes having priorities and trying to follow them very real to
you.''

In both her writing and in person, Miss Sontag has always been reluctant to
discuss herself. She has a strong sense of privacy, she says, and she has only
recently begun, shyly and tentatively, to use autobiographical material in some
of her short stories. Like most writers, however, she projects her own
temperament into her work and that temperament has determined, to a great
degree, what she has chosen to write about.

'The Saturnine Personality'

In the title essay of her new book, for instance, she describes ''the saturnine
personality'' as someone afflicted by melancholy, someone who possesses ''a
self-conscious and unforgiving relation to the self.'' He who lives under the
sign of Saturn, she writes, tends to be ''analytic,'' ''solitary,'' ''fiercely
serious'' and ''condemned to work.'' The essay was written as a portrait of
Walter Benjamin, but it could well serve as one of Susan Sontag herself.  ''I
felt I was describing myself,'' she said. ''I'm trying to tell the truth, but of
course I know I am drawn to the part of people that reminds me of myself.''

Miss Sontag says that she writes out of her own obsessions - in the case of ''On
Photography,'' her preoccupation with images and their meaning; in ''Illness as
Metaphor,'' her own experience with cancer.  Because she regards writing as a
means of ''getting rid of something,'' its effects are almost therapeutic. ''It
feels hygienic,'' she says. ''I feel I'm finally free of those obsessions and
free to go on to other things.''

Throughout her work, in fact, there is a theme of transcendence, of overcoming
history, both personal and cultural. In the well-known essay, ''The Esthetics of
Silence,'' she wrote on the intentional emptiness, the silence, in the work of
such modern artists as Cage and Beckett, and she admired their ability to
''jettison'' ''the inherited anguish and complexity of this civilization.'' Even
her arguments for formalist criticism assumed that one could approach a work of
art free from preconceptions.

In her own life, certainly, Miss Sontag has traveled a long way from her
rootless childhood in Arizona and California, the daughter of a traveling
salesman and a teacher. And she has traveled quickly - college at 15, marriage
at 17, teaching at 20 - but she says that she is still trying to ''create''
herself. She is at work on a novel, and after directing a play in Italy this
winter, plans to teach two small seminars at the New School. ''I feel
restless,'' she says.  ''I'm always trying to move on, and when I bring a book
out, I want it to be done, over, so I can do something different. I feel that my
best work is ahead of me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Susan Sontag

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 11, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 872 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
RAY. By Barry Hannah. 113 pages. Knopf.  $7.95.

IN ''Ray,'' Barry Hannah's startling new novel, set in the American South, we
have come a long way from the hanging moss and stately columns of the antebellum
era. In ''Ray,'' we have come by way of Faulkner, Flannery O'Connor, Tennessee
Williams, Walker Percy, and Harry Crews, to an image of the South that perhaps
is best captured by Mr. Hannah's description of the Hooches' home in Tuscaloosa,
Ala.: ''The others of the street are not of their homes as much as the Hooches.
The loud and untidy failures of the Hooches pour from the exits. Their broken
car is on the curb in front, pasted over with police citations. Around the base
of a ragged bush near the front door is wrapped an old rotten brassiere. In the
small front yard parts of toys and soaked food lie. A rope hangs from a
second-story window. The drainpipe has been beaten out of place by the
children.''

Not that this is the only image of the new South that appears in ''Ray.''
Indeed, it's remarkable how much of what we think of as quintessentially
Southern has been worked into the 62 fragments that compose this brief fiction
by the author whose first novel, ''Geronimo Rex,'' won the William Faulkner
Prize, and whose collection of stories, ''Airships,'' won the Arnold Gingrich
Short Fiction Award.

Cast of Characters

There is Sister Hooch, who appears first as a sort of Tennessee Williams Baby
Doll, but progresses, by way of a stint at prostitution, to become a rising
recording star. There is Maynard Castro, the Baptist preacher, who wants Sister
to ''sing for us at the church during the Youth Impact next month,'' because
''You are so admired by the young people in town,'' but who ends up shooting
Sister ''three times through her precious brain,'' because ''he just could not
take the beauty.'' ''Most preachers are this way. Their messages seem
benevolent, but they are more evil than the rest of us walking pavement.''

And there is Ray, the subject and object of the novel: ''Ray, you are a doctor
and you are in a hospital in Mobile, except now you are a patient and you're
still me.'' Ray is a violent-tempered alcoholic, a bad poet, a bigot, a
womanizer, a wastrel, an irresponsible adventurer who steals and crashes other
people's Learjets and administers drugs to the un-needy. ''I tell you, if not
for his old records and his Shakespeare,'' Ray observes, ''Ray would be a
casualty of the American confusion.''

Ray is appalling. He punches out harmless poets and lets his patients die if he
disapproves of them. He responds to a woman who consults him about her
lesbianism - his best friend's wife -by offering to sleep with her. ''I am
infected with every disease I ever tried to cure. I am a vicious nightmare of
illnesses.'' But Ray embodies certain contradictions. Honor and ignominy: he
dreams of charging across a field with Jeb Stuart in the Civil War, and he
remembers flying his Phantom jet in Vietnam.

As he lectures an American Civilization class at the local university:
''Americans have never been consistent. They represent gentleness and rage
together. Franklin was the inventor of the stove, bifocals, and so on. Yet he
abused his neglected family. Jefferson, with his great theories, could not
actually release the slaves even though he regularly fornicated with one of
them. One lesson we as Americans must learn is to get used to the contrarieties
in our hearts and learn to live with them.'' That's Ray every time.

Later he tells us: ''And yet without a healthy sense of confusion, Ray might
grow smug. It's true, isn't it? I might join the gruesome tribe of the smug. I
think it's better with me all messed up.'' Maybe so. The more you think about
Ray, the more you understand him and almost sympathize.

Novel Grows on You

The more you think about Mr. Hannah's novel, the more you understand and like
it. It doesn't go down easily. Only occasionally does its language approach
poetry: ''There are dry tiny horses running in my veins,'' says Ray, as he
thinks himself out of the hospital in Mobile. More often the poetry is downright
bad, like the verse that Sister's father, J. Hooch, turns out. ''We got the jinx
and the voodoo visited upon us./ But it's New Year, so I'll light myself up/
With a cup of gas./ It'll be a hell of a feeling,/ And this one will really,
really be the last.''

Still, one has to admire the extraordinary amount of movement Mr.  Hannah gets
into his apparently impressionistic plot. One has to admire Mr. Hannah's
originality and jagged unpredictability. One has to admire his willingness to
look at ''God's especially ugly creatures'' without sentimentalizing or
blinking. As Ray says, speaking for the author, ''Now I guess I should give you
swaying trees and the rare geometry of cows in the meadow or the like - to break
it up. But, sorry, me and this are over.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Barry Hannah

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 12, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN-AFFAIRS OUTLOOK ON CAPITAL HILL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1013 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


The Republicans' election victory in the Senate could usher in a new phase in
Congressional relations with the White House in which greater freedom of action
in foreign and defense policy is restored to the executive branch, several
Senators and staff aides said today.

Just a week has passed since the Republicans won control of the Senate, 53 seats
to 47, and the leaders of the new Republican majority have just started working
on an agenda for next year.  However, both Republican and Democratic members say
that the new Senate will be more supportive of increases in military spending
and more skeptical of arms negotiations with the Soviet Union.

They said that the most important shift that could occur would be giving the
executive branch greater flexibility in conducting diplomacy and using military
force abroad. ''There will certainly be more support for giving the White House
more flexibility on national-security matters,'' said Senator John Tower, who is
scheduled to take over the Armed Services Committee in January.

Few Liberals Survived Election

''If Reagan wants to concentrate power in the White House, I think he will get
what he wants,'' said Senator Gary Hart, Democrat of Colorado, one of the few
liberals who survived last week's election.  ''We have lost a whole generation
of people in the Senate who are experienced in foreign affairs, and the new
people have little memory of Vietnam or Watergate.''

Senators and staff aides said that after 12 years in which Congress legislated
restrictions on Presidential authority for going to war, selling arms and
ordering intelligence operations, the pendulum of Congressional control had
already begun to swing back.

Senate aides said the defeat of Democratic Senators Frank Church of Idaho,
George McGovern of South Dakota and John C. Culver of Iowa, meant that some of
the most vocal and articulate voices for an expanded Congressional role in
foreign policy would be gone. Mr.  Church, chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee, had been a particularly strong force behind legislation restricting
Presidential war powers and cutting back White House prerogatives in national
emergencies.

Together with other liberal Democrats and Republicans, the three Senators had
also brought about adoption of restrictions on foreign aid and military
cooperation with pro-Western countries that were judged to have violated human
rights, such as Chile and Argentina.

Restrictions on C.I.A. Opposed

Some of the leaders of the new Republican majority in the Senate, including
Senators Tower and Barry Goldwater of Arizona, the prospective chairman of the
Intelligence Committee, are well-known critics of many of the controls placed on
Presidential authority during the 1970's, including the 1973 War Powers Act and
the 1976 Arms Control Export Act.

Mr. Goldwater said in an interview that he also favored the removal of
restrictions on intelligence operations ''that had hampered the legitimate
functions of the C.I.A.''

Staff aides close to Charles H. Percy of Illinois, the new chairman of the
Foreign Relations Committee, said it was too soon to say whether he would
support the widespread repeal of Congressional controls. But committee aides
said that Mr. Percy, considered a moderate in foreign policy, was likely to come
under heavy pressure from Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, and
other conservatives on the committee.

Mr. Tower said it was unlikely that the War Powers Act would be repealed because
it had become a symbol of Congressional participation in national security
issues. The act, which was largely drafted by Senator Jacob K. Javits, the New
York Republican who was defeated last week, requires the President to consult
with Congress after ordering troops into combat.

Repeal of Act Believed Unlikely

A senior Republican aide in the Senate also said it was unlikely that the Reagan
administration would seek repeal of the act for fear of appearing too eager to
go to war.

At the same time, several foreign policy restrictions could be loosened or
dropped altogether, Senate aides said. Several senators are said to favor
modification of the 1978 Nuclear Nonproliferation Act so that the the White
House would have greater flexibility in exports of nuclear materials.

There is also said to be growing support for ending restrictions on sales of
military equipment to countries that have generally supported American diplomacy
but that have been out of favor because of human-rights issues or other
problems. These countries were said to include Somalia, Morocco, Turkey and
Pakistan.

Republican aides said there was strong sentiment on both the Foreign Relations
Committee and the Armed Services Committee in favor of abolishing the 1976
action requiring an annual report from the executive branch on the impact of new
weapons development and deployment decisions on arms-control negotiations.

Senate officials said that the removal of existing foreign-policy restrictions
would depend, in the end, on whether the Democratic majority in the House was
willing to concur with the Senate. The chairman of the House Foreign Affairs
Committee, Clement J. Zablocki of Wisconsin, supported earlier efforts to
guarantee Congressional participation in foreign-policy issues, but aides said
he had recently backed attempts by the Carter White House to get somewhat more
autonomy in foreign aid and other areas.

On military issues, Congressional staff members said they expected close
cooperation between the Armed Services Committees of the House and the Senate.
The House committee, headed by Melvin Price, Democrat of Illinois, has supported
increases in military spending in recent years and is expected to continue doing
so.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 12, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A COLD VETERANS DAY OF MARCHERS AND MEMORIES

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 630 words


Patriotism paraded down Fifth Avenue yesterday, draped in bunting and brave with
ribbons.  It came in many forms: men on crutches and with canes who had served
in World War I, Gold Star mothers and wives wearing their men's medals, packs of
former soldiers in military caps, color guards, majorettes, the trumpeter who
played taps, the officers of the American Legion posts and the three small
children who rode on the back of their father, who spent two years in Vietnam.

They came in the cold to mark Veterans Day, though scarcely anyone stood on the
sidewalks to cheer them.

'Patriotism Is Coming Back'

Mayor Koch, who was in the Army during World War II, was there as honorary
marshal. He joined the march from 39th Street to the Eternal Light Monument at
24th Street and Fifth Avenue, where the veterans have gathered each year since
it was dedicated in 1923. Then he stopped to address them and inveigh against a
weak America.

''Patriotism is coming back,'' he told the several hundred people stamping their
feet in the cold. ''The country and all of its citizens agree that for this
country to be strong is paramount. It is when we are not perceived as strong
that we get into a situation where others take advantage of us, such as in
Iran.''

The hostages in Iran were a big part of the parade. Each speaker invoked their
spirits. Mayor Koch promised them a ticker-tape parade upon their return. A
large wreath of yellow chrysanthemums bore a broad ribbon reading ''Remembrance
Our Hostages in Iran: 374 days.'' Barbara Rosen, whose husband, Barry, is one of
those hostages, helped place it at the foot of the monument.

''With their loss of freedom, they have made each of us redefine what freedom
is,'' Mrs. Rosen said. ''We should all say thank you to the 52 men and women who
have lost so much so that we could reevaluate and see what is important to us.''

Elsewhere there were also flags and flowers and ''The Battle Hymn of the
Republic.'' The red oak on 110th Street that was dedicated more than half a
century ago to Harlem's unknown soldier was rededicated at the 369th Regiment
Armory.

A statue, part skeletal form, part eagle, went up on the C. W.  Post campus on
Long Island, paid for by a veterans group that is now defunct.

The traditions mingled with their own decline.  ''I understand that it doesn't
really mean anything to the kids,'' said Pat Monahan, who was one of the few to
watch the parade pass down Fifth Avenue, the flags flying. ''But my older
brother died in World War II and it still hurts. It's a different world now.''

Behind the bandstand at the Eternal Light sat Robert Condon, who fought in both
World Wars and in Korea. He is 85 years old, and when he retired from the Air
Force he was a major general.

''I was here at the dedication of this monument in 1923,'' Mr.  Condon said.
''This makes me feel sad. The public has lost their interest. If the young
people don't get interested, they're going to lose an awful lot.''

Vincent McGowan was wearing a blue American Legion cap, too, but in one corner
of his was a big gold pin that said ''Vietnam'' in block letters.

''1966 to 1968,'' he said, ''Central Highlands. Remember hearing about it during
the Tet offensive? I think we're past the point of being self-conscious about
our contribution. As long as we did what we did in good faith, it's up to the
politicians to justify whether it was right. More and more we are realizing that
we can't be ashamed, that we have to stand up for what we did.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 12, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 71 words


''I think we're past the point of being self-conscious about our contribution.
As long as we did what we did in good faith, it's up to the politicians to
justify whether it was right. More and more we are realizing that we can't be
ashamed, that we have to stand up for what we did.'' - Vincent McGowan, a
Vietnam War veteran, at the Veterans Day parade in New York. (B3:3.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 13, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. Aide Is in Vietnam for Talks On an Airlift of 1,700 to the U.S.

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 158 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 12


Officials said today that an American employed by the United Nations had begun
consultations in Ho Chi Minh City for an airlift of more than 1,700 Vietnamese
to the United States.

The United Nations representative, Thomas Malia, went to the former South
Vietnamese capital, previously known as Saigon, yesterday, the officials said.

Mr. Malia, a member of the staff of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, is authorized to compare a list of 1,745 names submitted by Vietnam
with a Washington roll of acceptable Vietnamese and determine whether they are
eligible for a flight to the United States. Those approved would make a short
stopover in Bangkok for administrative formalities.

''The fact that the Vietnamese let the man into Saigon appears to be a very
encouraging breakthrough,'' an American Embassy source said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 13, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICA, RECOGNIZE VIETNAM;
by Anthony Barnett

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 871 words

DATELINE: ITHACA, N.Y.


The arrival of the Reagan administration, with its proclaimed attachment to
business-like procedures in foreign policy, could open the way for a
professional approach to the issue of recognizing Vietnam. It is time for
America to normalize diplomatic relations with Hanoi. The argument that
recognition would sanction the occupation of Cambodia is naive, an example of
the way old attitudes leave America off balance. Washington has, and will
continue to have, accredited representatives in countries that it condemns for
aggression. Rather, what matters is that it can conduct a balanced, non-paranoid
foreign policy.

The Carter Administration's weakness in this respect was illustrated in April
when a predominantly religious, seven-member delegation visited the White House.
It carried a petition signed by more than 500 Americans, many of them
distinguished, calling for the recognition of Vietnam. Although almost all had
personally condemned Hanoi's overthrow of Pol Pot, their plea was dismissed as
pro-Hanoi.  Lincoln P. Bloomfield, then a National Security Council member,
responded: ''There is no reason to normalize diplomatic relations with Vietnam,
other than liberal, neurotic guilt.''

His Council colleague in charge of Asian affairs, Roger Sullivan, was more
energetic: ''If Vietnam experiences economic hardships,'' he was quoted by the
delegation saying, ''I think that this is just great.''

To me, a European, such sentiments seemed amateurish, even ominous. It is surely
clear that America should have representatives in Hanoi. It is one thing to
describe the Vietnam War as having been a noble cause; it is another to keep
fighting it mentally into 80's. Of course, it is understandable that bureaucrats
whose careers were wounded by the Vietnam conflict should retain deep,
irrational obsessions.

But whether in the White House, the Pentagon, or in ''thinktanks,'' such
attitudes are a disability. The Reagan administration should pension them off,
decently and swiftly.

Mr. Sullivan justified his position this way: ''To put it in terms of a Chinese
dialectic, United States policy is exactly to squeeze Vietnam as hard as we can
to force it to rely upon the Soviet Union: Then Vietnam will find that the
Soviet Union cannot meet all its needs.'' There is no dialectic here. To be
sure, in its brutality the remark recalls one by China's Deputy Prime

Minister, Deng Xiaoping, who in 1979 told Masayoshi Ohira, Japan's Prime
Minister at the time: ''It is wise for China to force the Vietnamese to stay in
Cambodia, because that way they will suffer more and more...'' Both views are
equally shortsighted and show a staggering contempt for the people of the
region.

What Mr. Sullivan seemed to think was that should America oblige the proud
Vietnamese to rely on the Soviet Union, Moscow would then overplay its hand and
a split would develop. Vietnam, he seemed to imply, would then turn to the West
as China has done.

Such a scenario is improbable. Rather, America's squeezing Vietnam will almost
certainly continue to increase Soviet influence in Hanoi, especially in its
military guise.

Consequently, the China-Soviet dispute could come to dominate Southeast Asian
affairs: It could result in an unwanted polarization in the region. There are
already signs of such a development.

Along the China-Vietnam border well over half a million heavily armed troops
face each other. There are regular exchanges of artillery fire, with the risk of
escalation. The Vietnamese presence along Thailand's border has increased the
militarization of Bangkok, while Hanoi has linked its occupation of Cambodia to
what it regards as Chinese threats. Although the situation is still precarious,
there is now a pause in large-scale fighting.

The United States should use the opportunity to prevent itself from being boxed
in by its past. America must not reproduce the irrationality of its original
China policy when the refusal to recognize Peking helped to bring about the
Vietnam War.

Meanwhile, Thailand's Prime Minister, Gen. Tisunalond Prem, has just returned
from Peking. He requested that China move away from its support for Pol Pot's
Khmer Rouge. Apparently he returned empty-handed. As Washington has tied its own
Cambodian policy to that of its Asian allies, it also finds itself in an
untenable position.  Moreover, Asian countries that America supports, among them
Japan, already have embassies in Hanoi and trade with Vietnam. So, too, do
France, West Germany, and Britain. There is a sense in which the United States
will merely continue to ''abnormalize'' itself unless it opens diplomatic
relations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Anthony Barnett, a British subject, is an associate of the Transnational
Institute, in Amsterdam, an affiliate of the Institute for Policy Studies, in
Washington. He is a Visiting Fellow at Cornell University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 13, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ROBERT LEE WOLFF, 64, A HISTORIAN

BYLINE: By WALTER H. WAGGONER

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 483 words


Robert Lee Wolff, Coolidge Professor of History at Harvard University, a
specialist in Balkan affairs and East-West relations in Europe, died Tuesday of
a heart attack at his home in Cambridge. He was 64 years old.

Dr. Wolff wrote widely in his field, but he was also a student of English
Victorian literature. He had just completed the first volume of a five-volume
work cataloging his own collection of English Victorian fiction and he was also
supervising the writing of a series of volumes on ''The Vietnam Experience.''

Among his major works was ''The Balkans in our Time,'' published in 1956 and
reprinted in 1976. A review of the book in The New York Times Book Review said
that Dr. Wolff had ''accomplished a major feat in encompassing within one meaty
and readable volume the kaleidoscopic history of Yugoslavia, Rumania, Bulgaria
and Albania in this century.''

''The process of Communist takeover in each of the four countries is set forth
in masterful strokes,'' the reviewer wrote.

Other Historic Works

Dr. Wolff's other volumes of history included ''Studies in the Latin Empire of
Constantinople,'' published in 1976. He was also a co-author of the two-volume
''A History of Civilization,'' published in 1955, which chronicled man's
experiences from prehistoric times to the mid-20th century. He was a co-editor
of Volume II of ''A History of the Crusades,'' published in 1962 and reprinted
in 1969.

Dr. Wolff wrote several books on the Victorian fiction of England.  Among them
were ''The Golden Key: A Study of the Fiction of George MacDonald'' (1961),
''Strange Stories'' (1971), ''Gains and Losses: Novels of Faith and Doubt in
Victorian England'' (1977).  ''Sensational Victorian: the Life and Fiction of
Mary Elizabeth Braddon'' (1979) and ''William Carlton, Irish Peasant Novelist''
(1980).

Dr. Wolff, who was born in New York City, was the son of Samuel Lee Wolff, a
professor of English at Columbia University. He graduated from Harvard
University in 1936, receiving his M.A. degree in 1937 and his doctoral degree in
1947.

Named to Havard Post

He was a teaching fellow at Harvard from 1937 to 1941, and from 1942 to 1945 he
was chief of the Balkan section in the research and analysis branch of the
wartime Office of Strategic Services. After a period of teaching at the
University of Wisconsin, Dr. Wolff rejoined the Harvard faculty in 1950. He was
named a full professor in 1955 and Coolidge Professor of History in 1965.

Dr. Wolff leaves his wife, the former Mary Andrews; two daughters, Rosamond
Purcell and Katharine Wolff; two sons, Robert Lee Jr. and James, and four
grandchildren, all of Cambridge.

A memorial service will be held at 2 P.M. Nov. 20 at the Memorial Church at
Harvard University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 15, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HERO OR DESERTER, GARWOOD GOES ON TRIAL AT CAMP LEJEUNE

BYLINE: By WENDELL RAWLS Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1031 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Nov. 14


An inscrutable Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marine Corps and five officers of a
general court-martial were taken back today to a steamy jungle existence half a
world away and half of his life ago.

After nearly 14 years behind enemy lines, Private Garwood returned to this
country in 1979, four years after the fall of Saigon. The last American
serviceman back from Vietnam, he said he had been a prisoner of war all that
time and had been shot, beaten, stoned and tortured.

The Government said he had been a deserter and a collaborator with the enemy.
Today his official day in court began.  The charges against Private Garwood stem
from actions he allegedly took against American troops and prisoners of war and
in favor of North Vietnam ese soldiers and Vietcong guerrillas from 1965 to
1969.

According to the Government, he was absent without leave from his Marine unit in
the northern South Vietnamese city of Danang; linked up with the Vietcong;
accepted a position in their forces; wore their uniform; turned their weapons on
his American comrades; encouraged American combat forces to throw down their
weapons and refuse to fight; and chose to remain with the Vietcong after he had
been offered freedom in 1967.

Coercive Persuasion Alleged

Mr. Garwood contends that he was taken captive while on an authorized duty
assignment to pick up an officer, and that inhumane treatment at the hands of
his Vietcong captors caused him such mental debilitation that he became a victim
of coercive persuasion and did not know that some of his actions were criminal
or were violations of military law.

Maj. Werner Hellmer, the chief Government prosecutor, acknowledged today that
the Government lacked documentary evidence. But he insisted that the case was
''not complicated'' and that testimony from witnesses, most of them former
prisoners of war, would show that Private Garwood had served the enemy as an
interpreter, an interrogator, a leader of political indoctrination courses and a
guard of and an informer against American prisoners.

However, the case seems to have implications that go beyond desertion or
collaboration.

Those Missing in Action

For example, Mr. Garwood emerged from Vietnam in March 1979, more than two years
after a special United States commission had reported North Vietnam's contention
that there were no Americans being involuntarily held in that country. Since
then, reports have persisted that more American soldiers are still being
detained in Vietnam, a contention long held by the families of those soldiers
listed as missing in action.

In addition, the corps has reasserted its allegiance to the obligations of a
United States marine. And there have been murmurings, at least indirectly
related to the Garwood case, among officers on this post that Marine guards in
Iran reacted inadequately when the United States Embassy in Teheran was
attacked.  According to this accusation, they succumbed and were taken prisoner
without either killing or being killed.

Some of those officers refer with pride to the recent speech of Gen. Robert H.
Barrows, the Marine Corps Commandant, on the occasion of the corps's 205th
birthday, in which he stressed a commitment to ''uncomprising standards and
uncompromising perfo rmance.''

Discipline and Pride

John C. Lowe, a civilian who is Mr. Garwood's chief defense attorney, today
cited the ''long tradition of discipline and pride in the Marine Corps.'' But in
his opening statement he also cited conditions in Private Garwood's experience
that he said overrode both concepts as well as the Code of Conduct, which
outlines a soldier's duty in case of capture.

Mr. Garwood, 34 years old, is from Adams, Ind. He joined the Marines when he was
17.  According to statements in the cramped courtroom today, Private Garwood was
in his jeep waiting for an officer when he was set upon by a Vietcong unit. He
engaged in a brief firefight, killing two of the guerrillas and receiving a
wound in his right arm.

His attorney said the soldier was captured, stripped to his underwear and
marched for miles in public display and abuse, then confined to a hanging bamboo
cage, where he was subjected to body leeches and thousands of mosquitos and
suffered diarrhea and malaria.

And Then He Broke

Mr. Lowe said the private twice tried to escape and was punished by being thrown
into a deep hole and urinated upon. Then the marine cracked, his attorney said,
the victim of ''deep-seated and searing trauma, and profoundly mentally ill.''

His mind, the attorney said, was more a victim than his body.  Mr. Garwood is
expected to call five psychiatrists and psychologists to describe the extent of
his ''mental disease.'' The first prosecution witness was Warrant Officer
Francis G.  Anton, a helicopter pilot and a former prisoner of war who first saw
Private Garwood in 1968, about two years after the marine had been captured.

He said that Mr. Garwood wore pajama-type uniforms similar to those of the
Vietcong and that he occasionally carried a rifle. But he said he did not know
whether the rifle was loaded or whether Mr. Garwood had access to bullets.

According t o Mr. Anton, Private Garwood occasionally guarded other prisoners
and ran errands for the Vietcong. He also said that the defendant occ asionally
smuggled eggs to the other prisoners and on one occasion got them a chicken.

He added that Mr. Garwood had told him that the Vietcong had promised him
freedom if he worked for them for a specified time - but that they had reneged
on that promise.

After Mr. Anton's testimony, the court-martial adjourned until 9 A.M. Tuesday.
The trial is expected to last past the end of the year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert R. Garwood

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 15, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: VETERANS TROUP GIVES 'HOME OF THE BRAVE'

BYLINE: By RICHARD F. SHEPARD

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 646 words


The theater of World War II had barely closed in 1945 when ''Home of the
Brave,'' by Arthur Laurents, opened in the theater of Broadway, a realistic play
about the war and some of the people who fought it. It was a departure from the
general run of heroic drama that had spurred morale during the fighting, and it
also tackled a theme that even then made some audiences uncomfortable:
anti-Semitism.

The three-act play by Mr. Laurents, the first on Broadway by the man who later
wrote the book of ''West Side Story,'' is being performed by the Veterans
Ensemble Theater Company, whose male members are all Vietnam veterans, at the
American Theater of Actors, 314 West 54th Street.

After all these years, ''Home of the Brave'' still has something to say and, if
its thrust is different from that of war plays of today, it says it well in this
production, done with an earnestness born of understanding. It is not an antiwar
play, as one might expect in the curre ncy of our time. It does not question th
e war effort, but it deals with what war can do to young people wh o have to
grow up in a hurry.

Coen is a Jewish soldier in a small but highly regarded cadre of engineering
troops. He is ridden hard by a corporal who doesn't like Jews; he finds signs of
latent anti-Semitism in others, and even suspects it in his best friend, who is
killed while they are on a daring sortie on a Japanese-held island in the
Pacific. Coen becomes paralyzed as he refuses to leave his friend's body, but
the problem is mental, not physical. He is hospitalized, and the play rests on
the framework of the doctor and patient trying to work their way out of his
guilt.

Under the direction of Jonathan Polansky, the acting is realistic, reflecting
the casual manner of genuine people, but the performance hits many dramatic
highs. It is full of action that very nicely counterbalances the words. If it
fails to do more than just adumbrate the Jewish question, it is very specific
and telling on the thinking of the soldier and his therapy.

R.J. Bonds, as Coen, projects very neatly the image of a clean-cut but troubled
American boy, the sort we were used to seeing at that time. He is more lost than
bitter, but his performance catches nuances of feeling in excellent fashion. Dan
Lauria, as the doctor, carries an authority and understanding that make his role
quite credible. David Fletcher is genuine as the best friend, who says he is
free of prejudice, but at one moment lets it slip. Shelton Franklin and Ron
French are fine as the other soldiers, and Don Smith is the personification of a
young inexperienced major.

''Home of the Brave'' shows some signs of wear theatrically at the hands of
time, but it shows no wear at all in dealing with the perennial problems of
soldiers, who are just people.

The Cast
HOME OF THE BRAVE, by Arthur Laurents; di- rected by Jonathan Polansky; set
design by Salvatore Tagliarino; costume design by Lee Entwisle; lighting design
by Michael Gebhardt; stage manager, Anthony Rasemus. Presented by the Veterans
Ensemble Theater Company, Thomas Bird, artistic director. At 314 West 54th
Street.  Coen .......................................R.J. Bonds Finch
..................................David Fletcher Mingo
................................Shelton Franklin T.J.
.......................................Ron French Doctor
.....................................Dan Lauria Major Robinson
..............................Don Smith

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 15, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CHOOSING FOR DEFENSE;
by Ivan Selin

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 904 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va.


Only one of the Army's 10 divisions in the United States is combat-ready, 60
percent of the Air Force's tactical fighters cannot be used immediately, more
than half of the Navy's fleet has serious readiness deficiencies. Fewer than
half the military's recruits finish their first tour of duty, and the shortages
of pilots, submariners, and career noncommissioned officers is critical.
Although these facts are widely acknowledged, their implications are not
reflected in defense programs and were not reflected in the defense debate that
preceded the election of Ronald Reagan.

This debate focused almost exclusively on comparisons between American and
Soviet defense spending. Our defense budget does need to be increased but not
primarily because of Soviet defense-spending levels. An increase is needed
because our defense Establishment cannot carry out its missions. A spending
increase could improve the situation significantly, but only if the increase is
spent intelligently. Unfortunately, Mr. Reagan's proposals will not improve the
situation perceptibly. We do need a healthy defense increase - probably 10
percent in real terms in 1981 and for the next two years - but we should spend
it for readiness, not for more new divisions, new airplanes, or missiles.

Our military's main missions are deterrence of a nuclear attack on the United
States and Europe, deterrence of non-nuclear attacks on the Atlantic alliance,
protection of our vital interests in the Middle East and Persian Gulf, and
maintenance of logistic and manpower reserves in America to back up these or
other requirements that might arise. We can perform these missions adequately,
but with no margin of safety or miscalculation. Our ability to perform secondary
missions, like deterrence of attack in northeastern Asia, is generally marginal.

World trends will make this already precarious situation even more tenuous. We
are starting to ask more, not less, of the military than we have at any time
since the Vietnam War. We are increasingly committed in the Persian Gulf and
elsewhere in the Middle East, and yet other areas such as Korea and NATO's have
not lessened their reliance on our defense Establishment.

Even as our list of military requirements grows, Moscow seems determined to make
it as difficult as possible for us to meet these requirements. Whether measured
in dollars, rubles, research-anddevelopment vigor, or general belligerence, the
Soviet defense effort is continuing at a very high pace. Current trends will not
lead to an improved military balance.

The essential point here is that the balance is unfavorable, not because we are
spending less than the Russians but because we are not spending enough to carry
out goals we have set for ourselves.

Better defense management won't free resources needed to improve the military
balance while allowing us to live within our defense budget. Although particular
examples of potential savings abound, the savings do not add up to enough. We
have had a number of strong management-oriented Defense Secretaries in the last
15 years. It is wishful thinking to believe that a new magician could accomplish
miracles on a scale they could not. The only alternative is to increase defense
spending in real terms.

Wholesale procurement of new weapons systems, when we cannot properly operate
and maintain those we have, would do little to increase our military capability.
Our highest priority has to be to remedy deficiencies in readiness. Fortunately,
these are primarily problems of money, not of morale, the draft, leadership. We
need increases in military pay especially targeted to retention of pilots and
key enlisted ratings. We should increase operating funds to allow more training
and maintenance, thus improving readiness. We should invest in capacity to
produce future weapons so that industry will be able to turn out weapons when we
need them. Defense-program planning should stress personnel retention, improved
readiness, research-anddevelopment.

For the first time in 10 years, we are close to a national consensus for a
program with these emphases, even though the required increases in military pay
and operating funds alone will amount to 10 percent of the Defense Department
budget in real terms.  It is when additional teeth - MX's, B-1's, and new
fighters - are added that the consensus disappears. We have about three years to
decide whether we also need a new generation of aircraft and missiles. But if we
try to lard the defense budget with premature procurement decisions, we risk
losing the once-a-generation opportunity to fix the critical readiness problems.
We can't have new hardware and improved readiness at the same time. We cannot
improve the readiness of our f orces if at the same time we try to change these
forces significantly.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
Ivan Selin is chairman of American Management Systems Inc., a consulting and
computer-software concern. About 10 percent of its business comes from the
Defense Department, a spokesman said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 15, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 1980

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 932 words


International
Poland stopped almost all food exports in an effort to counteract domestic
shortages that have recently worsened. The export of foodstuffs from a country
that had been a major supplier of grain to Britain, Scandinavia and elsewhere
''has now practically fallen to nil,'' according to Jan Zaleski, the Minister of
Food Industry. As winter approaches, grocery stores are short of basic
commodities - eggs, milk, flour, butter, sugar and potatoes. (Page 1, Col. 5.)
A Soviet-American compromise in Madrid saved the East-West conference there on
detente and human rights under the Helsinki accords from collapse. Both sides
accepted an agenda fashioned by the foreign ministers of four other nations,
breaking a procedural deadlock and ending a Soviet filibuster. (5:4-6.)
A Swiss court froze millions of dollars in proceeds of an auction of jewelry in
Geneva, which the Iranian Government said belonged to the Empress Farah, the
Shah's widow. The court order was obtained by Swiss lawyers on behalf of
Teheran, which says 15 pieces of jewelry were put up for sale by the deposed
Empress. (6:3-6.)
Persian Gulf Crisis
Iraq stepped up its offensive in Iran's oil province of Khuzistan.  Both sides
said that Iraqi forces were advancing from several directions toward the city of
Susangird, northwest of Ahwaz, the provincial capital. (6:3-6.)
National
A discount rate increase of a full percentage point, to 12 percent, was
announced by the Federal Reserve Board and will be effective Monday. The
discount rate is the interest rate the Federal Reserve charges on loans to
financial institutions. The board's action indicated that still higher interest
rates might be in view. (1:6.)

A military budget for 1982 that could authori ze up to $200 billion will be
proposed to Congress in January by th e Carter Administration,a much larger
increase than planned only eigh t months ago. Meanwhile,Secretary of Defense
Harold Brown reversed hi s plans and asked the Senate Appropriations Committee
to increase, rather than decrease, the 1981 military budget by $1 billion. (1:2-
3.)
Ronald Reagan announced his first Administration appointments and key transition
officials said work would begin Monday to select, as directed by the
President-elect, no fewer than three names to be considered for each Cabinet
post. Mr. Reagan announced, as expected, that his White House chief of staff
would be James A. Baker 3d, and that Edwin Meese 3d would be counselor to the
President with Cabinet rank. (1:4-6.)
The aims of the Justice Department under the Reagan Administration, the
President-elect's advisers suggest, would be aid to victims of crime, renewed
emphasis on combating street crime, strong support of the F.B.I., and a cautious
approach to civil rights enforcement.  (9:1-2.)
An evangelist's inauguration party for Ronald Reagan is being investigated by a
Federal grand jury for possible violation of mailfraud laws. James E. Johnson, a
minister and a former aide to the President-elect, sent mail solicitations to
40,000 people asking them to buy $130 tickets to a ''Presidential Inaugural
Celebration With Love,'' indicating that Mr. Reagan and George Bush, the Vice
President-elect, would attend. This was denied by the official inauguration
committee. (11:1-3.)
Robert Garwood's court-martial began at Camp LeJeune, the Marine base in North
Carolina. Private Garwood returned to the United States last year, four years
after the fall of Saigon. The last American serviceman back from Vietnam, he
said he had been a prisoner of war all that time and that he had been
brutalized. The Government says that he was a deserter and collaborator with the
enemy. (8:1-4.)
24 million acres of public land in the West have been designated for study as
potential wilderness areas by the Interior Department's Bureau of Land
Management. At the same time, the bureau released 150 million acres from further
consideration as wilderness areas. (16:3.)
Metropolitan
Sweeping deregulation of liquor laws in New York State were proposed by Governor
Carey at meeting with legislature leaders. He called for the repeal of the
liquor minimum-price laws and abolition of the current system of uniform
price-setting at the wholesale level, and recommended that the minimum price
system for wine, struck down by the courts this year, not be restored. (1:1.)
Demolition of the bicycle-lane barriers installed in Manhattan last summer was
begun. Mayor Koch, who ordered them built, changed his mind about their efficacy
when their use had sharply declined. (1:4.)
John M. Murphy's lawyer charged, in an attack on the prosecution, that two
months after the Representative from Staten Island was alleged to have joined in
taking a $50,000 bribe from an Abscam undercover agent, the agent knew he
''didn't have a case against Murphy'' and attempted to build one by getting him
to say incriminating things at another meeting. (1:1-2.)
Deliveries of adulterated heating oil with a dangerously low flash, or
ignitable, point in North Jersey by two Newark companies was halted by the New
Jersey Attorney General, John J. Degnan. The fuel is a No. 4 heavy oil used in
industry, institutional buildings and apartment houses. (25:6.)

Business Digest, Page 29

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Weed-Killer Faces Ban

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 44, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 66 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 15


The National Park Service plans to halt the use of a weedkiller, 2,4-D, in the
325 parks it operates following complaints by environmentalists, Dwight Morrow,
a spokesman for the service, said today. Last year, the service used 2,000
pounds of 2,4-D, also a component in the controversial Vietnam War era herbicide
Agent Orange, according to Mr. Morrow.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
FROM A TIGHLY FOCUSED 'LIFE' TO A SCATTERSHOT 'FIFTH OF JULY'

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1944 words


''The devil and all was not in me'' is the rueful summation Roy Dotrice arrives
at as he counts up his memories in Hugh Leonard's ''A Life.'' And the devil
wasn't in the man. The man, incidentally, is one we all met in Mr. Leonard's
''Da,'' that crusty old employer with a passion for language and a facility for
bookkeeping who kept trying to steer his youngers toward literature rather than
ledgers. He was a drop-in figure in ''Da,'' moving with rigid decorum and a
bitter tongue toward the uninviting end of his days. In ''A Life,'' though, Mr.
Leonard turns the evening over to him, still heading for death but desperately
demanding his due.

He has something due to him, and, before the evening at the Morosco is done,
we're willing to pay up. He may, at first hearing, sound on the arid, dour,
unprofitably frosty side, and God knows there's winter all over him. ''Don't be
such a dry old stick!'' scolds the still hale and still vividly red-headed Mary
he'd earnestly wooed when both were young but whose heart he simply could not
win for himself.

And he's unbearably indifferent to the now graying Dolly who did take him on and
who's been as cheerful about a cheerless marriage as a human being possibly
could be. When Mary, whom Mr. Dotrice has suddenly chosen to visit after a
six-year absence, blithely asks, ''How is Dolly?,'' he has a curt, tart answer
at the ready. ''She hasn't changed'' he reports, levelly, meaning that his wife
was a dolt and a simpering bore to begin with and that she is a dolt and a
simpering bore now. Inasmuch as she is really neither, and given the
sweet-tempered loyalty she continues to show him, the remark has its theatrical
hazards: we could learn to detest such a man in a hurry.  We could not want a
play about him.

Yet there is something other than the ice in Mr. Dotrice's veins - in the veins
of Desmond Drumm, to give him his character name - that must be reckoned with.
As we watch him begin to take on stature, and as we begin to extend him a bit of
the warmth he cannot offer others, we're not thawing simply because the poor
fellow's been given a mere six months to live. In fact, he can be chilly about
that. Having been advised by his doctor to watch himself, he lets us know that
''I told him my name was Drumm, not Narcissus,'' and then condescendingly
remarks to his baffled wife that the doctor hadn't caught his meaning, either.
Wit is beyond them both. He's insistent with Mary that he's keeping the news of
his terminal condition from his wife not for Dolly's peace of mind but for his
own. If his caring Dolly knew, he'd ''have to walk around on tiptoe with his
head split.'' He doesn't have to pretend to honesty. It's real enough.

But add to this that very real love of language. The love, of course, is
playwright Leonard's own; but he has bestowed it, as a most saving grace, on his
character, letting him boast of it and then make good on the boast. Wryly and
haughtily dismissing out of hand what he calls ''the Irish passion for
inexactitude,'' he demands precision of himself even when the banter that's
going on consis ts oflittle more t han slang. Asked if his Dolly is ''tip-top,''
he needs little time f or thought before replying that ''she passed that summit
some t ime ago.'' He was finally able to get straight information o ut of his
doctor, he tells us, ''after I managed to hackdown the bush he was beating
about.'' Having learned that his wife has taken a s hortcut through the fields,
he is ready with a lofty ''So you went crawling through the gorse like a
decrepit sheep?''

Yet not everything out of him is intended to wound, or to be waved about like
semaphore flags. There is intensity in his immediate need, and he can condense
his rhythms to make it felt. Since he is going to die soon, he needs to strike a
balance sheet. ''A man has rights, Mary,'' he begs of his longtime, still-loved
friend, ''if he is solvent, tell him!'' He cannot estimate for himself his worth
as a human being. All his adult life he has kept books, kept files; he works in
a storehouse filled with them. ''I seem to have access to everyone's life except
my own,'' he concludes, candidly worried that he may be a cipher after all. The
probing is as earnest as the nowand-again pomposities are.

Oddly, it is the actual journeys into the past - as Drumm tries to reconstruct
what values he may have possessed - that act as an unwelcome brake on the play.
Mr. Leonard has once again used a device that was enormously successful in
''Da,'' the device of letting a dead father, the living son, and that same son
at a much earlier age all cross paths, intermingle, fight across time as though
eternity and the present moment could be read on one and the same clock. In ''A
Life,'' the dodging back and forth among the years works much less
satisfactorily, mainly because there is no real interplay of then and now, nor
any dramatic need for it. Here the young Dolly and Mary and Drumm must simply
freeze into waxworks while their aging selves take over, and, of course, vice
versa.  Drumm is merely lookingat his own youth, not participating in it, cr
ossing swords with it.  And, looking at it, he makes no discoveries, really
learns nothing from it that he doesn't already - all too edg ily -know.

And so, watching Mr. Leonard's new play, we must settle for the pleasures of the
present tense. They are substantial, not only in Mr. Dotrice's tight-lipped
performance, ankles locked together as though braced for the leap into the
hereafter, but also in the fond and snappish gift of gab that has spilled over
onto the ample Aideen O'Kelly (a no-nonsense Mary), the wistful Helen Stenborg
(Dolly) and Pat Hingle as the immensely sociable, utterly unflappable fellow who
walked off with the prize Mr. Dotrice most yearned after. Mr. Hingle wants it
known that in his house ''no one walks out of here sayin' they weren't asked if
they had a mouth on them,'' and he cannot, simply cannot, be stung. Having been
gratuitously insulted by half a dozen of Mr. Dotrice's best barbs, he merely
glances upward to ask, with a grin, ''How much do you want to borrow?''

The contemporary passages are funny and they are more than that; I was much
surprised to find myself suddenly and seriously moved by a muted four-line
exchange between Drumm and his Dolly toward evening's end. The exchange has to
do with a motorcar and an unwritten book, but I'll tell you no more than that.
To have so swift an effect, a grudging affection for the pair must have been
growing all along, underneath.
'Fifth of July'

I wish that I could promise you as much in the way of rewards at Lanford
Wilson's ''Fifth of July,'' especially since the author of ''Talley's Folly''
and ''The Hot L Baltimore'' is neither inarticulate nor insensitive himself. The
play at the New Apollo - somewhat revised after its earlier appearance at the
downtown Circle Rep - exists in a rather vague relationship to the charming
''Talley's Folly,'' picking up the heroine of that romance after the death of
the man she married and posing the problem of where and when to scatter his
ashes. She is a peripheral figure here, however, and just how this new and
larger play will fit into what we are promised will eventually become a trilogy
is difficult to say.

Doubly difficult because, to my way of thinking, everyone in ''Fifth of July''
is peripheral. (At present writing this seems to be a minority report, and I do
so caution you.) Gathered on the riverbank porch of the old Talley place in
Missouri are Christopher Reeve as the Talley scion, robbed of his legs in
Vietnam and fearful of making further use of his gift for teaching retarded
children; Jeff Daniels as his homosexual caretaker and lover; Swoosie Kurtz as a
very rich relic of the drug culture of the late 60's, eager to buy the Talley
place for use as a recording studio; Jonathan Hogan as her manipulative husband;
Joyce Reehling as Mr. Reeve's sister, a onetime campus rebel gone sour; Amy
Wright as her 13-year-old daughter, spying on the group's sexual activities and
parading about the place dressed rather like Theda Bara; Mary Carver as the
Sally of the ''Folly,'' and Danton Stone as a black, and largely neglected,
musician.

One by one and sometimes eight by eight, these people who are or should be
looking for new beginnings curl up on all available surfaces - swing, chaise
longue, cellar door, wheelbarrow, steps - and try to imagine what those new
beginnings might be. So, with c oncentration and very often a frown, do we. But
no one member of the group is the spiritual center of the play, the magnetic
force about which t he others can assemble and come to coherent focus. It isas
though the stage were constantly spinning, like those fun-house disks in amus
ement parks, with everyone hurled centrifugally toward the outer rim , and then
off.

It is conceivable that Mr. Wilson wants such an image, has asked director
Marshall W. Mason for it so that a pattern of losing hold, of dropping out, of
being unable to find roots and cling to them, will emerge. From the ending of
the play, though, I doubt it. Mr.  Wilson seems much more interested in renewal,
fresh assertion: the teacher will teach again, the house will not be sold, the
13-year-old will carry on the line of the clan.

But these are last-minute turnabouts, and we have not really participated in -
or truly understood - the struggle to arrive at them. Mr. Reeve's indecision
seems arbitrary; Miss Kurtz's plan to remodel the house seems preposterous; Miss
Carver's delay about scattering husband Matt's ashes seems irrelevant. The good
bits become something like vaudeville turns, with changes of bill every four or
five minutes.

Miss Kurtz certainly makes the most of hers, wearing enough bangles to put a
pawn shop in business, explaining that she's had most of her vital organs
removed by the time she was 25, asking how her brains could not be fried
considering the variety of drugs she's lived on.  Often funny, the actress can
draw a solid laugh out of the announcement that the Bermuda Triangle is a ripoff
because she's gone there and tried to make herself disappear without success -
but precisely what comment she offers the core of the play escapes me.

Mr. Reeve, who has been Superman in his time, doesn't really have a part he can
make stick; it's like a postage st amp with the gum gone. Mr. Daniels is more
effective as his loyal co mpanion, and Miss Carver's quietly sober Sally is
moderately ap pealing. But there is a great deal of screeching from Miss Wright
as the underage voyeur (''Ihave just seen something that will warp my yo ung
mind!'') and the narrative between outbursts seems to me virtu ally at a
stalemate. Onemay savor the irony of watching Mr. Reeve lur ch to his feet with
the help of metal crutches and self-mockingly ann ounce ''I may never dance
'Swan Lake' again!,'' but the decision to make a move of any sort is rarely very
clear or very forceful. P erhaps the third play, when it comes, will bless us
with a perspecti ve.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT-ELECT REAGAN AND THE SOVIET UNION

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 360 words


To the Editor; Ronald Reagan stated in his Nov. 6 news conference that he
believes in linkage of negotiations with the Soviet Union on strategic arms to
discussions of Soviet behavior in other areas - notably Moscow's foreign policy.
If there is an honest desire by the Reagan Administration to limit the growth of
nuclear arms, this statement represents seriously flawed thinking.  First, the
U.S. and the Soviet Union have vast and fundamental differences i n their
perceptions of proper foreign policy, and tying SALT negotiat ions to these
differences will inevitably slow the process down.  Moreover, the question of
limitations on nuclear arms is logically divorced from other foreign-policy
differences and represents a vital problem on its own.

SALT discussions should clearly be first on the agenda, and it is only when we
are protected from the proliferation of these weapons of mass destruction that
we should pass on to a resolution of more subtle questions of policy.

Next, and equally important, even if one accepts the need to tie SALT talks to
Soviet behavior abroad, then one must also allow a discussion of similar
American behavior.

This then implies discussions of American interventions in Latin America, Iran
and the Middle East, Africa and the Far East. Did the Russians insist upon a
cessation of the American invasion of South Vietnam before negotiating earlier
test-ban and arms-limitation treaties? Only if American behavior is also linked
to the SALT negotiations will Mr. Reagan's position be consistent.

Should this occur, then, while arms discuss ions will no doubt he hampered, some
of the suffering of millions o f people under regimes supported and/or installed
by the U.S. as wel l as the Soviet Union may be alleviated. In this case, the
talks wi ll not have been in vain.  LAWRENCE M. KRAUSS

Cambridge, Mass., Nov. 7, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'A SOVIET CHALLENGE'

BYLINE: By Sinnathamby Rajaratnam

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 840 words


The question that exercises the minds of many Asian and third-world leaders is:
''Who will fill the vacant role of world leadership?'' The absence of such a
leadership today lies at the root of contemporary international anarchy. After
30 years of United States leadership, we increasingly ask ourselves as we watch
this great country stagger under this load: ''Will the United States opt out of
the contest for world leadership?''

If it does, then the mantle of world leadership must fall, through default, on
the Soviet Union, which does not flinch before the prospect of world leadership.

If the United States is not prepared to accept this role, then a Pax Sovietica
is inevitable in the 80's. The overwhelming majority of nations may not desire
such a dispensation. However, if the non-Communist industrial powers cannot stem
the rising tide of Soviet power, then the third-world nations will come to terms
with the new Caesar. Some are already mentally trying out Pax Sovietica for
size.

I doubt very much whether the Soviet leadership can offer the prospect of a Pax
Sovietica under which non-Communist societies would be permitted to exist. But
it is not altogether impossible. Within Eastern Europe for some years now
significant diversity of economic styles and practices have been cautiously
permitted.

So I would not rule out the possibility of a more sophisticated Soviet
leadership offering a place for non-Communist nations under the Soviet sun - in
exchange for acceptance of Soviet Union as No. 1.

It could be an offer that many countries in Asia might accept even if they have
doubts. They would accept it simply because they have no other choice.

It is in As ia that the decisive battles for world leadership would be waged. It
is no accident that within three years of the last of the Western p owers
withdrawing from Vietnam, the Soviet Union launched stra tegic offensives in two
corners of Asia - in Kampuchea (Cambodia) in 1978 through its Vietnamese proxy,
and exactly a year later by dire ct intervention in Afghanistan.

What dismays us is the propensity of our American and Western friends to wallow
in long guilt trips - not so much by their governments as by the so-called
progressive liberal opinion.

A sense of guilt over Vietnam has prevented Western liberals from seeing the
Kampuchean situation as part of Soviet moves for world leadership. They see it
primarily and wholly as a moral problem.

It has been said that it was ''arrogance of power'' that contributed to American
debacle in Vietnam. Now that American power has waned somewhat - and one hopes
temporarily -compensation is being sought in ''arrogance of morality,'' which
has prevented Western liberals from asking why the overwhelming majority of
Asian nations have advocated the continued seating of Democratic Kampuchea (at
the United Nations).

It is not that nearly two-thirds of Asia is blind to Pol Pot's brutalities or is
without any moral sense. Asian countries support Democratic Kampuchea for the
same reason that the Western world made a choice between tw o mass murderers
whose cri mes far exceed those of Pol Pot, during World War II - between Stalin
and Hitler. The West then decided that the survival of Western Eur ope was
better assured by choosing the lesser of two mass murderers - Stalin.

Pol Pot appears to Asians as the lesser of two evils. The continued occupation
of Kampuchea is the first of many moves to draw the rest of Southeast Asia
within the Soviet orbit. A million men are under arms in Vietnam, apart from an
estimated two millionmember militia, wholly financed by the Soviet Union. One
must be extremely simple-minded to believe that the parsimonious Soviet Union is
financing so formidable an army just to cope with Pol Pot's guerrillas.

I do not feel a sense of outrage that the Soviets should aspire to world
leadership.  They have as much right to fill this vacant and necessary role as
anybody else, and world leadership is not synonymous with world domination.

That is why I prefer to talk of a Soviet challenge rather than of a Soviet
menace.  Unless this Soviet challenge is made the core of United States foreign
policy and met with the same resolve and sense of realism that the Soviets bring
to their cause, then a Pax Sovietica is a high probability in the 80's.

This is not what we in Asia want, but if that is the only item on the shelf that
is what we will have to settle for.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Sinnathamby Rajaratnam is Second Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore.  This
article is adapted from a lecture to the Asia Society.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN WHAT KIND OF WORLD LEADER?

BYLINE: By Hedrick Smith

SECTION: Section 6; Page 47, Column Z; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6760 words


Not since the 1960 campaign of John F. Kennedy has an American Presidential
candidate ridden into office sounding so loud an alarm that the United States
has fallen perilously behind the Soviet Union in the arms competition. Not since
the late Secretary of State John Foster Dulles has so powerful an American
leader issued the warning that the United States ''has been sleepwalking too
long'' and must now ''snap out of it'' to engage anew in the global cold war.

Yet whatever themes of Kennedy and Dulles echo in Ronald Reagan decades later,
the irony is that, in the White House, the former Governor of California may
emerge more as a natural counterpart to the Soviet leader Leonid I. Brezhnev
than as a lineal descendant of any single American leader.

For Brezhnev is a personally cordial, congenial consensus maker who climbed to
power in the provinces before ruling the Kremlin, and he has presided over the
most determined, costly and successful buildup of armed strength in Russian
history. Now comes Ronald Reagan, another affable politician whose roots are in
the midland and whose route to power has been far from the capital, in distant
California, and he, too, has proclaimed his dedication to a massive new American
military thrust that will ''restore the margin of safety'' for the free world.

Obviously, there are important differences between these ideological
adversaries. But there are also intriguing parallels.  Like Brezhnev, Reagan is
entering national leadership as a politician whose primary concern has been
domestic affairs and who is not broadly tutored in foreign policy.

In the early 1970's, President Nixon sent then-Governor Reagan on good-will
tours to the Far East and Europe - just as Brezhnev was called on to perform
ceremonial diplomatic chores before assuming real power. Reagan has visited more
than 20 countries, meeting such leaders as West German Chancellor Helmut
Schmidt, French President Valery Giscard d'Estaing, and British Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher.

But after he won the Republican nomination last July, Reagan decided against a
trip to Europe on the grounds that it would take too long to prepare himself and
that it would seem an artificial effort to make him look expert in a field in
which he was still an amateur. Earlier, in a television interview, the candidate
had seemed to betray a surprising lack of knowledge when he did not quickly
recognize the name of the President of France. Jimmy Carter mocked Reagan with
the taunt that, if the Republican were elected, pa rticipants in summit meetings
would have to wear name tags for his benefit.

Reagan's inexperience in foreign affairs brings to mind the stiff awkwardness
European leaders encountered in Brezhnev a decade ago.  After the late French
President Georges Pompidou and West German Chancellor Willy Brandt held their
first meetings with Brezhnev, it was whispered that the Soviet leader was so
insecure in diplomatic affairs that he rigidly read the script of his briefing
papers and, in response to questions, resorted to what were evidently carefully
rehearsed answers. Westerners complained that Brezhnev was too inadequately
informed to sustain a genuine dialogue - an impression that has faded in the
intervening years.

Born a short time apart in the early years of the 20th century, Brezhnev and
Reagan formed their world outlook long ago, and their fundamental views have
been little modified by the changing tides of history. Each talks in the tongue
of the true believer, with unbounded faith in his homeland and its historic
mission in the world, and with wary suspicion of the bluffing and devious
strategems of ideological adversaries. To hear Reagan tell it, Communism is the
implacable foe; to hear Brezhnev, it is capitalism. Rhetorically, both describe
the world in black-and-white terms. It is a world of allies and adversaries,
patriots and villains, loyal friends and untrustworthy enemies. It is a world
where complex power relationships and subtleties or shadings are often lost or
forgotten, and where the vibrant nationalism of many other peoples is dimly seen
or poorly understood.

In practice, however, both men have been more pragmatic and flexible than their
rhetoric suggests. Brezhnev marched Soviet troops into Czechoslovakia when he
felt vital Soviet interests were at stake and into Afghanistan when, in a less
vital cause, it seemed a safe bet. But with the instinctive conservativism of
the Soviet elders who disdain recklessness and let proxies fight most of their
battles, he has acted more cautiously than he sounded on other occasions -
especially when confrontation with Washington loomed. After seeming to be on the
brink of intervention in the 1973 Arab-Israeli war, for example, the Kremlin
backed down, and Brezhnev has been equally careful not to intrude in the
Iraq-Iran conflict, evidently out of fear of American counteraction.

Likewise, though Reagan is untested in foreign affairs, on the home front he
tempered his rhetoric with realism as Gove rnor of California. He struck
compromises and made de als with political opponents, reversed campaign
positions and sw allowed policies that hehad labeled unthinkable before he took
office . In foreign policy, he has also adjusted, though not without problem s,
to the American diplomatic opening to China and to the agreem ent to relinquish
ultimate control of the Panama Canal - both o f which he once adamantly and
vociferously opposed. In his in experience and his chauvinistic enthusiasms,
Reagan has sometime s exhibited Dulles's readiness to go to the brink of
conflict with the Russians in a test of power over what he saw at the moment as
cr ucial issues. But he hasoften retreated when his impulsive comments h ave
pushed him too far out on a limb.

The closer his political path brought him to the White House, the more narrowly
Reagan defined the perimeter of vital American interests. And the more eager he
was to assert that he is, at heart, a man of peace - ''not trigger-happy ... not
warmongering'' and not itching for a showdown. In his campaign for the
Presidency, Ronald Reagan fashioned a rhetoric of implied force that was not
only fervent in its insistence on greater military power, but also vague about
how he would employ this power as President.

In short, there are two Reagans. One is the rhetorical right-winger who
instinctively voices wide popular disenchantment with postwar American
diplomacy, who conveys the sense that the world is a dangerous and inhospitable
place and expresses resentment that America seems to have retreated in the face
of Soviet advances. This is the Reagan of confrontation, who strikes a
responsive chord when, his voice thickening with patriotic passion, he declares,
''No more Vietnams, no more Taiwans.'' And when he suggests periodically that it
is high time to strike back and demonstrate that America has not become what
Richard Nixon once called ''a pitiful, helpless giant.'' This is the politician
who picked for his campaign hawkish foreignpolicy advisers such as William R.
Van Cleave, a defense strategist from the University of Southern California, and
retired Lt. General Daniel O. Graham, former head of the Defense Intelligence
Agency.

The other Reagan is the pragmatic practitioner of power. His statements are more
circumspect, his language more carefully ambiguous and qualified. If the
right-wing Reagan urges a blockade of Cuba, the pragmatic Reagan shrewdly
refuses to be lured into advocating American intervention in Iran. ''I am not
going to rush out and wave a blood-soaked sword and yell, 'Onward men' - and I
don't think it's necessary, '' the pragmatic Reagan remarked last summer. This
is the Reagan of accommodation who talks of a ''reasonable and balanced''
relationship with the Soviet Union. This Reagan leans for advice on experienced,
prudent conservatives like former Treasu ry Secretary George Shultz, a man with
ties to European leaders and t he world of international trade and finance.

The tensions between the two Reagans almost inevitably foreshadow differences
within the new Administration and conflicting passions in Congress and among the
public. Although Reagan repeatedly castigated President Carter's vacillating
foreign policy and promised an Administration that would ''speak with one
voice,'' his own conflicting impulses are likely to produce shifts and lurches
and inconsistencies of policy that will bedevil friend and foe alike.  They make
Reagan's choice of senior defense and diplomatic advisers crucial to the course
of American foreign policy over the next four years, for the closest and most
trusted of these will have great influence on which of the two Reagans
predominates at critical moments of decision.

Whichever side of Reagan prevails at any given time, the new President
approaches the world with a basic philosophical outlook that is a throwback to
the 1950's, when American power was paramount. This outlook may founder on the
more complex realities of the 1980's. His is the bipolar world of the early cold
war. For Ronald Reagan, much more than for other recent American Presidents, the
global power rivalry with Moscow not only animates his thinking about foreign
affairs but is, to a great degree, the prism through which he views everything.
Both intellectually and temperamentally, he is ill at ease with the diffusion of
power around the world, and he has set out to reverse the decline of American
power.

Reagan has minced no words in declaring that the top foreign-policy priority of
his Administration will be to rearm the United States quickly and dramatically
to avert what he sees as a grave menace to our nuclear deterrent forces, and to
use the threat of a sharp new arms spiral to try to induce the Soviet leadership
to reconsider its own nuclear strategy and ultimately to negotiate on terms that
Reagan considers more equitable to Washington and its allies. As his associates
say, he and they are prepared for a long haul.

Even allowing for the exaggerated hyperbole of a political campaign, Reagan's
bristling anti-Soviet declarations have continually rung with alarm. His vision
of the peril to America and the West is apocalyptic. ''We now enter one of the
most dangerous decades of Western civilization,'' he warned as 1980 began.

Like many others, Reagan finds ''a threatening pattern'' in the Soviet thrust
into Afghanistan; in the Soviet and Cuban i nvolvement in Marxist takeovers in
Ethiopia, Angola and South Yemen; in Cubanbacked terrorism and upheavals around
th e Caribbean basin. He clearly sees the Soviet hand behind the tumul t of
change. ''Let us not delude ourselves,'' he said in a revealin g comment to The
Wall Street Journal. ''The Soviet Union underlies all the unrest that is going
on. If they weren't engaged in this gam e of dominoes, there wouldn't be any hot
spots in the world.''

Such a characteristically sweeping judgment betrayed an ignorance of - or a lack
of concern about - the home-grown roots and nationalistic dynamics of the
upheaval in Iran, the Arab-Israeli conflict, unrest in southern Africa, tension
in Turkey and terrorism in Ireland - not to mention the broader economic
confrontation between the underdeveloped nations of the southern hemisphere and
the industrialized nations of the North. In Reagan's scheme of things,the
explosive diversity and turbulence of the Third World, the clamorous,
conflicting currents running through the arc of crisis south of the Eurasian
heartland independent of Soviet adventurism, are essentially unaccounted for.
Nations are judged pro or con by which side they take in the global chess game,
by whether they are market economies or Marxist governments.

Steadfastness to our allies, for instance, has been a staple of Reagan's stump
appearances. He talks as if the disarray in the Western alliance were caused
simply by the failure of American will, which allowed the Soviets to exploit
minor rifts. And he seems to believe that most of the problems will be resolved
and that Europeans will willingly huddle under the umbrella of American
leadership once again if Washington simply rectifies the strategic balance,
demonstrates global firmness and provides constancy of direction for allied
policy.

Elsewhere, Reagan may be less prone to committing American forces than his
critics fear. During the campaign, President Carter exaggerated Reagan's
penchant for issuing ultimatums in an effort to paint the Californian as a
reckless cowboy ready for a shootout at the least provocation. In three
statements President Carter cited out of context, however, Reagan was actually
advocating the use of American forces for peacekeeping purposes - in Cyprus,
Lebanon and Rhodesia.

But on othe r occasions, Reagan has been ready - at least rhetorically - to risk
actual conflict in defense of American interests. In 1975, when Ecuador seized
American tuna boats for fishing insid e what it claimed were its 200-mile
territorial waters, Reagan propos ed sending out a Navy destroyer with the tuna
boats ''tocruise, say, 13 miles offshore of Ecuador in an updated version of
Teddy Rooseve lt's dictum to talk softly but carry a big stick.'' More menacing
ly, when North Korea seized the United States Navy intelligence ship Pueblo in
1968, Reagan declared that the American response shou ld have been: ''Send our
ship and our men out within sixhours or we'r e coming in to get them, and we'll
use planes, guns, torpedoes, wh atever it takes.'' More recently, he suggested
that the United States could have blockaded North Korea's ports.

Reagan's most risky and controversial advocacy of the use of force has been his
persistent call for a naval blockade of Cuba in reprisal for the Soviet invasion
of Afghanistan. ''My own belief,'' he said in the heat of the New Hampshire
primary last February, ''is that, in addition to showing the flag there in the
Middle East to indicate they might face a confrontation with us, we should have
a plan of touching them on soft spots - for example, the suggestion I've made
about blockading Cuba.''

Despite the contention of George Bush, then his rival and now his Vice
President, that a full blockade of Cuba would be terribly costly and perhaps
impossible to impose without risking a clash with the Russians, Regan insisted
that he was ''not talking about war ... not being a warmonger.''

''Why couldn't we blockade Cuba and then say to (the Soviet Union), 'When your
troops get out of Afghanistan, we will drop the blockade around Cuba?' '' he
said. ''And I think this could exert great pressure ... I don't think they could
stand a blockade very long, and I think a little call on the hot line with this
kind of threat might get the withdrawal of the troops from Afghanistan.''

For all his alarm over growing Soviet military superiority, Reagan contended -
somewhat inconsistently and without offering any evidence -that the Russians
would back down in a crunch. The Moscow that was so menacing in his rhetoric was
deemed surprisinglly malleable in reality. ''I don't think the Soviet Union has
enough of an edge that they want a confrontation,'' Reagan asserted.  Much of
what Reagan has been saying for years now mirrors the mood of America today.
During President Carter's tenure, the public, the Congress and the
Administration itself went through a watershed change, shifting gradually out of
the neo-isolationism and the nearly crippling sense of national culpability that
followed the Vietnam war. Opinion polls began showing majorities in favor of
higher defense spending. The public, jolted by the Iranian revolution and the
taking of the hostages, the threat to Western oil supplies and the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan, seeme d ready for a new era of greater American
involvement in the world.  But when Ronald Reagan moves into the White House, he
will have to c ome to terms with the serious limits on American power abroad and
o n his own Presidential power and flexibility at home as well as over seas.

Although Republican gains in Congress, and especially control of the Senate,
assure Reagan a relatively hospitable climate on Capitol Hill for his foreign
and defense policies, there is still a Democratic majority in the House of
Representatives, and many Democrats are ready to do battle to keep Reagan's
drive for improved national defense from cutting too deeply into domestic
programs. With a narrow balance in the Senate, Reagan may also be bedeviled by
Democratic critics about levels of aid and the supply of weapons to right-wing
allies abroad. The broader public, too, uneasy at the prospect of intervention
abroad or of economic sacrifices at home, may be a restraining factor.

Reagan faces a much more intractable world than the one his campaign speeches
portrayed. It is not merely Soviet military strength that will set limits on his
policies, but also the economic power of Europe and Japan, dependency on Middle
East oil, and the weakness of the American economy. The complexities of
international affairs will not conform easily to the neat squares on Reagan's
geopolitical checkerboard. Allies in Europe and elsewhere see his overarching
anticommunism as antiquated and counterproductive. China, the OPEC powers,
Western Europeans and others have economic and political leverage that will not
yield to greater American military power. And these nations are not, as Reagan
has suggested, playing some Soviet game, but acting in their own interests.
Almost everywhere, Reagan's nostalgic ideological impulses are bound to bump
into contemporary realities that he has overlooked or cast aside and that now
stand like rocks in his path.

Philosophically, Reagan has laid the groundwork for radical departures from the
policies of President Carter. He has opposed detente, SALT II and the return of
the Panama Canal to Panama. He believes a stepped-up arms race can lead
ultimately to arms reduction. His rumbling rhetoric about the use of force and
his recollection of the Vietnam war as ''a noble cause'' may presage an
aggressive policy in the third world. But in other areas, his course may not
diver ge as dramatically from President Carter's as both of them made it sound
during the campaign.

''I would not foresee radical policy shifts in the Reagan Administration,'' said
Richard V. Allen, Reagan's top foreign-policy adviser in the campaign until
allegations of conflicts of interest resulted in his last-minute withdrawal.
''There are sobering realities that confront a President on Jan. 21. We do not
control events. All we can do is shape them.''

In one instance - China -Reagan had to shift to President Carter's policy in the
midst of his own campaign. With greater pragmatism than he is usually given
credit for, Reagan had long before muted his outspoken anti-Communist rhetoric
against China and his suspicion of the Peking regime, in part because he had
begun to see China as a potential partner in a three-cornered strategic poker
game with the Soviet Union. But the rhetorical Reagan torpedoed his pragmatic
alter ego's decision to advertise a Reagan Administration's reasonableness by
sending running mate George Bush to Peking in August. As Bush was preparing to
board the plane to China, Reagan revived an earlier call to restore ''official
relations'' with Taiwan. Peking admonished Reagan for a ''brazen'' and
''absurd'' position that ''would, in fact, destroy the basic principle of
normalization of United States-China relations.'' Ultimately, when Bush returned
home, Reagan had to back down and accept reality: China was more important than
Taiwan, and the die had already been cast.  Reagan conceded his past
misstatements and pointedly dropped his insistence on ''official relations''
with Taiwan. The episode is symptomatic of difficulties President Reagan may
encounter with other major world powers - for example, in Europe - because of
his relative inexperience and his insensitivity to the changes of the last
decade or two.

''There's a generation gap between what Reagan thinks he knows about the world
and the reality,'' observes John P. Sears, the Washington attorney who managed
Reagan's 1976 campaign and did it again in 1980, until he was dismissed early in
the year. ''His is a kind of 1952 world. He sees the world in black and white
terms.  That's O.K. if he has the right Secretary of State and the right
National Security Adviser. The dangerous thing is not the Russians, but other
situations beyond the Russians. Reagan's going to be upset to find out that some
countries in Western Europe part company with us rather sharply on a number of
issues. He tends to assume a community of both objectives and tactics that
wants, at the bottom, to 'beat the Russians.' ''

In Reagan's rather wistful view, America's current difficulties with its major
allies are traceable to President Carter's erratic leadership and strateg ic
slippage in the comp etition with Moscow.  Reagan's stress on military
preparedness will boost morale, no doubt, in some quarters of Europe. But his ha
rdline talk already has other Europeans nervous.

Leaders like President Giscard of France see a positive virtue in a strong and
independent, economically resurgent Europe able to deal with the United States
on an equal footing and to conduct its own affairs with the Russians, rather
than having Washington speak for a united West. Moreover, economic rivalries and
centrifugal forces will continue to divide the Western powers, apart from any
Soviet chicanery or shortfalls in the Western arsenal. So long as he treats
Europe as an offshoot of the Soviet-American relationship, Reagan is in for
trouble.

During the campaign, for example, when European leaders balked at President
Carter's retaliatory grain embargo against the Russians, Reagan complained that
the action was too mild. He advocated an across-the-board trade boycott,
discounting the fact that the Germans, French and other Continental powers have
little stomach for confrontation with Moscow over the issue of Afghanistan
because they have a far greater economic stake than America in detente.

Different approaches to the common need for imported energy drive other wedges
in the alliance and Reagan, so far, has shown little appreciation of how Europe
and America part company on this issue.  The Europeans, far more dependent on
Middle East oil and hence more vulnerable than the United States to another Arab
oil embargo or cutback arising from a regional war, have taken a different
diplomatic tack and may wind up differing more sharply with President Reagan
than with President Carter.

The Iraqi war with Iran, which has stirred a common Western impulse to protect
the flow of oil through the Persian Gulf and the Strait of Hormuz, may provide
an opening for Western collaboration to protect that vital zone. But if the
Reagan team pushes for rapid construction of a new, expanded architecture of
regional military alliances, reminiscent of the 1950's, it will find reluctant
partners in Europe.

Turning from military to diplomatic considerations, Europe has consistently been
more sympathetic than Washington to the Palestinians. It has re garded for some
time an equitable Arab-Israelipeace agreeme nt - one that includes the
Palestinians - as the best longterm guar antee of a steady supply of Middle East
oil. This diplomatic pr iority may set Europe on a collision course with
President Rea gan.  The third w orld is one of two areas (the Soviet Union is
the other) where Reagan's policies will probably depart most noticeably from
Presiden t Carter's. Although President Carter warned Americans that Reagan i s
''trigger-happy,'' this may not be Reagan's main problem in th e most turbulent
regions of the third world. Reagan seems to be a self-confident man, not plagued
by the kind of personalinsecurities that could provoke a President to prove
himself with a macho display of power. Some who have known Regan for a long
time, like John Sea rs, insist he will not be as reckless or aggressive as his
right-win g rhetoric has sometimes made him sound.

Regarding the Iranian crisis that persisted throughout the campaign, Reagan was
very restrained. He was less venturesome, indeed, than President Carter, who
warned in his State of the Union Address last January that the United States was
ready to use any means, including force, to repel an outside attempt to control
the Persian Gulf. In San Francisco last May, asked whether he would send Moscow
''a clearcut ultimatum not to meddle'' in Iran or risk American counteraction,
Reagan raised a cautionary theme he would sound several more times in the
campaign. America was not strong enough or well enough positioned, he said, to
make such a threat and back it up with adequate force.

''We could send an ultimatum, but what would we back it up with?'' he asked. The
Soviet Union, he contended, has 150,000 troops poised on the Iranian border.
''Logistically, we're talking about thousands and thousands of miles from our
borders.'' Such comments caused former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger to
observe, much later, that ''recklessness will be the least of Reagan's
problems.''

A more likely pitfall for Reagan is his ignorance of the complex ingredients
that boil over unpredictably in the third world, and his reflexive instinct to
categorize nations as simply friend or foe. In the Reagan years, President
Carter's concern for human rights, the North-South dialogue and nuclear
nonproliferation will probably be replaced by a concentrated effort to bolster
right-wing regional partners in the strategic rivalry with Moscow and to apply
pressure against partisans of the other side. A Reagan Administration is likely
to move toward less strained relations with autocratic allies like South Korea
and the Philippines. Conversely, the rhetorical Reagan's penchant for
ideological judgments may alienate left-leaning states like India and Iraq and
shut the door to ultimate accommodation with Marxist regimes in Angola and
Nicaragua.

In the Middle East, where President Carter tried to strike a balance between
Arab and Israeli interests, Reagan has repeatedly proclaimed that American
support for Israel springs not primarily from a historic special relationship or
a moral obligation inherited from the Holocaust, but rests fundamentally on the
calculation that, in the global struggle with the Soviet Union, Israel is a
strategic ally that can help secure a vital geographic region.

''Israel is the only stable democracy we can rely on in a spot where Armageddon
could come,'' he has said. ''The greatest responsibility the United States has
is to preserve peace - and we need an ally in that area. We must prevent the
Soviet Union from penetrating the Mideast. The Nixon Administration
unsuccessfully moved them out. If Israel were not there, the United States would
have to be there.''

But in supporting Israel so zealously during the campaign, Reagan seemed
oblivious to the price he would pay in the Arab world if he pursues this
strategy in office. Too ardent an embrace of Israel would not only inflame the
Arab radicals but also offend such moderates as Saudi Arabia, the Persian Gulf
emirates and Jordan.  Reagan's rhetoric suggests, moreover, that he does not see
the Palestinian question as an issue of fundamental consequence to the Saudis
and other Arabs, and hence he seems not to grasp its significance for the
broader American strategy in the Middle East, either to secure oil or foil the
Soviets.

Reagan may speak with admiration of President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt or suggest
throwing the mantle of Western protection around the Saudi monarchy, but his
endorsement of Israeli positions has been virtually unqualified. He has broken
with established American policy by backing Israel's West Bank settlements and
its integration of Jerusalem as its undivided capital. ''An undivided city of
Jerusalem means sovereignty for Israel over the city,'' Reagan told a delighted
group of Jewish leaders in New York. ''The West Bank should be a decision worked
out by Jordan and Israel. I would never have supported dismantling (of Israeli
settlements on the West Bank).''

Reagan has treated the Palestinian issue as a refugee problems oluble by some
mathematical formula, rather than as an explosively complex political issue with
wide ramifications for American relations with the Arab world and with Europe
beyond. ''Palestine was never a country,'' Reagan observed in one political
debate. ''It was a territory, an area, and it was a British mandate. And it was
the British Government that created the Kingdom of Jordan, which is 80 percent
of what used to be Palestine. The Israelis have less than 20 percent of what was
Palestine. The Palestinian refugee problem, it seems to me then, is an
80-percent 20-percent problem of Jordan and Israel.''

Without Jordan's participation in peace negotiations, such an approach to the
Palestinian problem can hardly succeed. Yet Reagan has done the very opposite of
making this prospect attractive to Jordan's King Hussein. Indeed, his
unequivocally pro-Israel campaign rhetoric may prove an enormous handicap to any
effort to induce King Hussein to enter negotiations under President Reagan's
auspices.

In the end, unless the pragmatic Reagan tempers the rhetorical Reagan's
positions and launches a diplomatic campaign to woo the moderate Arabs, the new
President may even find himself hard-pressed to keep Sadat engaged in
negotiations with Israel. For Sadat's patience has rested heavily on his
personal relationship with President Carter and his faith in Carter's
even-handedness between Israel and Egypt. And open collapse of the peace process
in the Middle East will invite wider violence in an already volatile region.

Elsewhere in the third world, Reagan's ideological instincts, if translated into
practice, may produce cleavages that Carter sought to avoid. Reagan himself has
called Latin America a touchstone for Washington's relations with the Third
World, and a battleground with Communism. He has berated the Carter
Administration for ignoring realpolitik by idealistically ''bullying'' countries
like Brazil and Argentina for violating human rights. And, alarmed by what he
sees as the rising leftist threat in Nicaragua, El Salvador, Guatemala and
Honduras, he has sharply chided his predecessor for aiding Nicaragua's
revolutionary Sandinista Government. At heart, his fear is that Cuba's Fidel
Castro, acting as an agent for the Kremlin, is fomenting revolution and turmoil
around the Caribbean, trying to turn it into what Reagan has called ''a red
sea'' that will eventually engulf Mexico and leave the United States with a
hostile, oil-rich neighbor on its southern border.

It is clear, however, that Reagan intends to pursue a friendly policy toward
Mexico, not only because of its obvious size, wealth and importance, but also
because, as Governor of California, he dealt personally with the issue of
illegal Mexican immigrants and, just prior to his Presidential candidacy, he
visited Mexico and talked with President Jose Lopez-Portillo. He came home
talking of a North American accord, embracing Mexico, Canada and the United
States. What he envisioned was a tripartite council enabling the three neighbors
to deal more effectively with issues arising from their interdependent
economies. He also came home advocating an op en-border policy for Mexican
migrant worker s, which appealed to thekind of Southwest American agribusinesses
tha t generally back Reagan,but which would also be likely to relieve pol itical
tensions with Mexico.

''They have a problem of 40 to 50 percent unemployment,'' Reagan said of Mexico.
''Why don't we work out some recognition of our mutual problems, make it
possible for them to come here legally with a work permit? This is the only
safety valve they have right now with the unemployment that probably (can) keep
the lid from blowing off down there.''

Reagan associates say that his attitude toward Mexico is indicative of his
flexibility once he gets to know a situation, preferably firsthand. Reagan is
not so ideologically rigid, they say, that he cannot work with a leftist
government that presides over a mixed economy, as in Mexico, especially if there
is the specter of an even more threatening swing to the far left. It is the
bogeyman of Marxist extremism or Soviet involvement that may prompt the Reagan
Administration's most pragmatic policies in the Third World.  By far the most
striking break from President Carter's foreign policy is likely to be Reagan's
approach to the Soviet Union. He has rejected ''the illusion of detente,''
which, he claims, lulled the West into expecting Soviet restraint around the
world and in the arms race. He has vowed to withdraw from the Senate the
Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty negotiated from 1972 until 1979 and signed by
President Carter and Brezhnev in Vienna. It is, he says, a ''flawed treaty''
that permits the Soviets to race ahead with their military buildup while, as he
and his advisers like to put it, it ''freezes the United States into a position
of permanent inferiority.'' Until close to the end of his campaign, Reagan
talked the language of confrontation. Only in the waning fortnight, with the
election in the balance, did he adopt a more pragmatic and balanced approach
toward both arms control and general dealings with the Russians.

During the campaign, Reagan argued that, over the past decade, Moscow had spent
$240 billion more than Washington on defense, and the Russians were now
outspending the United States by $50 billion a year in a drive for military
superiority. He estimated that the Soviets ''lead us in all but 6 or 8 (of the
40 strategic military categories) and may well surpass us in those if present
trends continue.''

The Reagan stategy is to withdraw the SALT II arms-control agreement and to put
pressure on the Soviet leadership to accept an agreement more favorable to
Washington. This will be achieved by confronting the Kremlin with a major new
American military surge that, as the Republican platform optimistically put it,
will be ''sufficient to close the gap and ultimately reach the position of
military superiority.'' So controversial is the concept of superiority that the
mere mention of it during the campaign revived anxious debate over the prospect
of an open-ended arms race that would permanently dash all prospects for arms
control. Reagan found refuge in the ambivalent declaration that he wanted to
''restore the margin of safety'' for America, letting conservatives read that as
superiority and letting moderates and liberals hope it meant something less.

But, Reagan insisted in an Oct. 1 interview with the Associated Press, that the
American approach to arms talks had to change. ''I don't think that we should
sit at the table the way we have in the past,'' he said. ''We have been
unilaterally disarming at the same time we're negotiating, supposedly, arms
limitation with the other fellow, where all he has to do is sit there and not
give up anything and his superiority increases. He will be far more inclined to
negotiate in good faith if he knows that the United States is engaged in
building up its military.

''They know our industrial strength,'' Reagan continued. ''They know our
capacity. The one card that's been missing in these negotiations has been the
possibility of an arms race. Now the Soviets have been racing, but with no
competition. No one else is racing. And so I think that we'd get a lot farther
at the table if they know that, as they continue, they're faced with our
industrial capacity and all that we can do.''

His objectives, Reagan went on to say, were either to persuade the Kremlin to
accept absolute arms reductions or to improve the American defense posture to
the point where ''once again the possibility of a (Soviet) pre-emptive strike
has been elminated.'' Throughout the campaign, Reagan and his aides studiously
avoided putting a precise time frame and a dollar ceiling on their projected
buildup. Reagan pledged simply to spend ''whatever is necessary'' for new
ICBM's, a new strategic bomber, a beefed-up navy, the neutron warhead, improved
air defenses and higher military pay.

Despite his skittishness about budget figures, Reagan has made clear his
intention to give defense spending priority, not only over domestic programs but
even over balancing the budget, long one of his cherished goals. By the
estimates of some of his advisers, Reagan's defense budgets will run at least
$150 billion - and perhaps much more - over what the Car ter Administration pl
anned to spend between now and 1985.

At least initially, President Reagan can expect trouble with the Russians, who
derisively lampooned him during the campaign ''as an aggressive and ignorant
Californian who does not remember the name of the President of France, who mixes
up North Vietnam and North Korea and who repeatedly refers to Indonesia as
Indochina.'' Reagan will incur their disfavor by rejecting the SALT II
agreement, negotiated with two previous Presidents. More fundamentally, having
achieved at least rough strategic parity with the United States through an
18-year arms buildup, the Soviet leaders are unlikely to let this slip from
their grasp. Their arms programs have developed momentum, far more momentum than
American experts anticipated only a few years ago. And it took long, arduous
bargaining for them to accept the agreement that Reagan believes is to their
advantage, making it highly unlikely that they will accede anytime soon to terms
the new President considers more favorable to Washington.

Moreover, Reagan's hard line, coming at a time when the Soviet Union is
undergoing a transition in leadership, may spur the Russian effort to repair
relations with China and prompt new Soviet stratagems to split off America from
West Europeans who have come to regard arms-control agreements as a reassuring
foundation for detente.

Sensing nervousness about his approach, the pragmatic Reagan sought to calm an
anxious American electorate with his promise on Oct. 19 to ''make immediate
preparations for negotiations on a SALT III treaty.'' He softened some of his
own bristling rhetoric with the assertion that ''we seek neither confrontation
nor conflict'' and the reassurance that ''with our allies, we can conduct a
realistic and balanced policy toward the Soviet Union.''

But Reagan's logic has not altered. He remains convinced that the leverage of
American industrial might, technological ingenuity and economic flexibility will
cause the Kremlin to reconsider as it faces the prospect of being outrun in a
new arms race in the 1980's as it was in the moon race in the 1960's. Reagan has
been told by hisadvisers that the Soviet leaders have already squeezed their
consumers and their economy to the limit, so he believes the Soviets have no
more resources to throw into an accelerated arms competition.

To some outsiders, Reagan's reasoning sounds like a formula for putting an end
to meaningful arms negotiations - or at least for leaving them in suspended
animation during his four-year term. Early in the campaign, close Reagan
associates were acknowledging privately that it would be a year or two, perhaps
longer, before meaningful arms negotiations could begin. The closer they came to
Election Day, the shorter their time-frame became.

To ease voters' concerns, foreign-policy aides like Richard Allen drew a
distinction between formal negotiations and ''talks'' with the Russians. Talks,
Allen contended, could start very early and deal not only with the arms race but
with such other crucial topics as avoiding accidental conflicts around the
world. Moreover, the Reagan high command envisions fairly regular high-level -
though not summit - meetings with the Russians and plans to upgrade the
importance and functions of the American Ambassador in Moscow as a channel for
communicating with the Politburo.

Nonetheless, Reagan himself seems to feel that it will take a while for the
Soviets to adjust to his view of the world and his way of doing business. They
will choose to become more flexible, he contends, only when confronted with the
hard reality of renewed American determination and military readiness to protect
vital interests and allies abroad. And, despite all his pre-election
protestations about not wanting a showdown, there is a hint that he believes it
will take some test of strength to alter Soviet calculations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Ronald Reagan

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ORDEAL OF A PROSECUTION WITNES S

SECTION: Section 6; Page 106, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4937 words


Greg Mitchell is a freelance writer. By Greg Mitchell hris and Marie are two
young Americans who have become refugees in their own land. Four years ago, they
were living happily with their 3-year-old son on the outskirts of a major city
in the Middle West.  Both were employed -Chris in a field to which he had
devoted almost 15 years - and their parents lived nearby. Their credit was good;
they had just bought a new Chevy Vega and had an option to buy their own house.
Today, their house and automobile have been taken from them; they have moved to
a new and distant location in the United States; they are living under a new
name; they cannot vote or obtain passports. They have no credit, no friends and
their lives are in danger. They cannot safely see their families, and Chris
cannot resume his career.

''It's a life in ashes,'' says Chris.  While it might seem that Chris and Marie
have done something terribly wrong to suffer these consequences, quite the
opposite is true. In a time when looking the other way has become almost a way
of life, Marie stepped forward to testify against reputed gangsters.  For this
she expected no reward, only a clean conscience and protection against
reprisals.

The Justice Department's Witness Protection Program was instituted in 1970 to
provide security for individuals who offer evidence against members of organized
crime. To protect witnesses from mob vengeance, the Government permanently
relocates them and gives them new identities. Witnesses are promised new jobs
and complete documentation to support their manufactured backgrounds. In the
past decade, more than 3,450 individuals have availed themselves of this
opportunity.

The Witness Protection Program, which is managed by the United States Marshals
Service, has been hailed by Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti as ''one of our
most successful tools against organized crime.'' The first 800 witnesses helped
produce some 3,071 convictions. One witness, a loan shark named Vincent Teresa,
testified against 30 of his former colleagues. Silous Huddleston and Annette
Gilly linked the United Mine Workers' union leadership to the murder of Joseph
Yablonski. Paul Rigo, an engineer, told of bribing Newark Mayor Hugh Addonizio.
Many of the Government witnesses, 96 percent of whom had been engaged in
criminal activities themselves, went on to make the most of their new lives, to
benefit from a ''second chance.'' Though program officials admit that 13
protected witnesses have been murdered, they claim that in nearly every instance
it was because of the witnesses' own blunders.

But through a combination of Government mishandling and the witnesses' own
mistakes, some have fared poorly. In the mid-70's, some 450 witnesses a year -
10 times as many as had been anticipated - were entering the program. It began
to suffer growing pains. John Partington, the United States marshal in Rhode
Island, who supervised some 500 witnesses, told a Congressional subcommittee:
''We did not grow with the program. We were just not able to service these
people. Where it backs up, it's not fair to the people coming into the
program.'' After investigations in 1978 by Congress and the Justice Department,
the program was reformed. ''At one time it was out of control,'' says
Partington. ''We still have a long way to go, but there has been a dramatic
improvement.''

This, of course, is of little comfort to the scores of Government witnesses who
were mistreated in the past, and Chris and Marie are in this category. Yet they
are also different from almost all of the others. They are among the few who
have come forward under the Witness Protection Program who have never been
involved with crime themselves.

Justice Department officials are reluctant, for security reasons, to discuss all
the details of Chris and Marie's story, and marshals who dealt with the couple
along the way have not been permitted to comment, but Justice officials do
confirm the essence of their complaints. ''The problems these individuals went
through should not have happened to anybody,'' says Howard Safir, the director
of the witness program.  Marie and Chris grew up in the same middle-class
community in the Middle West, where Chris was a licensed Thoroughbred racehorse
trainer. They were married in 1973 and their son, Shane, was born later that
year.

In 1975, Marie got a secretarial job with an insurance company. By the time her
responsibilities had grown to include bookkeeping, she believed that company
executives were taking kickbacks and establishing ties with organized crime.
When she decided to leave the company on July 31, 1976, one of her employers,
knowing she had had access to incriminating material, asked what she would say
if she were subpoenaed to appear before a grand jury. ''The truth,'' she
replied.

The following week, when Chris was at work, cars would pull up in front of the
couple's house, their motors idling. One night, Chris came home to find Marie
locked in their bedroom and ''nearly hysterical.'' A man had just called and,
disguising his voice, said: ''Keep your mouth shut - or else.''

Marie was m ore outraged than intimidated. ''Who the hell do they think they ar
e?'' she asked Chris. She told him she could not live with herself if she did
not speak out. Marie did not expect any reward. In fa ct, neither she nor Chris
was aware of the Internal Revenue Servi ce's Claim for Reward program, which
pays informants 10 percent of ta x recovered (with a ceiling of $50,000) if they
give evidence agai nst someone that results in a conviction.

Chris and Marie did not know which Federal agency to go to with their
information, so they called the I.R.S. intelligence division, which referred
them to the local Strike Force Against Organized Crime. The next day, they found
themselves in the downtown office of Kenneth Bravo, a special attorney for the
strike force, with whom they expected to discuss what it would mean to testify,
without divulging their names; then they would go home and think about it.

But the questioning in Bravo's office moved quickly. From the vague details
Marie offered, Bravo guessed the name of the company she had worked for. When
Marie said she would not provide any hard evidence until she and Chris were
promised some kind of physical protection, Bravo replied that he could not
guarantee that until he judged the importance of her information. For the next
two hours, Marie told her story. When she pressed Bravo for protection, he told
her there was a Federal program, but ''it's no bed of roses.'' He did not
elaborate.  ''Down the road,'' he said -after Marie testified - representatives
of the Marshals Service would answer all their questions.

At 2 P.M. on Sept. 9, 1976, Marie told a Federal grand jury everything she knew.
A Justice Department spokesman said later that she was an important witness who
''opened up a whole new area of possible organized-crime infiltration.'' While
she testified, Chris met with two marshals in an office down the hall. The
marshals would not answer his questions about the protection program in detail
but said they would visit the couple the following morning at 9:30.  ''Pack your
belongings,'' one marshal said, ''and don't tell your families.'' A surprised
Chris suspected that the officials had waited to tell him and Marie what was in
store until it was too late for them to back out.

The next day, Chris, Marie and Shane left their home and belongings behind,
followed the marshals downtown and parked the new Vega at the Federal
courthouse. That was the last they ever saw of the car.  Marshals drove them to
motels outside the city, where they spent six days. Chris and Marie were finally
told that they were going to be temporarily relocated in Albany, N.Y. Marie
called her parents but could not tell them where she was headed or when they
would see her again. Her family, she thought, was in a state of shock. When
Chris and Marie got off the plane in Albany carrying nothing but a suitcase,
they still had no idea that permanent new identities awaited them.  Shortly
after their arrival in Albany, the couple's local contact, Deputy Marshal John
Jennings, informed them that they would be given new driver's licenses, birth
certificates, Social Security cards, and employment, educational, military and
medical records. Their new last name was borrowed from a local landmark.
Jennings said the couple would receive a modest monthly stipend - $890 - until
they got jobs. He explained that they would only be in Albany temporarily, then
they could select another part of the country as their final destination.

A few days later, Jennings found them a two-bedroom mobile home outside Saratoga
Springs. The $275 rent would be deducted from the couple's monthly subsistence
check. It didn't take long for them to grow restless. After six weeks without
transportation, Chris asked for Government funds to purchase an automobile. He
was given $600, with which he bought a broken-down 1970 Oldsmobile. When he went
to the motor-vehicle office to sign his registration, he absentmindedly
scribbled his old name, which he had to scratch out.

Except for new driver's licenses, Chris and Marie had received none of the new
records promised them. Nor had the job assistance Chris had been promised
materialized; Jennings eventually told him to ''forget about that.'' Although
the couple found Jennings to be compassionate and well-meaning, they also felt
that he didn't know what to do with them. He was used to dealing with witnesses
who had been criminals, many of whom had recently been released from jail and
were grateful to be free - or even alive.

Whenever they thought of leaving the progra m and returning home, they had to
face the fact that they were stil l in danger. Earlier that year, a grenade had
exploded at the resi dence of another Federalwitness back home. Two mobsters in
that area had recently been killedwhen bombs went off in their automobiles. The
y learned that someone had called the police in their home town and said that
Marie's parents had been in a serious accident - woul d the police please reveal
where Marie could be notified?

Still, Chris and Marie had to do something. They had no friends and spent most
of the day cooped up in their mobile home, watching television. To keep in touch
with their past, the couple would drive to Saratoga and stare at the beautiful
empty race course. The marshals forbade Chris from w orking at a race track
because of the unsavory char acters who sometimes congregate there. But he had
spent some time in California and knew that near Santa Barbara there were
several horse -breeding farms where he could work and yet keep some distance
from the track itself.

Ray Echtment, then a Marshals Service inspector in charge of several Eastern
states, agreed that Santa Barbara was suitable and obtained Washington's
approval. On March 21, 1977 - the day after Chris finally received a new Social
Security card - the family set out for California in their automobile, dragging
a U-Haul. They were to get in touch with two marshals in Los Angeles.

''They're expecting you,'' Jennings told them.  When they reached Santa Barbara,
Chris and Marie were dismayed to learn that the marshals were surprised to hear
from them. Donald Mc-Pherson, an inspector with the Marshals Service, said he
didn't know who had authorized Santa Barbara; they couldn't live there because
it was too far away for his Los Angeles office to service them. Deputy Marshal
John DiLuberto helped them find a small one-story house in San Pedro, south of
Los Angeles. He said that, because the cost of living was lower than it was in
New York, their subsistence pay would be cut from $890 to $790 a month.

Again, they were starting over in an unfamiliar area, with no job contacts and
few credentials. Chris found a horse farm 100 miles away, but the marshals would
not allow him to work there because of the distance. And when he asked McPherson
to assist him in getting a job, Chris says the inspector replied: ''We are not
an employment agency.'' DiLuberto soon visited their house, and Chris asked when
they would receive birth certificates, notice of a legal name change and their
other new records. The marshal replied, ''Those things take time.''

Two months after they arrived on the West Coast, Chris wrote a long letter,
''with regret, sadness and disillusionment,'' to William Hall, director of the
United States Marshals Service in McLean, Va. ''We will not accept being asked
to make our way in the world alone, with just a new last name and no means with
which to live with it,'' Chris stated, threatening to ''take our case before the
national news media.''

When applying for jobs, he could do nothing for a reference but tell the
would-be employer to ''call the U.S. Marshals.'' Chris found this hopeless. By
spring 1978 - a year after they had reached California - Chris and Marie were
coming unglued. Chris couldn't sleep; Marie had horrible nightmares. Although
Marie's testimony had triggered important criminal indictments in the Middle
West, her former bosses themselves had never been indicted. Now, newspapers were
reporting that a woman who worked in an F.B.I. office - the same office Chris
and Marie had been dealing with back home - had sold the names and addresses of
Government witnesses to the mob. Wondering if their cover had been blown, Chris
said they were constantly ''waiting for somebody to show up and do us in.''
Every car passing in the night set them on edge.

Their only friends were a couple who lived across the street, but, because Chris
and Marie could not discuss their past, this relationship was strained. Day
after day, the family went to a local fishing pier to stare at the sea - ''the
only thing that kept us sane,'' Chris says. Since they could not seem to fight
the forces that were making them miserable, they began lashing out at each
other. And Shane often woke up at night, crying. His parents had tried to avoid
talking about the case in his presence, but they couldn't shield him from the
unexpected visits of gun-carrying marshals, whom the boy had come to fear. When
the family entered the program, Shane was proud that he had just learned to say
his full name. Now he was resisting his new one.

In June, Terry Walter, an inspector in the program, arrived to assist them.
Within weeks, he reported that he had found a job possibility, a low-level
Federal job, but he would not say where, what precisely it was, or how much it
paid. Chris said he would not take it without more information. Walter then came
up with a menial position at a McDonald's that paid considerably less than the
couple's subsistence allowance. When Chris called this opportunity ''economic
suicide,'' Walter reminded him that his refusal was grounds for expulsion from
the program.

In a last-ditch effort, the two men visited a state employment office.  The
counselor told them that Chris sh ould go back to the horse business. ''That's
the best chance he h as of supporting his family,'' he said. Chris exploded with
l8 mon ths of frustration: ''That's the very thing I came out here to do !'' The
counselor said he would search for a position at a horse far m where Chris could
worksafely. In Chris's estimation, the counselor was the first sincerely helpful
official he had met in California.

But nothing came of the horse-farm suggestion, and Walter finally told Chris he
was not authorized to continue the couple's funding past Dec. 1. The family
would then have to go on welfare,

A few days later, at 3 o'clock in the morning, Marie started packing her bags,
sh outing: ''I can't take it anymore! I don't know where I'm goi ng - I'm just
going!'' She bolted out the front door anddashed down t he street. ''I was
convinced I'd lost her and would never get her back,'' Chris said, but he caught
up with her four blocks away a nd forced her back to the house.

Chris visited the marshals' office in Los Angeles and complained bitterly again
about the broken promises and missing documentation.  When he felt Walter and
McPherson were totally unsympathetic, Chris declared, ''That does it. We're
leaving.''

So, despite the risks, Chris and Marie drove cross-country again and moved in
with Marie's parents.  Howard Safir, who directs the Witness Protection Program
from the United States Marshals headquarters in McLean, Va., says it was
unfortuate that the couple did not receive a full briefing before they entered
the program. He also says there is ''a great deal of truth to the fact that
(Chris and Marie's relocation to) California was an ill-coordinated move.'' And
he says that the policy of preventing Chris from working with horses ''was not
well thought out. I think a job in that industry could have been provided in an
area that was not a security problem.'' Safir was appointed program director two
years ago, after 13 years as an investigative agent with the Drug Enforcement
Administration.  He became the fourteenth man to head the operation in eight
years, and he proposed a series of reforms. The number of witnesses admitted has
been reduced from an unmanageable high of 469 in 1977 to 330 this year. With a
greatly increased budget, he has hired 131 witness-security specialists (up from
28 two years ago), who, unlike most of the marshals, have been trained
specifically for this program. A 24-hour national hotline has been created for
emergency requests, and a formal grievance system for witness complaints has
been established. The Washington-based documentation staff has been increased
from two to eight. ''Since (Chris and Marie) were in the program,'' Safir
reports, ''policy has changed from having to give witnesses job assistance to an
absolute requirement to provide a job.'' Witnesses can now turn down jobs
without losing their subsistence pay. And if they take a job that pays less than
their stipend, their income will be supplemented.

Gerald Shur, the associate director in the office of Enforcement Operations of
the Justice Department's Criminal Division, who helped establish the program a
decade ago, says his office is receiving 90 percent fewer complaints from
witnesses these days. But others are less enthusiastic. Robert Nichols, counsel
for the Senate subcommittee that has conducted hearings on the program, says
many witnesses continue to claim that marshals ''fouled up'' jobs for them. ''I
got a call this morning,'' Nichols said recently, ''from a guy who has been with
the program five years and still doesn't have a Social Security card.'' Last
spring, Senator John C. Culver asked for a review of the program for his
judiciary subcommittee. William Hall, the director of the Marshals Service, in a
letter to Senator Culver, replied that the program was now ''more responsive to
witnesses.'' But he also disclosed that a recent manpower study indicated that
the program was still badly understaffed and needed another 112 workers in the
field. And in the past five years, Hall wrote, though the number of witnesses
taken into the program each year had been reduced, the total number
participating had increased sevenfold without an appropriate increase in
headquarters staff, which ''hinders the . . . initiation of routine program
services.'' There are currently 900 individuals, he said, waiting for
documentation.  After Chris and Marie left California, they decided they had to
escape what had become imprisonment for them. Chris called Mike Wallace of CBS's
''60 Minutes'' and told him what was happening to them. Chris and Marie thought
that if their case was exposed, someone in Government outside the Marshals
Service would help them go back to their old identities or solidify their new
ones. They shunned the usual backs-to-the-camera approach and, despite the
dangers, decided instead to show their faces to 30 million television viewers.
Marie felt that, otherwise, ''people could not relate to the fact that we are
real people.''

The ''60 Minutes'' staff said it confirmed almost every point the couple had
made, and the story was broadcast on Feb. 4, 1979. But the couple's hopes for
any action were dashed when they found that what was actually aired was only the
skeleton of their story.  Furthermore, it produced almost no reaction: one job
offer and a few letters suggesting that Chris and Marie ''got what they deserved
for being snitches.'' There was no response from the Government. Wallace said he
was ''surprised there wasn't more of an outpouring of support. I really thought
it would strike a n erve in America. I thought Marie would be rewarded, not by
one b ut by 50 or 100 job offers.'' The couple had little choice but to accept
the one offer of employment they did receive. A Florida publis her would provide
them with entry-level newspaper jobs - Marie in th e classified department,Chris
delivering papers. Though Marie hated t o move so far from home again, and
though Chris wondered whether they could make it in the affluent coastal town on
$5-an-hour jobs, the y accepted the offer.

On May 11, they said goodbye to their parents and headed South. A month later,
''60 Minutes'' rebroadcast their story, and Wallace commented at the end: ''They
have now moved to another state. Their child and the y are well and happy, and
they are optimistic, finally, about the fut ure.''

''Optimistic,'' it turned out, was a bit strong.  Howard Safir says a
''revitalized and relatively effective'' program can now be made to work for
Chris and Marie. ''Those folks are welcome back to full program services,'' he
says. ''All they have to do is request it. But, quite honestly,'' he adds, ''we
don't know where they are.''

Where they are is in the front half of a two-family house on the fringe of a
small resort city. Chris is now 36, Marie, 29. When I visited them recently, I
became the first person, other than Marie's sister and a television installer,
to enter their home in the 12 months they had lived there.

When she speaks, Marie's words rush out almost inarticulately. But Chris's deep
blue eyes flash with anger when he says, ''I really shook this morning - you
can't believe the dreams I have,'' still incredulous at all that has happened.
Last night, he explains, he dreamed he was at his parents' house. ''There were
cobwebs over everything. No one was home. When I got to the mailbox, I brushed
the cobwebs aside and there were stacks of mail for us inside.''

Chris takes me on a brief tour of the town in his 14-year-old Buick. Along an
endless white beach, where surfers are paddling into huge waves, he points out a
fishing pier that has again given him solace. ''There's no one for us to talk
to,'' he explains. ''We've become social hermits. We start to make friends, then
lose them because we're so inhibited. And we're afraid to leave Shane - someone
may still be looking for us. Marie and I have only gone out by ourselves once in
the past year.''

Back home, Marie, sitting rigidly on the couch, hands me a folder containing
photographs of her and Chris with magnificent Thoroughbreds in dozens of
winner's circles.

''That's all I have left, and what's in here,'' Chris says, tapping his chest.
''This breaks our hearts,'' Marie says softly. ''These were the happiest days.''
On one of the pictures, Chris's former name is printed in full.  ''You're the
first person to see that in four years,'' he says. I had already noticed, in
their bathroom, what I thought was the only visible trace of his old identity -
initials on a metal comb that did not match his new name.

Marie lost something as precious to her as horses were to Chris.  She repeatedly
refers to how much Shane misses his grandparents and how devastated her tightly
knit family has been. She feels responsible for having put her family through
the emotional wringer.  Marie knows that what she did was ''right,'' and at the
same time she is consumed by guilt for having done it.

As we talk, their landlord, who lives in back of the house, walks by the front
window. Chris suggests we stop talking. ''All I need is for them to find out who
we are,'' he says.

Although they have gained some security, the couple still lacks birth
certificates and passports. They cannot vote. They have no major credit cards
and still cannot hope to land jobs that require a check on their backgrounds. (A
year ago, Chris left his newspaperdelivery job and has since taken another
position that did not require references.) Chris cannot receive his Vietnam
Veterans benefits or renew his trainer's license.

Yet they do not feel they can resume their former identities. Their old credit
rating is shot, because their new car was repossessed four years ago, when they
disappeared. And when witnesses take an alias, the Government often removes
their old records in local, state and Federal offices to deflect inquiries from
people who might want to harm them. But requests for records may come from
would-be employers as well as gangsters. If Chris and Marie went back to their
old names, they would have difficulty explaining in job interviews why there
seemed to be huge gaps in the official records of their lives.

''Shane has finally learned his new name,'' Marie says. ''How can we ask him to
go back to his old name now? Can you imagine the identity crisis he would go
through?''

Chris and Marie do not think much of Howard Safir's latest offer totake them
back into the program. ''If he real ly wanted to help,'' Chris says, ''why
hasn't he tried to contact us personally? He knows '60 Minutes' forwards our
mail.''Sitting side by side on a sofa in the living room of their Florida home,
Chris and Marie become extremely agitated when rapprochement with th e Marshals
Service is discussed.

''It makes me sick,'' Marie says. ''We trusted them ... and they lied to us a
thousand times. It scares me to death thinking about going back into oblivion,
under their sole control. All it would do is silence us again.''

One source within the Marshals Service - a field marshal with the witness
program for many years - concurs. ''There's no way they should come back,'' said
the marshal, who does not want to be identified. ''They didn't belong to begin
with and the program still has nothing to offer them.'' The program still
consists chiefly of criminals, not innocent people like Marie and Chris. John
Partington, the Rhode Island marshal, believes that this is a mistake: ''It
should be geared to people like that couple. They should be a higher priority.''

Asked if the couple could receive help without resubmitting to direct
witness-program control, Gerald Shur, an originator of the program, made a small
joke: ''Not unless they can find another Government to assist them.''

Last year, Marie told ''60 Minutes'' that, if called to testify at a trial
involving her former employers, she would ''fulfill my commitment to my
Government.'' Twenty-one months of unhappiness later, Marie now says that she
will not voluntarily step forward ''until the Government acknowledges its
responsibility for us and corrects the injustice.''

Yet Chris still strongly believes that ''someone has to stand up to organized
crime. No one does it, and that's why it goes on and why all along we were
treated like crackpots. There has to be some reasonable alternative to remaining
silent. If the program had done well by us they could have shown the American
public that John Doe can stand up to this cancer. All they ended up doing was
making us feel like criminals.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A DISSENTER'S ODYSSEY THROUGH MAO'S CHINA

SECTION: Section 6; Page 134, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7144 words


Wei Jingsheng is China's most famous dissident. This autobiographical account
has been translated, condensed and annotated by Taling Lee and Miriam London.
They wrote the following introduction. Lee, currently a visiting fellow at Yale
University, is a professor of history at Southern Connecticut State College.
Miriam London is a researcher in Chinese and Soviet studies.  Thirteen months
ago, on Oct. 16, a Peking court sentenced 29-yearold Wei Jingsheng to 15 years
in prison. During the brief period of officially tolerated political dissent in
1978-79, known as the ''Peking Spring,'' Wei's essays - including ''The Fifth
Modernization: Democracy'' - were published in the underground journal
Explorations, of which he was an editor, and posted on Peking's Democracy Wall,
where they attracted worldwide attention.  These essays appealed for the
rejection of ''tyrannical dictatorship Mao Zedong-style'' and for the
establishment of political democracy as the necessary basis for economic and
social reform. Wei did not hesitate to measure China's present leadership
accordingly: ''Does Deng Xiaoping want democracy? The answer is no,'' he wrote
in Explorations on March 25, 1979.

At his trial, Wei Jingsheng's journalistic activity - described as the writing
and distribution of ''reactionary'' literature with intent to overthrow the
socialist system - constituted one of the ''counterrevolutionary crimes'' with
which he was charged. The other major charge against him - the betrayal of
''military secrets'' to foreigners -cited information about the 1979
Sino-Vietnamese War that he divulged dur-ing conversations with Western
correspondents in Peking. As Wei Jingsheng explained in his defense statement,
the source of these ''secrets'' was merely ''byroad news'' - a sub rosa channel
of inside, top-level information leaked usually by the children of high-level
Communist Party and Government cadres in Peking and relied upon by millions of
Chines e .

At a time of sudden, relative relaxation in every sphere, when China seemed to
have moved toward the adoption of a codified legal system, the sentencing of Wei
Jingsheng rang with the arbitrary harshness of the recent past. In an evident
effort to justify the suppression of Wei Jingsheng and others, and to discredit
the ''democratic movement,'' the official Chinese media have sought to equate
the dissidents of the present with the Red Guards of the past, invoking the
specter of new massive ''disorder'' and ''anarchism.'' The Red Guar d student
movement that surged forth in 1966 - in response to M ao's signal to launch the
Cultural Revolution - did indeed decima te the ranks of the Party and Government
apparatus and sow chaos in every province. Wei Jingsheng himself was once a
member of the most r uthless, fanatic Red Guard organization in China - ''United
Acti on,'' composed almost exclusively of children of high Party cadres.  But
he, like many others of his generation, has traveled a lo ng path since then.
The initial course and causes of his transform ation from Maoist believer to
advocate of democracy are sketched in a n unfinished autobiographical account
written secretly by Wei before his arrest in 1979 and recently smuggled out of
China.

A comparison of this account with numerous other histories and analyses of
former Red Guards, including a few published since 1978 in the internal and Hong
Kong Chinese Communist press, reveals similarities of experience and personal
evolution too consistent to be coincidental. It can be said, therefore, that
Wei's account, aside from disclosing much new information about the author
himself, casts the pattern of psychological change for part of a generation now
in its early 30's.

This does not mean that all who followed the same path arrived, like Wei
Jingsheng, at democracy's door. Many of this group are cynically passive and
have not reached any clear political conclusions or embraced any cause. The
precise number of organized activists is unknown. However, in a recently
published speech, Hu Qiaomu, a member of the Party Central Committee Secretariat
and one of the architects of the policies of Party Vice Chairman Deng Xiaoping,
stated that, according to Deng, ''The strength of these people should not be
underestimated... Their number is small but ... they have organizations. Their
organizations are secret ... and in mutual liaison all over the country.'' On
Sept. 26, an Agence France-Presse dispatch disclosed the launching of the first
nationwide ''activist publication,'' an underground journal called Duty,
representing 21 activist and dissident organizations in 12 major cities. It
would seem, then, that the brief star of Wei Jingsheng was not a random flash
but a portent.

The following is a condensation of Wei Jingsheng's autobiographical account.
This personal document, with its blunt assignment of ultimate guilt for the
economic disasters and political persecutions of the last two decades in China,
appears in inadvertent counterpoint to the impending trial of Mao's widow, Jiang
Qing, her ''counterrevolutionary clique'' - popularly known as the Gang of Four
-and other culprits. Through the summation of his own experience, Wei Jingsheng
bears witness against the unseen defendant at this trial, his former idol and
master, Mao Zedong himself.  By Wei Jingsheng t the outset of the Cultural
Revolution in 1966, I was 16 and about to graduate from junior middle school (in
Peking). The Cultural Revolution disrupted everything, including my formal
schooling. I still feel, however, that whatever our generation lost through
aborted education was compensated for by the mental awakening that ensued from
the cultural revolutionary turmoil. For in that turbulent time we were forced to
discard our former (ideological) superstitions and prejudices, to examine
constantly our own ways of thinking in the effort to analyze objectively all
that we were experiencing. This could not have happened in normal circumstances.

In my student days, I loved literature, especially novels. It was in middle
school that I also became interested in philosophy. Our class was quite unruly
and notorious for the boisterous debates we carried on every evening after
school. We would debate standing on desks, gesturing with pointers and pencil
boxes as we shouted at one another. No teacher dared stop us; to do so was to
invite insult.  (Students at the middle school attended by Wei Jingsheng were
mainly children of high party cadres, who ''outranked'' their teachers.  Hence,
the unruly, arrogant behavior, atypical for that time.) Sometimes we had
interminable debates on strange, even absurd, topics, neither side yielding
until every argument was exhausted. We felt a great need to study theoretical
literature in order to increase our skill in logic. The members of my group read
virtually every important work by Marx, Engels, Lenin, Stalin and Mao.

As a Communist Party bureaucrat of sorts, my father was naturally quite
predisposed toward the thought of Marx, Lenin and Mao Zedong, which he tried
hard to inculcate in his children by encouraging us to read such assigned
political works as ''The Plain Truth,'' ''How to Be a Good Communist'' and
''Dialectical Materialism and Historical Materialism.'' Although I could not
understand these writings fully at the time, such a family upbringing made me
consider myself a strong believer in the thought of Marx, Lenin and Mao Zedong.
Indeed, until my ill usions were later shattered by th e reality I witnessed,
Iwas a fanatic Maoist.

My mother indoctrinated us differently. Although, like my father, she also
generally opposed my reading novels and influencing my younger brother and
sister to do the same, she did frequently buy and strongly recommend to us such
(contemporary realistic) novels as ''Flower of a Bitter Plant,''
''Three-Household Lane'' and ''Flower Toward the Sun,'' along with the memoirs
of early Communist revolutionari es. I once overheard an argument between my
parents. My mother argued that we should be taught to feel the difference
betweenlove and hate , and that only when we could side emotionally with the
people could we truly grasp the thought of Marx, Lenin and Mao Zedong. If a
young person did not understand how people suffered, shesaid, then he would not
try to understand the cause of their suffering and the need for revolution. This
sort of education in emotion by my mother was decisively to affect my thinking
later. Had it not been f or her effort to cultivate my revolutionary devotion by
imbuing me wi th a sense of ''sacrifice for the suffering people,'' I might have
re acted as children of other cadres did upon seeing the reality of pe asants'
and workers' life in China, dismissing it as ''merely the dark side of
socialism.'' And when later I saw filthy, foul-smelling beggars, I might have
followed the example of ''city slickers'' an d people of ''proper'' background
and scolded ''all those lazy go od-for-nothings.'' Thanks to my mother's
education, eventhough I grew up a cadre's son in the city, I was still able to
retain sympat hy for suffering workers and peasants.  The Cultura l Revolution
was an explosion of pent-up rage, accumulated o ver many years. It was also a
result of the incongruenceof officially sanctioned ideas and ways of thinking
with reality.  During the Cu ltural Revolution, in all units ranging from the
centralGovernment to the rural brigades, the struggles, as a rule, were waged by
the masses against the leaders who had oppressed them. The far-flung tur moil
was not initiated by the ''Great Helmsman,'' but was the outco me of years of
Communist despotism. This explosion of rage, however , assumed the form of
tyrant worship. Hence, the blindness of the mass struggle and the continued
shackling of people's mind s by feudalistic ideas. Hence, the strange and absurd
paradox where by the masses opposed the hierarchical and slave system while
waving the banner of the very founder of that system. They demanded demo cratic
rights while treating democracy with contempt, and instead s ought to acquire
these rights by adhering to the dictator's th ought. The result was that,
however people viewed the situation, th ey reached the same conclusion - it was
a total disaster! Eve ntually, everyone was to discover that his former views
were seriousl y flawed, requiring some degree of revision. The 10 years of Cult
ural Revolution produced enormous change in most people's perc eptions. Thus,
the gullible, frenzied masses who in 1966demonstrated in (Peking's) Tiananmen
Square in support of the man whohad deprived them of their freedom turned into
the courageous people who demonstra ted against the same man on Tiananmen Square
in 1976.

The painful experience of the Cultural Revolution educated an entire generation.
When scores of my comrades and I joined the Red Guards in 1966, the Red Guard
groups were fanatically Maoist but also - and most significantly - dissatisfied
with reality, with the inequalities in society. It was this feeling of
disaffection that inclined us toward rebellion and martyrdom. Thus, when Mao
Zedong spoke of continuing class struggle under socialism and of class enemies
concealed in the leadership, we immediately set forth to drag out these bad
elements. We had a strong will to fight and formed a powerful force that was
hard to defeat. Why did this force fail to achieve its end of destroying the
unequal social system? Because it was itself armed with the ideology of tyranny.

SECOND JUMP

The Red Guard movement rapidly spread to every part of the country and, in
accordance with Mao Zedong's instructions, we journeyed to many places on
''link-ups'' (travel for ''exchange of experiences'') for on-the-spot
investigation. Whenever we reached a new place, we contacted people at all
levels in an effort to understand the work of the local cadres, particularly the
''power holders.'' Then we would go to the local schools, factories and mines to
instigate rebellion. But each time, after the initial frenzy was over, we were
left with a nagging question: In all these rebellions it seemed that every power
holder was bad and, if so, then the whole party had to be bad. Obviously, this
had not been our understanding at the beginning of the movement. Yet, if power
holders were not universally bad, how was it that the masses at every unit we
visited were invariably able to produce solid evidence for opposing their
leaders?

After our return to Peking from the link-up journeys, we became more baffled
upon learning that many old-time cadres there had also turned into ''capitalist
roaders.'' We did not feel that these old cadres were anti-Party or
antisocialist; nor did we regard them as conspirators comparable to a Bukharin
(a Bolshevik leader condemned for treason at the 1938 Moscow show trials). On
the contrary, they were all of poor family background and had joined the
revolution at a very young age. For a bewildered 16-year-old, such
contradictions were hard to fathom. In this atmosphere of confusion, the Red
Guard groups beg an to split up. Of the original 400 -member Red Guard
organization in my school, for example, more than 100 withdrew to join other
organizations, while those remaini ng split into five or six factions.

At that time, I felt that I had to observe more before I could interpret rightly
this complex and contradictory situation.  Therefore, I led several of my
closest schoolmates on a fi eld investigation trip - never dreaming that this
investigation was to last many yea rs. My friends and I boarded a train headed
in a direction tha t our link-up journey had not followed - the northwest. The
train was packed with all sorts of people, but mainly passengers getting a fre e
ride in the name of link-ups - a lot of dumb country hicks who cle arly were not
out to learn anything and seemed to have only one goal - to enjoy. I was very
resentful of them. Facing me sata middle-aged man of this sort who claimed to be
on official business, but I noticed that he had a link-up ticket. When he saw
that we were Red Guards, he tried hard to strike up a conversation with us, but
we weren't much interested.

Once the train had passed the city of Xian (in Shaanxi Province), there were
many beggars in the railroad stations. Whenever I saw a beggar, instinctively I
offered some of my food. That fellow opposite me said, ''Don't give any food to
these people. They might have been landlords or rich peasants. At the very
least, they're lazy and deserve to starve.'' He seemed to make sense, so I took
his advice.  But whenever I saw children begging, I would still offer food out
of commiseration and pity.

Leaving behind the city of Lanzhou (in Gansu Province), the train approached the
famous region known as ''Corridor West of the (Yellow) River,'' where we stopped
at a small station. ''Small'' is no exaggeration - the station did not even have
a platform, probably because so few people normally used this stop. When our
express pulled into the station, however, a horde of beggars swarmed forward to
almost every car. Under my window, among several beggars in their teens, I saw a
young woman, her face smeared with soot and her long hair covering her upper
torso. These young people seemed like innocents to me and I pitied them. As for
that young woman, even if she did belong to the family of a (former) landlord or
rich peasant, I thought, she herself was neither a landlord nor rich, and thus I
would not be guilty of ''failing to distinguish between classes'' by offering
her food. So I took out some cakes I had bought at the Lanzhou Station and
reached through the window, trying to put them into her outstretched hands. But
the train was high on the track, while the beggars stood at the bottom of an
embankment; our hands were still half a meter apart. I began to lean from the
waist out of the window. No sooner had I stuck my head out than I withdrew
instinctively, my arm still dangling in midair; for I saw in that instant
something I could never have imagined or believed if I had heard it from anyone
else. Except for the long hair spread over her upper torso, that young woman -
probably 17 or 18 years old - had nothing at all on her soot-and-mud-smeared
body. From a distance, the soot and mud had looked like clothing, and, standing
among the other youngsters, she had not been conspicuous.

I simply could not accept the reality of what I had seen. The young people at
the foot of the embankment did not understand why I had suddenly drawn back and
they began to beg more loudly. Realizing that hunger was their sole concern, I
immediately let the cakes drop, causing a scramble below.

The man sitting opposite chuckled at the scene and said, in the tone of an old
hand, ''Never seen that before? There's a lot of that around here. You see girls
like that at every small station. Some are even very pretty. Just give them
something to eat, you don't even need money, and you can ...''

I glared at him, almost grateful for the chance he now gave me to vent the pain
and anger inside me. My look must have been frightening, for he stopped
immediately and, with evident embarrassment, changed his tone: ''If you'd been
on the trains around here a lot, you wouldn't find this surprising. You see this
at every station. Of course, when you think of it, they are indeed to be
pitied.''

I turned my face toward the window, not wanting a man like that to see my honest
emotion. Again I saw that young woman, on tiptoe, her hands outstretched, fixing
her piteous eyes on me as she pleaded in a dialect I didn't understand. Perhaps
she had lost out in the scramble for the cakes just now, or she had given what
she had snatched to a younger brother or sister. If I did not give her
something, she would continue to starve. My initial shock and embarrassment were
gone. I took all the leftover bread from my satchel and leaned out the window to
distribute it. The bread was not enough, for other hungry beggars came over from
nearby windows. A voice behind me said, ''Here, I have some leftovers.'' I
turned, half disbelieving, to the man opposite me. Looking embarrassed, he
added, ''I can't eat them all anyway,'' and handed me several packages of
biscuits. By now, passengers at other windows were also distributing food.
Perhaps this was the effect of the Red Guard armband visible on my outstretched
arm, who knows. As the train pulled out, the nude young woman and the youngsters
about her lowered their hungry eyes from the windows to the food in their hands.


For the remaining two days of the train rid e, the scene at this small station
haunted my mind. Was this the r esult of socialism or ofa few bad local leaders'
evil deeds? Such mis deeds could not be redeemed, I felt, even by death.

At the same time, it dawned on me that , in order to discern the true face of
this society, it was not enough to know conditions in the cities an d among the
upper echelons; one had to probe the situation at the lowest levels as well.

With this idea in mind, I decided to go with one of my closest comrades on a
tour of the (Production-and-) Construction Corps (settlements run by the
People's Liberation Army to which many Korean War veterans and city youth were
assigned to live and work) in a remote border region. We began to pay attention
not so much to the kind of local production or the amount of grain harvested,
but to the way various people lived and their attitudes toward life. Because of
our warm, earnest approach, we made many friends among the former city students,
demobilized soldiers and (exiled) old rightists who were settled there. We
discovered that, despite their divergent aspirations, experiences and
circumstances, they shared one common attitude toward the present:
dissatisfaction. The former city students and army veterans all felt that they
had been deceived. An old rightist told us bluntly: When she joined the
Communist Party, she never thought it would one day be controlled by such a
cruel, callous bunch. At first, we found complaints of this sort hard to
swallow; in fact, we felt this woman certainly deserved to have been denounced
as a rightist. At the same time, her attitude was conveyed through numerous
details, involving her life story, which seemed authentic and hard to refute.

She had been a correspondent for the New China News Agency before being exiled
to Xinjiang (province) as a rightist. However, because of the lack of trained
professional people in Xinjiang, she was permitted to serve as an editor and
reporter for the newspaper of the Second (Military) Farm Division in Ku-er-le
County. She took us around, introducing us to many people, including the
chairman of the county's Poor Peasants' Association (a kind of honorary
association in the countryside, restricted to peasants whose families had been
demonstrably impoverished before the Communist takeover in 1949), who was a
peasant of Uighur nationality. When we left this chairman's home after a visit,
I felt as though time had been set back 20 years, as though I had just seen a
poor peasant's home before ''liberation,'' as described in novels. The only
difference was that this poor peasant constantly mouthed such jargon as
''revolution'' and ''revisionism,'' as if to remind everyone that this was 1966,
not 1946.
THIRD JUMP

She also took us on horseback to a most isolated spot to see a stable. At a
fish-processing plant near the stable, we met more than 20 former students from
Shanghai, who asked immediately upon our arrival that we take their photographs.
They mounted our horses in scared glee and sat fixedly, clutching the reins.
Intrigued, I asked, ''Don't you people ride horseback often?''

After some hesitation, a bespectacled young man replied, ''We don't have any
horses here.'' Others explained that they wanted to send home pictures of
themselves on horseback against a background of beautiful scenery.

At dusk, on our way back to the regimental headquarters at Yanqi, I asked the
woman rightist why the students did not use the dilapidated thatched huts where
they were quartered as a background.

She replied wearily, ''It's bad enough not to send a picture home in over 10
years. But if, on top of that, you showed that you were living in those
broken-down huts, can you imagine how your parents would feel?''

Surprised, I asked why they had let 10 years go by. Obviously using this
opportunity to expose conditions there, she said, ''Because life is hard there.
Didn't you see that their living conditions - their food and quarters - were the
same as the labor-reform inmates?''

''They have labor-reform inmates there? How is it I didn't see any?'' I asked.
''You're not very observant. That row of huts in front of their living quarters
- didn't you see them in there?'' Suddenly, I remembered seeing people watching
us silently through the windows of the front-row huts. It had never occurred to
me that labor-camp inmates could be as ''free'' as the students.

She continued: ''To prevent their running away, they're not allowed to leave the
site of the fish plant. And didn't you notice there wasn't even one horse at the
plant?''

Of course, it had not occurred to me, either, that former city students would
have the same kind of ''freedom'' as labor-camp inmates.

''But can't they just escape?'' I persisted.  ''Just look at the current in this
river.'' Indeed, the river we were now fording cou rs ed swiftly past on its way
to Bo-shi-teng Lake. We had crossed three such rivers on our way here.

''Rivers like this are impossible to cross without a horse,'' she said, as we
looked down at the endlessly swirling current. ''And during t he sp ring thaw,
even a horse won't do. You can only cross by camel. And an unloaded horse
wouldn't be able to make it through the fast currents either.''

To keep our shoes dry, we tucked our feet back on the horses' buttocks. I turned
my head toward those thatched huts, now about 10 kilometers away. A few
unfortunate souls still stood there, presumably watching us disappear over the
horizon. Perhaps they would spend the rest of their lives there.

From that time on, whenever I saw in the newspapers glowing praise for the
''superiority of socialism'' or heard people brag about how socialism was better
than capitalism, I would swear silently, ''Garbage - your mother!'' Although we
had learned from books that capitalism was bad, I just could not believe that
anything could be worse than what I had seen.

Although I still believed that all this resulted from a failure to follow
Chairman Mao's directives, I began to wonder why Chairman Mao still put his
trust in those who countered his will. And the case of this woman rightist
further perplexed me: Why were good people always overthrown while bad people
ended up on top? I felt that this woman was a decent person who could never harm
others' interests and that she had been wrongfully denounced as a ''rightist.''
I particularly admired her attitude toward her former husband, who had not only
divorced her but had since remarried. She bore him no grudge.

When my schoolmate and I later sought out and discreetly visited her former
husband, bearing the gift of pears from distant Ku-er-le that she had asked us
to take to him, he refused even to let us in the door, disclaiming any ties with
his children's mother. He condescended only to let his children accept the pears
in the hallway. I walked away from his home in anguish. Perhaps it was this
heartlessness that had saved him from being tainted by his rightist wife! Why
was it always this sort of unconscionable person who escaped suffering and made
it in our society? I settled for my own answer: Because the cadres everywhere
were so poor in their ideological preparation that they allowed such people to
take advantage. I felt that only the thought of Marx, Lenin and Mao Zedong was
an effective weapon against these ''revisionists.''

Others among the earliest Red Guards like me, I heard, were similarly trying to
reach a deeper understanding of our society. Some even donned rags and became
beggars at the Peking Railway Station in order to learn about the realities. I
thought it unnecessary to learn about life in that way. It seemed a more
effective way to go down among the workers and peasants and listen to them talk
from the heart. By now I had adopted a new bias: Unless there were solid
evidence to convince me otherwise, I would regard all power holders in advance
as ruthless people who had built their success on others' misfortune. This bias,
I found, was widespread among my old ''comrades-in-arms,'' and since it chimed
in with the anti-Jiang Qing trend among the first Red Guards, I soon became
actively involved in that movement.

During this period, I cut back on theoretical study and spent most of my time in
and out of (the rival faction's) jails, holding meetings, smashing the Third
Command (the pro-Jiang Qing factions in the universities), raiding the Public
Security Bureau (police in charge of public order and security) and so on. At
that time, there were even some among us who openly advocated ''a recheck of Mao
Zedong thought against Marxism-Leninism'' and said that ''Chairman Mao was a
great man before 1957 (the year of the Anti-Rightist Movement and one year
before the Great Leap Forward) but has made mistakes since.'' The latter
statement is one that people would not dare make openly even today (1979). One
can imagine what a shock it must have been to ordinary people then. To me,
however, it was a beacon lighting the way. For the Chairman had already
instructed Jiang Qing to turn against us, to arrest the ''rebellious babes'' -
an act that began to shake Chairman Mao's towering image in my mind.  At this
critical juncture, I began to suspect that even Chairman Mao's thought was
''problematical.'' In 1967, the ''United Action'' was banned for opposing Jiang
Qing, and we, the first Red Guards, were left without our own organization. The
reason for opposing Jiang Qing was that she had used the naive youngsters in
''United Action'' to eliminate her enemies, thus bolstering her own power, and
then had slandered and trampled all over them according to her fickle mood.
Besides, her persecution of many old cadres had infuriated their children, and
there was talk of her dubious moral personal behavior.

Just at this time, certain Red Guard leaders in (Peking's) West Municipal
District organized a chorus to perform songs like ''Song of the Long March'' and
''Chairman Mao's Poems.'' Since most of its members were cadres' children who
had belonged to or sympathized with ''United Action,'' the chorus was both
anti-Jiang Qing and given to voicing the grievances of the old cadres.

The chorus later expanded into an organization including 100 singers, a band of
70 to 80 members, a drama group and the nucleus ofa film crew. It also put out a
publication, ' 'Getting Ready.'' The organizational funds came mainly from a
raid on the vault of No. 13 Middle Schoo l, led by one of the chorus's top
leaders, Yan g Xiaoyang.He picked the lock of the vault and removed more than
200, 000 yuan incash (at the time, about $83,000) and also bank books in a
burlap sack. (Such acts of lawlessness were common during this an archic
period.) Yang happened to be my neighbor. I soon learned t hat the ideological
position of the chorus was similar to mine and decided tojoin.

At first, I handled general assignments for the chorus; later, I went to Canton
to arrange for performances there and to contact local organizations with
similar views. By this time, our anti-Jiang Qing viewpoint was out in the open.
When I returned to Peking in early 1968, I found that the chorus was endangered
and that a second ''arrest 'United Action' '' move threatened at any moment. The
core members of the organization held a meeting and decided to move temporarily
to Canton. Yang Xiaoyang and I were sent to make advance arrangements. On our
return from Canton about a week later, however, Yang was arrested the moment he
entered his house. At another urgent meeting, during which I was named acting
head of the organization, we decided to proceed with our original plan of going
to Canton.

At the railway station, we knew we were in for trouble when we saw several
truckloads of soldiers from the Garrison Command (People's Liberation Army
headquarters of troops guarding Peking) pull up to the square in front.
Evidently, the central authorities were acting on a notion, leaked to me earlier
by the son of a cadre at the Garrison Command, that the chorus was planning a
mass escape to Hong Kong. When I saw the tense situation on the square, I
ordered an immediate pullout and, accompanied by about a dozen husky bodyguards,
made a quick tour of the station to see if any of our people had been arrested.
Inside the station, I caught sight of my younger sister and her girlfriend, who
were held by two soldiers; the other soldiers had presumably fanned out to other
parts of the station. We rushed the two soldiers, catching them by surprise, and
ran out of the station with the girls.
FOURTH JUMP After more meetings and much argument during the next few days, we
decided to disband the chorus. We had little choice; it was impossible for us to
leave Peking as a group and we faced imminent arrest. I did not tell others at
the time but, in any case, I felt that the group was eventually doomed by its
own internal weakness.  Its members complained loudly only about injustices to
their parents and friends, not to the people generally, and there were members
who were merely blind zealots without any clear goal.

In the months following the dissolution of the chorus, I was constantly on the
move and in despair. I could find no one in the world to trust, to pin my hopes
on. The workers and peasants, it seemed, ignorantly believed in the new
exploiter-bureaucrats (in the Party and Government); the soldiers, without
exception, would serve any ruler. Among the intellectuals, some had been bought
over by Lin Biao (then Defense Minister and Mao's chosen successor) and Jiang
Qing; others were just meekly living on the hope that some day they, too, would
win these leaders' favor. I saw no force capable of changing this evil reality.

With waves of mass arrests in Peking, I soon had nowhere to hide.  (The purpose
of the mass arrests begun by the central authorities in 1968 was to stamp out
the powerful organizations spawned by the Red Guard movement.) I spent July and
August of 1968 in Tianjin, completely desperate. After I had weathered another
police raid by hiding in the loft of an office building, my comrades emptied
their pockets down to the last cent to help me escape. The money, however, was
not enough to get me very far. I finally went to the home of a comrade's
girlfriend in Changzhou (in Jiangsu Province) for further help. I had just
enough for train fare. My real purpose was to get to Wuhan or Canton - or,
failing that, to Shanghai. In Changzhou, the girlfriend told me that she had no
money to lend, but asked me to stay a few days while she wrote to friends in
Peking for help with my fare to Wuhan. Arrests, she said, had already begun in
Shanghai.  Later, I learned that had I gone to Wuhan, I would have walked right
into the arms of the Public Security Bureau, because mass arrests were then
under way in every major city throughout the country.

After waiting about a week, I received money from friends in Peking, along with
a letter from my younger sister, enclosing the address of our rural ancestral
home in Anhui Province. She told me that my only safe haven now would be the
village.

I reached the village just as movements (purges) like ''cleansing the class
ranks'' were in full swing in the countryside and the personality cult of Mao
Zedong was proceeding with great fanfare.  With this stepping up of the class
struggle, many who had been loyal followers of Maoism were now also designated
as targets of the struggle.

The situation made me ponder another question. According to the Marxist theory
of ''class as a function of economic status,'' were not the former landlords and
rich peasants, w ho had lost their privileged economic position since Liberation
, now in the same class with workers and peasants?  As for the cadres, who held
rea l power andwere far superior economically and politically to ordinary
workers and peasants, were they not a new class? And was it not tr ue that this
new class was, in everyday life, incompatible, like f ire and water, with the
other (exploited) class?

At last, using Marxist analysis, I was able to clarify for myself this question
that had long troubled me. I felt as if I had awakened from a long dream. I
experienced sudden relief, but also fear that I was in the midst of darkness.
All my previous views and theoretical notions were shaken: All had to undergo a
new round of inquiry. In the quiet of the village, I immersed myself in the
classic works of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin. Marx and Engels inspired more
confidence in me, their theories seeming relatively more scientific.  Of Lenin's
works, I liked only one, ''The State and Revolution,'' especially the part on
proletarian democracy.

During this stay in the village, the aftermath of the Great Leap Forward
(launched in 1958) and the Communizing Wind (the introduction of the commune
system) was deeply impressed on my mind.  Whenever the peasants talked of the
Great Leap days, it was as though they were reliving ''doomsday'' and could
hardly hide their feeling of having been lucky enough to survive. I was
intrigued and took to questioning the peasants in minute detail. Gradually, I
came to understand that the so-called ''three years of natural disasters'' were
not really natural in origin, but caused by erroneous policies.  Peasants
recalled, for example, that during the Communizing Wind in 1959-60, rice was
left to rot in the fields because the peasants were too weakened (by hunger) to
harvest. Many starved to death and, in some villages, not a single soul was to
be seen harvesting in the fields.

Once a relative accompanied me to a neighborhood village. On the way, we walked
past a deserted village; the houses were only mud walls without roofs. I could
not understand why, if no one lived in them, these walls were not torn down to
make room for more rice paddies. Finally, my relative explained: ''You are
right, no one lives there. In the days of the Communizing Wind, all the people
in this village starved to death. The farmlands were long ago divided up among
neighboring production teams. At that time, people thought maybe some villagers
who might have run away to other places might come back some day to claim their
homes, so they decided not to touch the houses for the time being. Well, it's
been years now. I guess no one will ever show up.'' As we passed on one side, I
saw sunlight on the weeds within the walls - a sad contrast to the neat rice
paddies beyond.

Later, during a gathering at a friend's house in the neighboring village, I
heard horror stories of villagers who had exchanged babies to eat. I could
almost see peasants materialize from the weeds within those broken mud walls - a
terrible look on their faces as they devoured infant flesh. The children I had
seen chasing butterflies on the outskirts of the village suddenly seemed to me
the reincarnation of children once sacrificed by their own parents. I pitied
them all.  Who had made these parents exchange as food babies they could not in
any case have saved? Who had made them live to taste, inconceivably, of human
flesh mixed with parental tears?

By this time, I was able to discern clearly the face of the Executioner, whose
like would come along only ''once in several centuries in the whole world and
once in several millennia in China'' (a parody of a eulogy of Mao Zedong by Lin
Biao) - and his name was Mao Zedong. It was Mao Zedong's criminal system and
policies that had made these parents, driven out of their reason by starvation,
commit such acts to survive.

I now realized why Peng Dehuai (the Defense Minister purged by Mao in 1959 for
criticizing the Great Leap policies) had summoned so much courage to attack
Party Central (the Chinese Communist Party Central Committee), led by Mao
Zedong. I now realized why the peasants so deeply hated ''Communism'' and were
at a loss to understand the slogans against Liu Shaoqi's policies (the policies
of the disgraced head of state had eased the restrictions of the commune
system). It was because they wanted never again to deliver their babes for
devouring, never again to beat a daily companion to death for the sake of his
flesh. It was simply because they wanted to live - a reason stronger than any
''ism.''

Some people may find it unthinkable that I could have dared regard Mao Zedong as
an executioner at that early date, and they may imagine that one could have done
so only in a state of fear or hysteria.  However, I arrived at this view calmly,
convinced that what I had seen was the way things were, and that I had reached
the only possible conclusion. What I failed to understand was why this
executioner was still enthusiastically hailed. Were not the soldiers and police
themselves of worker and peasant origin?

In the countryside, I also witnessed the real practice of Mao's theory of class
struggle. Mao used class struggle to divide people into imaginary interest
groups, rendering them incapable of discerning their true interests. Thus, he
was able to incite people to engage in mutual killing for goals that were, in
fact, detrimen talto their own interests. It was precisely thro ugh this
technique that he foole d the oppressed millions and manipulated them into
supportinghim. It was precisely for this reason that he was able to conceal
hisreal face and masquerade as the people's leader.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Wei Jingsheng

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Media and The New Left

SECTION: Section 7; Page 43, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 226 words


To the Editor:

Although re aders of Walter Goodman's review of my ''The Whole WorldIs Watching:
Mass Media in the Making and Unmaking of the New Left'' (Aug. 31) mig ht hardly
guess it, one of my book's points is that journalists r outinely process
information into stereotypes that deflect and r epress challenges to the social
order. One common method- what I call hegemonic frame - is to make opposition
viewpoints appear bizarr e and ridiculous, to denigrate substance, to distort,
toconjure a fre ak show. Mr. Goodman ridicules the term and proceeds,
inadvertently , to embody precisely what I was writing about.

Any reader who is not content to sneer at polysyllables, and who wants to know
what a hegemonic frame is, should consult Mr. Goodman's ad hominem piece. To the
extent that Mr. Goodman takes account of my book's argument at all, he smothers
it. The book demonstrates in detail that many New York Times and CBS news
accounts effectively depicted the New Left as trivial and menacing, sometimes
both at the same time. (I also discuss important exceptions: The New York
Times's frame did change as the Vietnam War escalated and established opinion
shifted.) Mr. Goodman doesn't like the length of my criticism, but only that
length permitted me to develop an argument as elaborate as the facts required.
TODD GITLIN, Berkeley, Calif.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND JOURNAl

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 3, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1501 words


THE painted stucco queen of ocean resort hotels on the Island, the Lido Beach
Hotel, will be gutted before the end of the year and converted into 184
condominium apartments, to be called the Lido Beach Towers.

The 53-year-old, five-story building will receive more than $20 million in major
renovations. The apartments wil l range from $80,000 to $225,000 for duplex and
penthouse units wi th views of the AtlanticOcean.

Ben Rudolph, a principal owner, said that an auction would be held in about a
month for the hotel's Beaux Arts furnishings, artifacts, chandeliers and
carpeting. The last social function in the building, a bat mitzvah with 200
guests, was scheduled for this weekend, beginning Friday and continuing until
today.

The renovations will take about a year, Mr. Rudolph said. There are plans to
convert the 12-acre grounds into more clay tennis courts, one more outdoor
swimming pool, shuffleboard courts and additional parking facilities.

When the renovations are completed, gone will be the multivaulted ceiling of the
lobby with its rococo columns, the imported ceramic tiles, the dining room that
seats 1,000 people, the 40-by-80-foot dance floor and the retractable roof that
opened to the stars. But the shell of the dowager queen of Lido Beach will
remain on her 1,000-foot beach frontage.

Thousands of deli owners, supermarket managers and beverage distributors across
Suffolk County recently received copies of a proposed beverage container control
law in the mail. The copies were sent out not by the bill's sponsor, County
Legislator Patrick G.  Halpin, but rather by the Legislature's Presiding
Officer, Anthony Noto, who opposes the suggestion.

According to Mr. Noto, the proposal, which would require all beer and soda cans
and bottles sold in the county to carry at least a five-cent refund deposit,
would send Suffolk residents scurrying into Nassau County to buy their beer and
soda less expensively.

For his part, Mr. Halpin contends that the recycling of beverage bottles and
cans would solve a growing litter problem while saving money and energy, because
the returnables would be recycled.

New York State has been toying with the idea of a beverage container control law
for several years. Mr. Halpin said that perhaps such a bill, if passed in
Suffolk, would pressure the state into approving similar legislation.

Mr. Noto has a different view.  ''Each deposit can or bottle must be specially
marked,'' Mr. Noto said. ''I can't see the bottlers going to the trouble and
expense of providing all those special containers just for Suffolk County.
Instead, they'd probably package just a limited selection of beverages for the
Suffolk market, and we'd end up drinking only ginger ale.''

Discussing an incident on Nov. 8, when vandals sprayed epithets and symbols,
including two small swastikas and a Maltese cross, on a 150-foot-wall at Hewlett
High School, the District Superintendent, Dr. Kenneth Dunn, said: ''We are 99.5
percent sure the defacing was not anti-Semitic in intent. We do not believe it
was the same kind of situation that occurred in Great Neck.''

Two weeks ago, someone sprayed anti-Semitic slogans at Great Neck North Senior
High School.  The police are investigating the incident in Hewlett, Dr. Dunn
said. He added that the slogans sprayed on the wall were directed at two of the
Hewlett High School coaches, naming them and telling them to ''go home.''
Neither of the coaches is Jewish.

A strong possibility for the incident, Dr. Dunn suggested, is ''anger''
exhibited by some students were recently tossed out of a soccer game. Another
reason, he suggested, might be because ''some of our students are very good
soccer players.'' Dr. Dunn added: ''We went to the finals. It is possible that
envy might have prompted some students from other defeated schools to target
their anger in this manner. We are keeping our eyes open.''

The wall at Hewlett High School -long a forum for antiwar statements -for more
than six years had the slogan ''Get out of Southeast Asia'' painted on its face.
In 1976, when Dr. Dunn became Superintendent, he ordered that better cleansing
agents be purchased, thus enabling the anti-Vietnam slogan to be removed.

The South Huntington School District's plans to sell the Central School on Walt
Whitman Road for $1 million and relocate its principal tenant, the Pederson-Krag
Clinic, in the West Hill Administration Building will be discussed at the
regular School Board meeting at Memorial Junior High School on Wednesday.

A referendu m on the sale will be held on Dec. 10.  The move, w hich will
necessitate a zoning variance, ''should be no problem,'' ac cording to Elizabeth
Fraser, clinic manager. The only psychiatric o utpatient clinic for counseling
and group therapy in Huntington, P ederson-Krag has been situated in three other
residential a reas, Mrs. Fraser said, ''and has moved only because of
expansion.''

Open five days a week - from 8 A.M. to 10:30 P.M. - the clinic has grown since
its inception in 1957, when it treated 60 patients, to maintain a patient load
now of 1,700 with a part-time professional staff of 80.

Under contract to the Suffolk County Divisi on of Mental Heath Services, which
provides the bulk of its fina ncing, the clinic charges patients on a sliding
fee schedule wi th an average fee of $8 to $9, Mrs. Fraser said, as compared
with pri vate fees of $40 to $60.

To accommodate the move, the South Huntington Youth Development Association, the
Head Start program and some administrative services currently at West Hill would
be ''asked to consider relocation to the Beverly Hill School,'' said
Superintendent Charles A. Connell.  Additional parking spaces, he said , would
added to the front and rear lots.

''But the administration building is entirely adequate to house the clinic,''
according to school officials.

The East Hampton Town Board decided informally this month to impose a 10-minute
limit on all speakers who appear before the board.  According to Councilman
Randall Parsons, who thought of the idea, the board has the power to set policy
for speakers' conduct at public hearings before the board.

''That includes whether they stand at their seats, or in front of the room, and
it also includes the length of time they are allowed to speak,'' Mr. Parsons
said. ''We aren't trying to prevent anyone from speaking. We're just trying to
give everyone a chance to be heard.''

Mr. Parsons said that he decided to urge a time limit after a local lawyer, John
McGowan, recently spoke for two and a half hours before the board. ''People were
getting up and leaving because they thought they wouldn't get a chance to
speak,'' Mr. Parsons said.

The rule has ''worked out very well,'' he added. He noted that all speakers were
allowed to address the board again without a time limit after all those who
wished to speak had been heard once.

The next round of a mikvah controversy will be held in Hempstead Town Hall. The
Appellate Division of State Supreme Court upheld a lower court order that the
Town Board of Zoning Appeals conduct another hearing on whether the mikvah, or
ritual bath, can be built on the site in Hewlett of a home destroyed by fire.

The board had turned down an application by the South Shore congregation on the
ground that it would add to the already congested traffic on Peninsula
Boulevard. The Appellate Division said that there was enough on-street parking
for the ritual bath but that the zoning appeals board should consider whether it
would cost more to renovate the house than to establish the bath at another
location.

He says ''who'' when she says ''whom''; they say ''effect'' when they mean
''affect.'' And all together, they - Long Island secretaries, authors, editors
and newspaper reporters - are keeping the answering end of Nassau Community
College's Grammar-Phone busy.

Although these puzzlers are leading the pack of queries, said Frances Blander,
an administrative assistant in the English department who is primarily
responsible for the phone, the 20 or so people who call every day are also
confused about singular and plural verbs and spelling.

Miss Blander will answer the grammar questions, but she sends the bad spellers
back to their dictionaries. Although there's no prize for stumping her, she
loves a good challenge now and then. The number for the free service is
222-7146, and Miss Blander can be reached from 9 A.M. to 3:30 P.M. weekdays.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Lido Beach Hotel

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT WASHINGTON;
OF UNIVERSE LOST AND FOUND

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 949 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 16


Down the Mall from the Capitol's newly jagged lines of victory and defeat,
ordinary Americans exhausted from touring the more permanent monuments of
Washington have been flopping down on the lobby floor of the National Air and
Space Museum to watch the live television pictures flashing back wondrous scenes
of Saturn never witnessed before.

The people are sitting a stone's fall from the wingtips of the Wright Brothers'
first airplane, which is suspended above, glowing frail and mauve below the
museum skylight.

Here is another kind of transition, centered far beyond this world, where the
cosmic dwarfs the Governmental and the mechanical Voyager moves on to its next
stop, Uranus, little more than a mere Presidential term away from now.

The TV show seems almost satirical in making its own definition of transition,
showing to the energy-crazed Earth a red moon called Titan that may actually
rain gasoline, like a big rock-candy asteroid.

In Another Sphere

In the Capitol, there is a doorkeeper who never heard of Titan, a lean and
watchful man who is rushing around collecting fresh photographs of his own
universe.

''I've got 75 new faces coming in with the new Congress,'' the doorkeeper says
in his third decade of standing and waiting and - understandably, forgivably -
fawning. ''We're getting the glossies on the winners and I'll have them down pat
by opening day.''

Looking elsewhere as he chats, the doorkeeper suddenly flashes a smile with the
ease of a vaudevillian and darts his hand toward a well-groomed man passing by.
''Congressman, how are you, sir?'' the doorkeeper booms.

Just as quickly, he is mute d. ''Here comes Eddie,'' he says, referring to a
doorkeeping counterpart from t he Senate who lost all when the Democrats lost
their majority there.
All-Too-Human Voyager

The man Eddie seems clutched in mourning or cosmic hangover as he waves at the
doorkeeper who survived and who now watches an all-toohuman voyager pass on.

''Not at all,'' the doorkeeper says when asked about the cruelties of the
patronage game. ''You ride the wave and ride the wave and finally, you know, it
can happen. The Republicans got their own doorkeepers. I lost two Congressmen
from under me over the years, but I was always building contacts with others and
survived by shifting to them.''

At his post in the marble-rich, chronically dangerous halls of power, the
doorkeeper eyes everyone and talks as if nothing should surprise a properly wary
earthling, not even the unpredictable fate that dictates glimpses of Abscam and
the braided rings of Saturn.

Senator Nelson's Transition

The beauty of Senator Gaylord Nelson as he strolls his last days in the Capitol
in the ultimate Washington transition, defeat by the voters, is that he says in
a few plain words how he hates it and would so much rather stay in the Senate he
loves, the Senate he has served 18 years.

''The legislative process is fascinating to me,'' he says. ''And now I won't be
doing what I love most to do.'' All sorts of colleagues, staff workers and
lobbyists drop by to see the Wisconsin Democrat, the best of them avoiding
maudlin regrets. But the Senator who lost is as blunt as the doorkeeper who
survived.

''My employer said I was terminated,'' the Senator says, barely smiling as the
autumn of the 96th Congress glows sharp and golden outside his place of comfort
and privilege by the Capitol.

Among the cauterizing defeats inflicted upon liberal Democrats, Senator Nelson
is one of the legislators most admired by colleagues and Capitol workers. He
will be remembered as a pioneer in the complicated environmental issue that so
many voters seemed weary of this year. And in the early lopsided days of the
Vietnam War debate, he was one of the three Senate members who stood up to vote
no in warning against appropriations that sent the first large groups of
American ground troops there.

''I remember riding out in Hubert Humphrey's plane back then and telling him of
the Administration's blunder, how it could involve hundreds of thousands of
troops,'' the Senator says, conjuring a crisp image of flight above the Earth.
''And old Hubert says in this incredulous tone, 'Oh no, the President would
never get sucked into that.' ''

Proud as he might be of his record, the Senator knows now that this was not the
best Presidential year to have it on the line. In the campaign, the
President-elect ventured to suggest that the voters were less blameworthy than
the trees in polluting the Earth, and that there might have been something noble
in the Vietnam experience.  Issues have cycles as much as the spheres, but
Senator Nelson scoffs at arguments that a basic liberal philosophy was
repudiated by the voters.
Lost by 6,000 Votes

''That's simplistic,'' he says. ''I lost in a rough Presidential year by -what?
- 37,000 votes of 2.2 million cast. And Frank Church lost by 6,000 votes.
Considering the year, that's a hell of a victory for Frank Church.''

Still, whatever Presidential candidates say, Senator Nelson thinks the
environmental issue will long outlive all the latest losers and winners in
Washington.

''It is the one huge issue, the one dominant issue of the future of this
planet,'' he says flatly.  ''But, oh,'' he adds, ''I could be so much more
effective on it if I could have stayed in the Senate.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

'HOME' LEADS THE NOMINATIONS FOR AWARDS IN BLACK THEATER

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 479 words


The entire cast and the director of ''Home,'' the comedy-drama that went from
the Negro Ensemble Company's stage to Broadway, are among more than 70 nominees
contending for the Audelco Recognition Awards, to be presented tonight. The play
is also up for an award.

The eighth awards ceremonies are to be held in Aaron Davis Hall of the Leonard
Davis Center for the Performing Arts at Convent Avenue and West 134th Street on
the City College campus. Debbie Allen, who is performing in ''West Side Story,''
and Gregory Hines will preside.

The Audience Development Committee, an all-women's group, created the awards to
recognize the work of black theatrical artists and their work, sometimes
overlooked because it it takes place outside the mainstream of the theater.

Pioneers Lauded

Outstanding pioneer awards will be given to Earle Hyman, Vinie Burrows, S.
Randolph Edmonds and Regina Andrews. Mr. Hyman is a classical actor directing
''The Belle of Amherst'' in Norway. He has done many Shakespearean plays,
including ''Othello,'' in which he performed the title role in three languages.
Miss Burrows's one-woman show has been seen in such places as Norway and
Vietnam. Mr. Edmonds is a teacher, author and playwright who created Florida A &
M's dramadepartment. M rs. Andrews, as librarian in several Manhattan branches
during the 30 's, provided Harlem acting groups with space in libraries for
their productions. She also formed the Harlem Experimental Theater and wrote two
plays.

Ruby Dee and Ossie Davis will receive board of directors' awards in recognition
of their contributions to the theater.  Nominees for the dramatic production of
the year award are ''Home'' by Samm-Art Williams; ''Branches from the Same
Tree'' by Marjorie Elliott; ''Mother Courage,'' adapted by Ntozake Shange;
''Sizwe Bansi is Dead'' by Athol Fugard, John Kani and Winston Ntshona, and
''Suspenders,'' by Omar Ben Hassan.

Nominees for Musicals

The works nominated for musical production of the year are ''Blues in the
Night'' by the Production Company; ''Dunbar'' by Ayanna, Ron Stacker Thompson,
Quitman Fludd 3d, Lonnie Hewitt and Paul E. Smith; ''God's Trombones'' by James
Weldon Johnson, adapted by Duane Jones; ''Jam'' by John Gerstad, and ''The More
You Get the More You Want'' by Dan Owens.

Among the nominees for outstanding actor and actress are Gloria Foster for her
role in ''Mother Courage,'' and her husband, Clarence Williams 3d, the star of
''Suspenders.'' They are first husband-andwife lead-acting nominees for the
committee. Other awards will be given for playwriting, scenic design, lighting
design, costume design and supporting roles.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 848 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
HORN OF AFRICA. By Philip Caputo. 486 pages. Holt, Rinehart & Winston. $12.95.

ACCORDING to the opening pages of Philip Caputo's ''Horn of Africa,'' something
awful happened out there in the desert wastes of Ethiopia, in the fictional
province of Bejaya. It was something involving Charley Gage, the narrator of the
story and the only survivor of the ordeal he is about to recount; and Jeremy
Nordstrand, a brutal beast of a man who was exploring the realm beyond good and
evil; and Patrick Moody, an Englishman who ''did not know how to deal with a man
like Nordstrand''; and several Arabs named Kasu Murrah, Osman, and Muhammad
Jima, and finally Thomas Colfax, who belonged to ''The Craft,'' as he liked to
call his business, and who set the whole adventure in motion.

What happened was so horrifying that it has Charley Gage, the narrator,
muttering dark Conradian phrases like ''the abyss, the moral abyss,'' ''agonies
more exquisite than could be inflicted by the worst prison,'' ''a world
barbarous and alien'' and ''hideously grinning mouths and blind staring eyes.''
In fact, whatever that awful happening was, it is going to be hard for Mr.
Caputo to make it live up to its dark foreshadowing.
Unfulfilled Promise

And indeed ''Horn of Africa'' doesn't fulfill the promise of its opening pages.
When all is said and undone, the plot is nothing more than a harebrained attempt
by three mercenaries in the pay of ''The Craft'' to arm and train a rebel
Ethiopian tribe in exchange for the promise of an American base, should its
insurgence prove successful.  Granted, the politics are complex and authentic
sounding, for Mr.  Caputo is a former foreign correspondent who covered the
civil war in Eritrea, among other stories, and who was a captive of the
Palestinian guerrillas for a time. But what ''Horn of Africa'' boils down to is
an escapade of which we have read wilder versions on the front pages of our
daily newspapers.

What is more, Mr. Caputo tends to rely t oo much on static descriptive passages,
which, in their grim de termination to evoke the bleakness of the landscape,
tend to repea t themselves and slow upthe action interminably. And there is an
irri tating incongruity between the grandeur of the novel's theme and the
pettiness of some of its action. For instance, one of the major motifs is the
conflict between Nordstrand, the American barbarian, a nd Moody, the apparent
paradigm of the civilized British colonialist . But the issues they contend over
- such as how to divide up a can of preserved peaches - are sometims so niggling
that the grand confl ict isn't worthy of a schoolyard squabble.

Finally, Mr. Caputo's prose often gets lost in its profundity. In his childhood,
Nordstrand is supposed to have indulged in fantasies ''of turning into a
muscular he-man who would exact a terrible retribution.'' In addition to having
grown up to become a ''muscular he-man,'' Nordstrand had revealed to Moody ''new
depths of human darkness, and the revelation had done more than shock him
emotionally: it had inflicted upon him a metaphysical trauma that had changed
forever his concept of man's capacity for evil.'' One could quote on and on.

But such flaws don't really explain the novel's hollowness. They are merely
symptoms. The real problem is that Mr. Caputo fails to conjure up a convincing
portrait of human evil. It's true that Nordstrand does considerably worse things
than become a ''muscular he-man'' and hog Moody's canned peaches. He tries to
drive the Englishman insane. He murders gratuitously. He acts for action's sake.
And he plots to take over the leadership of the tribal army and set himself up
as an emperor in the heart of darkness.

No Accounting for Evil

But Mr. Caputo can't seem to account for Nordstrand's evil. Instead he
overexplains it. Nordstrand has bad genes: one of his ancestors was an outlaw
who rode with the James and Younger gang. Nordstrand has bad reading habits: He
has misunderstood and swallowed whole the writings of Nietzsche. Nordstrand is
an animal: he looks and moves like a bear. Nordstrand has broken through the
thin veneer of civilized behavior. Nordstrand worships Gordon Pasha and Lawrence
of Arabia. Nordstrand is a bully. None of this seems as horrifying in its
consequences as the opening of the novel portends.

But say this for ''Horn of Africa'': Its failure seems an honest one. In his
first book - a powerful memoir called ''Rumor of War'' - Mr. Caputo tellingly
described the guilt and horror he felt when soldiers under his command in
Vietnam committed the atrocity of killing innocent people. In ''Horn of
Africa,'' he has struggled to explain and universalize that horror.
Unfortunately, he hasn't yet gotten to its source.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Philip Caputo

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ISSUE AND DEBATE GOING TO COURT WITH THE STRANGE BEDFELLOWS OF POLITICS,
RELIGION AND THE TAX LAW

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1166 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 16


The surge of political activism by conservative evangelists and some Roman
Catholic leaders in this year's political campaigns has alarmed many liberals
and moderates and generated a debate about the legitimacy, even the legality, of
mixing religion and politics.

The debate extends across broad fields of politics, religion and philosophy and
resounds with strident accusations. Stung by the evangelists' tactics in
branding their political views as immoral and sinful, liberals have
counterattacked. Some have accused the evangelists of peddling demagoguery and
intolerance as religious truth, threatening religious and political liberty and
undermining the constitutional separation of church and state.

Preachers like the Rev. Jerry Falwell dismiss such complaints as hypocrisy, re
calling that there was no such fuss when church leaders like the Rev.  Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. led the civil rights movement and opposition to the
Vietnam War.

From this cacophony has emerged a narrow but thorny question of law: Should the
Internal Revenue Service restrain groups that mix religion with politics by
defining more precisely and enforcing more vigorously the legal restrictions on
the use of tax-exempt funds and facilities to support political candidates and
causes?

The question is quietly building steam in the files of the Federal District
Court in New York, where a group of abortion rights advocates filed a lawsuit
seeking to force the Internal Revenue Service to revoke the tax exemptions of
Catholic organizations that they accuse of abusing their privileged status by
supporting candidates who are opposed to abortion and attacking those who are
not.

The Background

There is no law forbidding religious leaders or their organizations to endorse
candidates or engage in other political activities. Such a law would clearly
violate the constitutional protections of free speech, press, assembly and
association.

But there is a tax law that requires such groups to refrain from exercising some
of those rights if they want to qualify for taxexempt status and provide tax
deductions to their contributors.  That law denies tax-exempt status to
religious, charitable and educational organizations that participate in ''any
political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office.'' It allows
such organizations to engage in lobbying for or against positions on political
issues, as distinguished from candidates, but such efforts must be limited so
that they do not become a ''substantial part'' of the organization's overall
activities.

For Stricter Enforcement

Such liberal groups as Abortion Rights Mobilization, which is a plaintiff in the
suit in New York, accuse the Internal Revenue Service of shirking its duty. They
cite what they view as repeated violations by the Catholic organizations,
including political endorsements of or attacks on candidates made from the
pulpit and in letters circulated on church stationery. They also call for
investigations to determine whether such politically active groups as Mr.
Falwell's Moral Majority, which do not receive tax-deductible contributions
directly, have received illegal financial assistance from their tax-exempt
cousins like Mr. Falwell's ''Old Time Gospel Hour'' television show.

The election victories of candidates who were supported by the new reli gious
movements made it ''even more impor tant that the I.R.S. be compelled by the
courts to enforce the law be cause some of their support may have been illegal
support,'' said Marshall Biel, an attorney representing the abortion rights adv
ocates in the suit.

Mr. Biel and others argue that when the Government allows such groups to use
tax-exempt funds or facilities to support or oppose political candidates, it is,
in effect, subsidizing the efforts of church organizations ''to further their
religious aims in the political sphere.''

They say that this violates not only the intent of Congress's tax laws but also
the constitutional prohibitions against any ''establishment of religion'' or
''religious test'' for public office. The lawsuit also argues that the
Government's failure to police alleged violations of the law by certain church
organizations discriminated against groups that favor abortion rights ''by
leaving them helpless to compete fairly with political opponents without
violating the law themselves.''

Against Stricter Policing

Organizations as diverse as the United States Catholic Conference and the
American Civil Liberties Union have accused the Internal Revenue Service not of
lax enforcement but of going beyond the intent of Congress and infringing on
First Amendment freedoms of speech and association in some of its rulings.

Such spokesmen as David Landau, a lobbyist in Washington for the civil liberties
group, say that laws that restrict the political freedoms of groups that receive
tax benefits are constitutionally suspect and should be enforced only where the
violations are clear.

One danger of more vigorous Government policing of political activities by
religious groups, the spokesmen say, is that the Internal Revenue Service would
enforce its vague regulations selectively, discriminating against groups that
are powerless or out of favor with a given Administration.

Constitutional scholars like Prof. Jesse Choper of Boalt Hall, the University of
California's law school, question imposing any restrictions on political uses of
tax-exempt funds.

Mr. Choper noted that the present law requires the Government to make fine dis
tinctions concerning when a politically active religiousleader is spe aking for
himself and when he is speaking for a taxexempt org anization with which he is
associated. It also requires the Governmen t to draw an ''artificial line''
between the use of tax-exempt fu nds on political issues and the use of such
funds for or against ca ndidates. ''Candidates after all run on issues,'' Mr.
Choper said.

Arguing that ''we already have all kinds of Government subsidies of political
views,'' including direct grants of tax funds to major political parties, he
suggested that, in trying to avoid unfairness, it might be easier to eliminate
all restrictions on the political use of tax-exempt funds than to attempt
stricter enforcement of the law.

The Outlook

In the current political climate it appears unlikely that the Internal Revenue
Service will crack down on political activities by the evangelists or the
Catholic Church groups. Two years ago the agency was blocked by Congress when it
tried to enforce prohibitions against the use of tax-exempt funds by segregated
private schools.  And it will soon be implementing the policies of a more
conservative Congress and of President-elect Ronald Reagan, who has said that he
will not turn his back on groups like the Moral Majority that helped elect him.

If there is to be any tightening of the tax law restrictions on mixing religion
and politics, it will probably have to come from the courts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 382 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          November 19, 1980 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

'HEAVEN'S GATE,' A WESTERN BY CIMINO

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 734 words


''HEAVEN'S GATE,'' Michael Cimino's gigantic new western and his first film
since the Oscar-winning ''The Deer Hunter,'' is apparently based on a historical
incident that occured in Johnson County, Wyo. in 1890: with the tacit approval
of the state government, the county's wealthy cattle barons banded together in a
systematic attempt to murder more than 100 German, Bulgarian, Russian and
Ukrainian settlers who were encroaching on their lands. If one can say nothing
else on behalf of ''Heaven's Gate'' (and I certainly can't), it's probably the
first western to celebrate the role played by central and eastern Europeans in
the settlement of the American West.

''Heaven's Gate,'' which opens today at the Cinema One, fails so completely that
you might suspect Mr. Cimino sold his soul to the Devil to obtain the success of
''The Deer Hunter,'' and the Devil has just come around to collect.

The grandeur of vision of the Vietnam film has turned pretentious. The feeling
for character has vanished and Mr. Cimino's approach to his subject is so
predictable that watching the film is like a forced, four-hour walking tour of
one's own living room.

Mr. Cimino has written his own screenplay, whose awfulness has been considerably
inflated by the director's wholly unwarranted respect for it. Though the story
really has to do with the contradictory feelings of Jim Averill (Kris
Kristofferson), the Federal marshal in Johnson County, toward the land war,
toward a coltish, completely unbelievable frontier madam (Isabelle Huppert) and
a fellow (Christopher Walken) who was once his best friend, the film's first 20
minutes are devoted entirely to Averill's graduation from Harvard 20 years
before. You thought the wedding feast that opened ''The Deer Hunter'' went on
too long? Wait till you see ''Heaven's Gate.'' The situation isn't helped by the
fact that the university looks not like Harvard but like Oxford, where it was
actually photographed.

The narrative line is virtually non-existent, which is not to say there isn't a
good deal of activity - fights, shoot-outs, cross words, and lots and lots of
sequences in which hundreds of extras are belligerent or dumbfoundingly merry.
Though the extras speak in Russian, German, Bulgarian and Ukrainian, all of
which is dutifully translated by English subtitles (along with some other
dialogue we don't even hear), they act in the mindless fashion of extras in a
badly directed, robust Romberg operetta.

The point of ''Heaven's Gate'' is that the rich will murder for the earth they
don't inherit, but since this is not enough to carry three hours and 45 minutes
of screentime, ''Heaven's Gate'' keeps wandering off to look at scenery, to
imitate bad art (my favorite shot in the film is Miss Huppert reenacting
''September Morn'') or to give us footnotes (not of the first freshness) to
history, as when we are shown an early baseball game. There's so much mandolin
music in the movie you might suspect that there's a musical gondolier anchored
just off-screen, which, as it turns out, is not far from the truth.

Nothing in the movie works properly. For all of the time and money that went
into it, it's jerry-built, a ship that slides straight to the bottom at its
christening.

Vilmos Zsigmond's gritty, golden photography looked better in ''McCabe and Mrs.
Miller.'' The aforementioned performers, plus Sam Waterston as the principal
villain - each one a talented professional, have no material to work with. In
addition they're frequently upstaged by the editing, which sometimes leaves them
at the end of a scene with egg on their faces, staring dumbly into a middle
distance, at absolutely nothing.

''Heaven's Gate'' is something quite rare in movies these days - an unqualified
disaster.

Murder in the West

HEAVEN'S GATE, directed and written by Michael Cimino; director of photography,
Vilmos Zsigmond; film editors, Tom Rolf, William Reynolds, Lisa Fruchtman and
Gerald Greenberg; music by David Mansfield; produced by Joann Carelli; released
by United Artists. At Cinema I, 60th Street at Third Avenue. Running time: 225
minutes. This film is rated R.

Averill . . . . . Kris Kristofferson
Champion . . . . . Christopher Walken
Irvine . . . . . John Hurt
Canton . . . . . Sam Waterston
Mr. Eggleston . . . . . Brad Dourif
Ella . . . . . Isabelle Huppert
Reverend Doctor . . . . . Joseph Cotten
John H. Bridges . . . . . Jeff Bridges


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Photo of Kris Kristofferson and Isabelle Huppert

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 19, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM DESCRIBES ECONOMIC SETBACKS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 955 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 18


An article published recently in Hanoi's Communist Party newspaper, Nhan Dan,
contains a far-reaching official acknowledgment of grave political, social and
economic difficulties in Vietnam.

The article, called ''Immediate Problems of Ideological Work,'' attacks China
and ''the imperialists,'' a codeword for the United States. But in the course of
blaming them for ''the difficulties and negative phenomena now prevalent in our
country,'' the long article provided a full summary by a party spokesman of a
number of problems that have been reported in recent months by diplomats based
in Hanoi, by sympathetic visitors and by refugees.

The author, Thu Huong, apparently a pen name for a writer assumed to speak for
the ideological department of the Communist Central Committee, acknowledges not
only failures in the economy but also ideological and material corruption among
trusted officials, widespread theft of state property and growing popular
disaffection not only in the South but also in the North, which has been under
Communist control since 1954.

Vietnam a Ship; Stalin a Captain

In acknowledging a host of problems, the article called for heightened
ideological discipline and invoked the words of Stalin to reinforce the call.

''Stalin used the illustration of a ship in a gale,'' the author wrote. ''Will
the ship survive? The only way is for the ship's crew and passengers to observe
discipline and comply with the captain's orders fearlessly . Stalin's words are
even mo re meaningful to us today.''

Vietnam is one of the few Communist countries that still regard the Soviet
dictator as a figure of reverence. His collected writings are sold in party
bookstores in Hanoi and his picture appears in most Vietnamese classrooms in the
North.

Throughout the article, the author acknowledged the survival of forces that were
supposed to have been swept away by the Communist victory of 1975 and the
subsequent process of re-education, collectivization, nationalization and
expulsion or imprisonment of untrustworthy elements.

Natural Disasters Are Blamed

Without mentioning the nature of the economic problems, mainly serious shortages
of food and consumer goods and a heavy dependence on assistance from the Soviet
Union and its East European allies, theauthor attrib utes them in large measure
to ''natural disasters and our poor econ omic management.''

In an evident allusion to failures in agriculture and a decline in productivity
in urban manufacturing, making necessities available almost exclusively on the
free non-nationalized market, the article declared: ''Our progress is still
hampered by the impact of the lingering capitalist forces, by spontaneous
small-scale production and by our weaknesses and shortcomings in economic and
social management.''

The author declared that a number of localities had ''allowed the free market to
expand at the expense of the socialist sector and allowed individuals to compete
with the state in securing goods.'' Individual farmers and small manufacturers
have reportedly circumvented enforced sales to the state at low prices to supply
the open market. State purchase prices are said to be so low that selling to the
state does not give producers enough money to buy necessities.
Chinese Linked to Capitalism

In this connection, the article provided an insight into the expulsion of ethnic
Chinese in 1978 and 1979. The author declared that in the struggle between
Communism and capitalism ''the Chineseborn bourgeois'' had to be eliminated as
''an important part of world capitalism.''

The article admitted that theft of state property was a major problem, causing
great losses and ''adversely affecting production and causing difficulties in
our people's lives.''

The articles disclosed serious misconduct among the most trusted party workers,
asserting: ''In the face of the new turning point and complicated developments
of the revolution, a number of cadres and party members have revealed their
weaknesses and unhealthy manifestations. Faced with the difficulties in economy
and life, they are confused and even wavering, losing their faith and fighting
spirit and erring in their awareness and implementation of the party's line.
Comrades Accused of Degeneracy

''Meanwhile, other comrades are not sufficiently vigilant against the sabotage
schemes of the Peking reactionaries and imperialists.  They have become
degenerate and deviant, taking advantage of their positions to misappropriate
state property, take bribes, oppress the masses and enter into collusion with
dishonest people to carry out illegal business.''

Writing of the problem of eliminating the Western-inspired culture in the South,
the author said that ''due to our difficulties and shortcomings, it is being
revived in the South and expanded to the North.''

He said that ''hostile forces at home and abroad are also attacking us on the
cultural front.'' The principal target is youth, he said.  ''They arouse in them
new crazes, causing them to lust after unhealthy desires, to live in an
unwholesome way,'' he said.

A European visitor who recently spent several weeks with students at Hanoi
University said that there was a degree of disillusionment with the regime and
party comparable to that among students in some European Communist countries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 19, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Ex-Prisoner Says Garwood Helped North Vietnamese

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 160 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Nov. 18


A former prisoner of war in Vietnam testified today that Pfc. Robert R. Garwood
of the Marines had helped the North Vietnamese guard captive United States
servicemen and had worn a black mourning band after the death of Ho Chi Minh.

Sgt. 1st Class Robert Lewis 3d of the Army, from Fort Sam Houston, Tex., said
that Private Garwood had carried weapons, worn a Vietnamese uniform and a badge
honoring the North Vietnamese leader and been known by a Vietnamese name that
translated as ''brave liberation fighter.''

Private Garwood, 34 years old, is on trial on charges of desertion,
collaboration, abusing fellow prisoners and trying to persuade other Americans
to surrender. The acts allegedly occurred in the 14 years Garwood was listed as
missing in Vietnam.

Sergeant Lewis was the second witness in the court-martial, which opened last
Friday after long procedural delays.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 19, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TIPS ON TRANSITION

BYLINE: By Theodore C. Sorenson

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 936 words


Every Presidential transition begins with the incoming and departing Presidents
vowing complete cooperation between staffs. That vow is generally kept. But the
views of the departing team, which has no future role, have comparatively little
impact. The more urgent need is for open channels between the incoming
Presidential appointees and the continuing Government bureaucracy. That is more
difficult, particularly in foreign affairs.

During the Truman-Eisenhower transition, Secretary of State-designate John
Foster Dulles reiterated General Eisenhower's campaign pledge to ''roll back''
the Iron Curtain and ''liberate'' Eastern Europe. Almost simultaneously, a
holdover State Department official publicly scoffed at the pledge, certain it
was unrealistic.  Events proved him right, but neither ally nor adversary could
determine what American policy was that week.

During the Eisenhower-Kennedy transition, a Joint Chiefs of Staff subcommittee
submitted a crucial memorandum recommending alternatives on Cuba. Months later,
a secret investigative report filed by Gen.  Maxwell D. Ta ylor on the Bay of
Pigs debacle concluded that the memorandum, w hich might have changed minds, had
apparently been ''lost in the activities arising out of the change in
administratio n.''

During the Johnson-Nixon transition, the American representative to the Paris
peace talks on Vietnam met with the President-elect and emerged to state, with
Richard M. Nixon's aide beside him, that Mr.  Nixon would send his own observer
to Paris. World capitals took notice. Mr. Nixon later denied it.

What accounts for these communication gaps? Old Washington hands have watched
half a dozen Presidents come and go, with their campaig nslogans and
public-relations gimmicks, each o ne arriving in hope and departing in pain.
They are skeptical of new appointees who hope to change the world in the first
10 days but are unable to decipher Federal Registerese. They were amused by Jimm
y Carter's pledge to abolish hundreds of agencies and by Mr. Nixon 's writing
66,000 ''Who's Who'' entrants to seek new appointees . No doubt some of thesetop
civil servants have been less than fully communicative with each set of
newcomers.

But sometimes the fault lies with the newcomers. Some act out of haste or
confusion, some out of arrogance. Some begin with an unconcealed mistrust of
bureaucrats. The best-prepared Cabinet members on Mr. Eisenhower's Inauguration
Day were Treasury Secretary George M. Humphrey and Joseph M. Dodge, Director of
the Bureau of the Budget, both having made clear to the career staffs they
inherited that no purges were planned and that all would be deemed useful until
proved otherwise. Mr. Dulles, though not a disciple of Senator Joseph R.
McCarthy, conveyed to his department an attitude of deep suspicion; the result
was neither harmony nor efficiency.

Let us hope the new Reagan national-security team will forget any campaign
rhetoric about a Foreign Service of fuzzy-minded incompetents insufficiently
alert to the Soviet menace and consistently outnegotiated. Our diplomatic corps,
from career ambassadors to consuls, is full of talented men and women. If
properly identified, encouraged, and called upon, they can be invaluable. So can
the career staffs at the Pentagon, Agency for International Development, and
Central Intelligence Agency. Any bureaucracy needs occasional pruning and
prodding, but, as Presidents Johnson and Nixon discovered, distrusting a
bureaucracy only diminishes its responsiveness and productivity.

One signal of trust toward the national-security career services is a new
President's decision on the ''little State Department'' in the White House.
President-elect Carter pledged to cut it but failed.  Every President needs an
Assistant for National Security Affairs to coordinate reports from State,
Defense, the C.I.A., Congress and others. But an ''assistant'' is not an
administrator running his own operation, competing for supremacy with the
departments yet unaccountable to Congress.

The danger of a President-elect's placing too little trust in the
national-security bureaucracy is outweighed only by the danger of his placing
too much trust in its specialists. Mr. Kennedy was initially impressed by those
briefing him on the Bay of Pigs scheme. In the heady atmosphere of infallibility
that follows successful campaigns, it is hard not to be impressed by the secret
maps, arcane terminology, gold braid, and experts' crisp, confident manner.
Success is in the air, failure is unthinkable. Thus, he stumbled. So will future
new Presidents - unless they remember that the military, intelligence, and
diplomatic specialist, for all his indispensable knowledge, sometimes lacks the
broader, more balanced perspective necessary for Presidential decisions.

Mr. Reagan did not win the votes of most Federal employees in the District of
Columbia and Maryland. But as a skilled communicator, he has in the transition
period a more important opportunity to win their confidence.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Theodore C. Sorensen, who was Special Counsel to President John F.  Kennedy,
practices law here.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 20, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WITNESS SAYS ENEMY ARMY MADE GARWOOD AN OFFICER

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 619 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Nov. 19


An Army enlisted man testified today that Pfc. Robert Garwood of the Marine
Corps had been commissioned an officer in the North Vietnamese army in a
ceremony at a prisoner-of-war camp.

Sgt. 1st Class Isiah McMillan told a jury of five Marine officers at Private
Garwood's court-martial that American prisoners had watched as the Vietnamese
commander of their jungle camp designated Private Garwood a North Vietnamese
lieutenant.

At the same time, Sergeant McMillan said, Private Garwood was given the
Vietnamese name of Nguyen Chin Dao. There was testimony earlier that the name
meant ''Brave Freedom Fighter.''
Says He Hit Fellow Prisoner

The witness also testified that Private Garwood, who contends that he was a
prisoner in Vietnam for 14 years, had struck Pfc. David Harker a backhanded blow
to the ribs without provocation while they were confined at the camp.

''He hit him a sucker punch,'' said Sergeant McMillan, a career soldier who is
now stationed at Fort Gordon, Ga. ''That's a quick, short punch, but you don't
want anyone else to see it.''

The sergeant, who was a prisoner of war for more than five years, was the third
prosecution witness at the court-martial of Private Garwood, who is charged with
desertion, collaboration, abuse of fellow prisoners and attempting to persuade
other Americans to surrender to the Vietnamese.

Incident Sparked by Punishment

Sergeant McMillan said he was standing behind Private Harker when Private
Garwood unexpectedly hit him. He said the incident was touched off by punishment
meted out to a third prisoner, Lance Cpl.  Russell Grissett of the Marines, who
later died in captivity.

The sergeant said Corporal Grissett had been ordered beaten after it was
discovered that hungry prisoners had killed and prepared to eat the camp
commander's pet cat. Corporal Grissett had confessed after a camp official had
ordered prisoners into formation to berate them, using Private Garwood as an
interpreter, Sergeant McMillan said.

He said Private Garwood, apparently angered because Corporal Grissett had been
singled out for punis hment, yelled at the other prisoners: ''You're supposed to
be all Americ ans. Why do you let Russtake all the blame?''

''That's when he hit Harker,'' Sergeant McMillan said. ''Then he walked to the
side of the camp commander.''
Says Garwood Admitted Switch

Sergeant McMillan said Private Garwood admitted switching his allegiance to the
Communists with the expectation that he would be freed.

''He said he crossed over,'' the sergeant said. ''They told him he would be
released, liberated. That's why he crossed over.'' Prosecutors and defense
attorneys had argued earlier today outside the presence of the jury over the
planned testimony by Sergeant McMillan about Private Garwood's alleged
commissioning.

John Lowe, the chief defense counsel, objected to Sergeant McMillan testif ying
ab out the situation, saying it was hearsay.  Sergeant Mc Millan testified, as
the first two witnesses had, that Private Garwo od lived separately from other
prisoners, had special privileges an d acted as an interpreter for the
Communists.

Private Garwood's attorneys will argue that he suffered from a mental disease
aggravated by his captivity and was unable to tell right from wrong.

If convicted, Private Garwood, 34 years old, could be sentenced to life in
prison and forced to forfeit $143,000 in back pay accumulated in his time in
Southeast Asia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 20, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CENTRAL AMERICA'S FUTURE;
by Terri Shaw

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 952 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The impact of Ronald Reagan's election has been so strong in Central America
that Carter Administration officials fear that irreversible changes will take
place in the region even before the new President is inaugurated.

Ambassador Robert White has flown to Washington from El Salvador to urge Mr.
Reagan's advisers to send some sort of message to that country to try to avert a
right-wing coup. Administration officials have told Reagan advisers that a coup
in El Salvador before Inauguration Day would narrow sharply the new
administration's options in dealing with volatile, strategic Central America.

In Nicaragua, the killing Monday of an important business leader, in what the
Government described as a shootout with security forces, dealt a heavy blow to
the shaky alliance of moderate businessmen and leftist revolutionaries that the
Carter Administration has been trying to nurture.

These and other developments in Central America indicate that the election of
Mr. Reagan has speeded up polarization of left and right in the region,
contributing to the first stages of disintegration of the Carter
Administration's policy of promoting social and economic reforms to stave off
more leftist revolutions.

News of the Presidential campaign that filtered down to Central America led
rightists to believe that Mr. Reagan would condone stepped-up repression of the
left, while leftists now fear United States military intervention against
Nicaragua and the leftist oppostion in Guatemala and El Salvador.

In fact, Mr. Reagan's advisers have said that they would cut off aid to
Nicaragua's revolutionary Government and resume military aid to the conservative
Governments of Guatemala and El Salvador. Both countries refused military aid in
1977 after the Carter Administration accused them of human-rights abuses; El
Salvador now receives some ''nonlethal'' aid, but Guatemala still gets none.

The Carter Administration's policy of suspending aid to countries where human
rights are violated has been criticized by Mr. Reagan. In what sounded like an
allusion to Nicaragua, he said at a news conference two days after the election:
''I don't think that our record of turning away from countries that were
basically friendly to us, because of some disagreement on some facet of human
rights, and then finding that the result was that they have lost all human
rights in that country - that isn't a practical way to go about that.''

As for military intervention, Mr. Reagan's advisers have said they do not favor
such a move, but would not rule it out as an option.  In El Salvador, the most
explosive of the five Central American countries and the laboratory for the
Carter Administration's policy of pushing for reforms, the Reagan victory, even
when prospective, appeared to have emboldened the most violent sectors of the
right.  On the eve of the election, an explosive charge blew up under a parked
car only a few feet from an auto carrying Col. Adolfo Majano, a member of the
five-man junta that is trying to carry out the United States-backed reforms.
While some have argued that the assassination attempt came from the left,
Colonel Majano himself expressed certainty that he had been the target of the
same right-wing groups that recently had bombed the headquarters of the Roman
Catholic Archdiocese of San Salvador and a residence of Jesuit priests.

In two long interviews last week with me, Colonel Majano issued a plea ''to the
North American people'' to understand ''the complexity of our problem.'' He
said: ''The attitude of the forces of the ultra-right is very belligerent since
they think they are about to return to power.''

If these forces do return to power in El Salvador and grow stronger in
Guatemala, the Reagan administration may have to face wider and stronger
violence in the region.

The most powerful rightist groups in these two countries generally advocate
extermination of the left as the only solution to their countries' problems. If
these groups gain control of the northern tier of Central America (Guatemala, El
Salvador, Honduras), Nicaragua's leaders doubtless will feel that their
hard-fought revolution is threatened and may turn to the ally that they trust
the most, Cuba.

They also would be able to expect support f rom Venezuela - which isunlikely to
back a Chile-type government in E l Salvador - and other democratic nations in
Latin America and Western Europe. Th e international Christian Democratic
movement, which has bee n supporting the United States-backed junta in El
Salvador, can be expected to join the rival Socialist International in oppo sing
any new government that does not include the Christian Democra ts now in the
junta.

If the political and ideological struggle now going on within Central American
countries turns into a regional conflict, the Reagan administration will be
forced to make some very difficult decisions about United States military
involvement.

Fidel Castro's warning of a new Vietnam in Central America may be exaggerated,
but United States policy-makers would do well to keep the Vietnam example in
mind when weighing the next step in Central America.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Terri Shaw, a specialist on Latin America, is a Senior Associate at the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 20, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DOW TOPS 1,000 BEFORE FALLING 6.91

BYLINE: By VARTANIG G. VARTAN

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 685 words


As tape-watchers eagerly looked on, the Dow Jones industrial average moved
briefly above 1,000 yesterday, only to fade sharply in the final hour and post a
moderate decline.

The Dow, made up of 30 leading stocks, finished at 991.04, down 6.91 points. On
Tuesday, it jumped more than 11 1/2 points, to 997.95, its highest since the
999.75 close on Jan. 3, 1977.

Wall Street analysts said profit taking occurred as the Dow flirted with 1,000,
a level that has often rebuffed advancing markets in the past. The Dow's most
recent run-up started at 917.75 on Oct. 30.

Nevertheless, many professionals believe the stock market - a nd theDow
industrials - are headed higher.

Market Momentum Cited

''There's a very good chance of a strong market near term, based on the market's
own momentum and improved investor confidence stemming from the Nov. 4
election,'' said Charles L. Booth, chairman of the investment policy committee
for the Bank of New York.

A Dow closing above 1,000, he asserted, would signal ''an important
psychological breakthrough, encouraging people to believe the market will go
higher.''

Mr. Booth, whose bank manages assets exceeding $6.5 billion for clients, held
out the prospect that the Dow might climb to 1,050 to 1,100.

The record closing of 1,051.70 was reached on Jan. 11, 1973. The Dow first
approached 1,000 more than 14 years ago. It finished at 995.15 on Feb. 9, 1966.
The Dow plunged as low as 744.32 on Oct. 7 of that year amid escalation of the
Vietnam War and inflationary pressures.

Yesterday, the average was down 3 1/2 points at 10:30 A.M. At 11:20, it hit
1,000 on the nose, and then moved slightly higher before giving ground. At 2:45
P.M, the Dow reached 1,000 again. Then selling pressure intensified to send
prices lower.

Volume at 69.2 Million Shares

Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 69.2 million shares for the Big
Board's sixth heaviest trading session. This compared with Tuesday's 70.4
million shares, or the fourth biggest turnover.

Late yesterday afternoon, volume for this year surpassed 10 billion shares. For
all of 1979, the previous record year, 8.16 billion shares changed hands.

Yesterday's strongest performers were precious-metal issues, which rallied as
bullion prices rose abroad. Gains of 3 to 5 points each appeared in Hecla
Mining, Dome Mines, Homestake Mining, Sunshine Mining and Campbell Red Lake
Mines.

Selected energy and defense stocks moved higher.  But many oil issues were h it
by profit taking.  The world's two largest oil enterprises, Exxon and Royal
Dutch Petroleum, so ld at record prices.  Exxon rose 1 1/2, to 86 3/4. Royal
Dutch advanced 3 7/8, to 110.  Both stocks h ave been rated ''O.K. to Buy'' by
Merrill Lynch for sometime.

Dow Acts as Lagging Indicator

Despite recent strength, the Dow has acted as a lagging indicator in a bull
market. On Tuesday, records were set by the Big Board's composite index of
common stocks, the Nasdaq composite index of over-the-counter issues, Standard &
Poor's 500-stock index and the Dow Jones transportation average.

The American Stock Exchange's market-value index, slipping 2.26 points, to
355.72, remains below its record closing of 363.33 last Oct. 22.

However, the Amex did set a volume record. Its turnover of 10.1 million shares
lifted volume so far in 1980 above the former record of 1.435 billion shares in
1968. A dozen years ago, Amex volume ran almost half as much as turnover on the
Big Board.

Pacific Lumber gained 3 3/8, to 57, after proposing a 2-for-1 split.  Sperry &
Hutchinson rose 3, to 23. The company has said that its controlling holders plan
to sell 1.2 million shares to another shareowner, Bass Brothers Enterprises.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Market profile chart

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PESSIMISM OVER ASIAN REFUGEES GROWS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 785 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 20


Since the beginning of this year, the number of Indochinese refugees in Asian
camps has declined by more than 100,000. While people from Vietnam and Laos have
continued to arrive to swell camp populations, the departures for resettlement,
mainly in the United States, have greatly surpassed arrivals.

Nonetheless, conversations with refugee officials from countries that receive
the migrants and from the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, disclosed a pessimism for the future and for a lasting solution of the
problem.

The pessimism is based on a number of considerations. First is the fact that the
refugee statistics do not include the latest mass of Indochinese asylum seekers,
the Cambodians who have fled since last year's invasion by Vietnam. They number
about 140,000 in so-called holding centers in Thailand, as well as a number
difficult to ascertain, perhaps 100,000, living in tawdry encampments on the
Cambodian side of the Thai border.

Not Listed in Official Statistics

These people, although clearly refugees from repression, warfare and hunger, are
not listed in refugee statistics because Thailand has admitted them to its
holding centers on condition that they not be granted refugee status. Once
granted such status, Thailand could not repatriate them against their will.
Those living in border encampments are not r efugees because they remain inside
their own country.

Another consideration causing pessimism is the fact that most of the departures
for permanent asylum have been among Vietnamese ''boat people.'' At the
beginning of this year there were a total of 140,000 ''boat people'' in camps.
At the end of last month that number had been reduced to 64,000. Over the same
period the number of overland refugees -largely Laotians who escaped to Thailand
- declined only from 139,000 to 113,000.

The reason for the greater departure rate for the Vietnamese is that the
countries in which their small and unseaworthy craft reach shore have made it
clear that they will accept them only if they are assured other countries will
quickly resettle them. As a result, the only place not to impose that condition,
Hong Kong, harbors 29,000, by far the greatest number of ''boat people.''

An assurance that has never been officially formulated but which has taken hold,
is that any Vietnamese not accepted by another country will eventually go to the
United States. The United States, with an intake of 168,000 Indochinese a year,
is by far the largest haven. The three other principal countries of refuge -
France, Canada and Australia - together take less tha n a quarter of the
American total.

Concern Over U.S. Intentions

Pessimism that the large American rate of intake may not continue beyond the
expiration of the current budget year in September is another factor for
pessimism. Few expect increases in the quotas of other countries; a fear that
they may be reduced is more widespread.

The fear that is growing among refugee officials here is that the approximately
300,000 Laotians and Cambodians inside Thailand or backed up against its border
are overwhelmingly people whom no country wants to resettle and who do not wish
to return to their homelands.

Thailand has made it clear since the first arrivals of refugees that it expects
all of them to leave eventually and has shown no interest in occasional
proposals to allow Laotians to resettle here in Thai communities with which
their ethnic, linguistic and cultural affinities are strong.

Eager to find a definitive solution, the United Nations refugee agency has laid
its emphasis on facilitating voluntary repatriation.  This has involved
persuading Laos and Cambodia to accept its citizens without punishing them for
fleeing and identifying those refugees who are ready to return.

Many Meos Feel at Home

A few Laotians have gone home, but a greater number are more interested in
remaining where they are. Some feel most at home here, particularly those from
the Meo hill tribes. Others, many Meos among them, harbor hopes of returning to
Laos as members of a liberating army.

Frequent tape-recorded messages from their leader, former Maj. Gen. Vang Pao,
now living in Montana, are reported to have contributed to this sentiment. A
number of Meos have accepted resettlement in China, evidently in the hope that
the Chinese will arm them for battle against the Vietnamese-dominated Government
in Vientiane.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

The Roll-Call

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2093 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Nov. 20


Following is the roll-call vote by which the General Assembly today reaffirmed
its call for the removal of all foreign troops from Afghanistan:

In Favor (111)
Albania Argentina Australia Austria Bahamas Bahr ain Bangladesh Barbados Belgium
Botswana Brazil Britain Burma Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Central Af.
Republic Chile China Colombia Comoros Costa Rica Denmark Djibouti Dominican
Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Fiji France Gabon Gambia
Germany, West Ghana Greece Guatemala Guinea Guyana Haiti Honduras Iceland
Indonesia Iran
Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kenya Kuwait Lebanon
Lesotho Liberia Luxem- bourg Malawi Malaysia Maldives Malta Mauritania Mauritius
Mexico Morocco Nepal Nether- lands New Zealand Niger Nigeria Norway Oman
Pakistan Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Portugal Qatar Rwanda
St. Lucia Samoa Saudi Arabia Senegal Sierra Leone Singapore
Solomon Islands Somalia Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Swaziland Sweden Tanzania
Thailand Togo Trinidad & Tobago Tunisia Turkey Uganda U. Arab Emirates United
States Upper Volta Uruguay Venezuela Yugoslavia Zaire Zambia

Against (22)
Afghani- stan Angola Bulgaria Byelorussia Cuba Czechoslo- vakia Ethiopia
Germany, East Grenada Hungary Laos Madagas- car Mongolia Mozam- bique Poland Sao
Tome & Principe Seychelles Soviet Union Syria Ukraine Vietnam Yemen, Southern

Abstentions (12)
Algeria Benin Cape Verde Chad Congo Cyprus Finland Guinea- Bissau India Mali
Nicaragua Zimbabwe
Absent or Not Voting (9)
Bhutan Bolivia Dominica Iran Libya Rumania & Gren.  South Africa Yemen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CHURCH LEADERS' MIDEAST APPEAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 461 words


To the Editor:

On Nov. 7, The New York Times published a story under the headline ''Recognition
of the P.L.O. Urged by National Council of Churches.'' As the administrative
head of the N.C.C., I would like to set the record straight.

he National Council of Churches urged no one - neither the Government of Israel
nor that of the United States - to recognize the Palestine Liberation
Organization.

The N.C.C. did urge Israel to negotiate with the P.L.O. - if the P.L.O. ceases
all hostilities, officially drops its call for the destruction of Israel and
recognizes Israel's right to exist as a sovereign, Jewish state.

Governments often negotiate with other governments or organizations they do not
bless with diplomatic recognition, as the U.S. has done within the last decade
with both North Vietnam and the People's Republic of China. The fact is that
hostilities are very difficult to end without negotiations between hostile
parties, and in this case the principal hostile parties are Israel and the
P.L.O.

For the record, the section of the N.C.C. policy statement that deals with this
matter says: ''At this time, the Palestine Liberation Organization functions as
the only organized voice of the Palestinian people and appears to be the only
body able to negotiate a settlement on their behalf. Steps toward peace which
would make possible direct negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians must
include official action by the Palestine National Council, the deliberative body
of the Palestine Liberation Organization, including either an amendment of the
Palestine National Covenant of 1968 or an unambiguous statement recognizing
Israel as a sovereign state and its right to continue as a Jewish state.''

Further, the statement calls on both sides of the conflict to cease all hostile
acts as a precondition to negotiations.  In the view of the council, any path
toward peace must guarantee the right of self-determination for both the people
of Israel and the Palestinian people. As our policy states, the Palestinians
must be allowed to choose what form of government they prefer, whether
federation with Jordan, an independent state or some other option. To do
otherwise is to insure that the seemingly endless cycle of bloodshed will
continue.  CLAIRE RANDALL General Secretary National Council of Churches New
York, Nov. 12, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Rights Make Right

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 916 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Nov. 20


Two weeks of the Madrid review conference on European cooperation and security
have already shown that this time it was the Russians who made the tactical and
diplomatic mistake.  Moscow may maneuver but it isn't always smart.

By stonewalling bluster intended to split the West and drown out complaints on
human rights violations in the East and on the invasion of Afghanistan, the
Soviets managed to solidify the bickering allies, disgruntle the Warsaw Pact and
draw even more attention to the central issues than they would otherwise have
attracted from a speech-sated world.

Chalk up a point, but it's a small one. The results show more than how to lose
at conferencemanship. The value of human rights as an element of American
foreign policy was at issue in the United States election campaign. That was
surprising, since critics came from the ranks of conservatives whose theme is
the primacy of individual liberties and initiative; but it is also a practical
issue. The question was raised whether the Helsinki process is good or bad for
the Western cause.

There have been so many switches in positio n over the last few years that it is
useful to recall the backgro und of the Helsinki accords, signed by President
Ford and 34 othe r government heads in l975.

The Russians had long pushed for some kind of European document that would
ratify the results of World War II in the absence of a peace treaty that was
impossible to negotiate because of the partition of Germany. Henry Kissinger,
then Secretary of State, decided to go along to improve the climate of
U.S.-Soviet relations, having to do mainly with Vietnam and arms control talks.

But the Europeans were leery of an agreement that might seem to settle the
Continent's fate over their heads and give their people a false sense of
security. So they insisted that the West get something more out of Helsinki than
concessions to the U.S. on non-European issues. They pushed for human rights.

When Jimmy Carter became President, he put the question up front.  The allies
shied away from what they considered excessive and unproductive dramatics, and
the first Helsinki review conference in Belgrade in 1977 saw the West in
disarray.

Still, a lot was going on rather quietly. Groups formed in many countries to
call for delivery on the promises. Sometimes in the East they were arrested.
Many times they succeeded in getting repressive measures eased. Frequently,
punishment changed from prison to forced exile, not a triumph but far from a
setback in countries that hadn't been allowing their people out.

Now the West, along with neutrals and even Yugoslavia, is consolidati ng on the
need to maintain the watch.  A human rig hts campaign is not a space shot. It
cannot be monitoredso precisely and so definitively proclaimed a success or
failure. It is a process, and the hundreds of dossiers developed by groups which
have flocked to Madrid show that it is becoming a living part of international
affairs. These accumulations of evidence and response are what real ly change
societies, opening people's eyes to brutalities t hey had accepted as
inevitable.

America's role in promoting the aspirations of others to the rights guaranteed
its citizens was no doubt complicated by Mr.  Carter's pronouncing human rights
an immediate moral absolute in a world where all people and governments are
fallible. He trumpeted too much and then he waffled.

Still, the underlying idea kindled hopes and brought some results, not only in
Europe. It is true, as liberal crusaders found, that the United States can't
police the world and dictate the American way for all. It is equally true,
though, that the U.S. must stand for something more than material glitter and
power, and cannot deny friends the right to seek guarantees that its own
citizens require.

America's image abroad was an important argument in the election, and the
majority showed they think it can be and want it to be improved. But how? Do we
want a return to the Vietnam War face of a powerful country being as mean and
nasty as needed to achieve a short-term advantage and impose its will on the
world? The bully glower didn't work anyway.

Or were the voters thinking of an earlier image of a strong, unfettered country,
naturally in sympathy with those who aspire to freedom and decency anywhere.
There were some ugly warts on that picture, of course. But it was a
heart-warming profile that inspired the world and in turn gave Americans
confidence.

Mr. Reagan offered to make Americans proud again. He has begun with a helpful
display of good humor and personal good will. The talk show in Madrid has
offered only a glimpse of the short-term rewards that an official American
commitment to human rights can bring. The campaign is gaining, despite upsets.
It is worth pursuing.

Awareness that Americans can't enforce their vision of goodness on the world
doesn't entitle the U.S. to abandon those who share it any more than to renounce
their own beliefs. Between saint and sinner, there is good faith and good cheer.
That takes persistence, and it can be effective.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 22, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WITNESS SAYS GARWOOD URGED HIM TO JOIN ENEMY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 183 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Nov. 21


A former prisoner of war, breaking down as he described how he was tortured with
leeches in the jungle, testified today that Pfc. Robert Garwood of the Marine
Corps tried to persuade him to ''cross over'' and join the North Vietnamese.

Gustav A. Mehrer, a disabled Army veteran from Colorado Springs, said that
Private Garwood told him he had the rank of a lieutenant in the North Vietnamese
Army, carried a rifle and had documents urging American soldiers to lay down
their arms.

Mr. Mehrer's testimony may have been the most damaging so far in the
court-martial of Private Garwood on charges of desertion, collaboration,
assaulting two fellow prisoners and trying to entice Americans to surrender.

Private Garwood, 34 years old, who could be sentenced to life imprisonment if
convicted, was a 19-year-old jeep driver when he disappeared near Danang in
1969. He reappeared early last year when he handed a Finnish businessman in
Hanoi a note in which he asked for repatriation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 22, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

A 'Greater-Evil Theory' Of Arthur Schlesinger

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 244 words


To the Editor:

After the battle, Arthur Schlesinger Jr. argues for an extraordinary revision of
liberal thinking: He would support a theory of the greater evil (Op-Ed Nov. 6).
Many Americans have long recognized that coalition politics will of necessity
bring together disparate groups. President Roosevelt cast the widest net of all
- he brought together the blacks of the North and the white racists of the
South, though one hardly has to add that F.D.R. was not a racist himself. John
F. Kennedy also managed to combine widely different groups, but liberals
supported him even though he was the President who first introduced large
contingents of U.S. troops in Vietnam. We didn't demand that Schlesinger resign
from the Kennedy Administration, just that he should oppose that unholy war.

Now Schlesinger says that, no matter what the choice, those in power must be
turned out if there has been rascality in their record, and even though they
will be replaced by greater rascals.

That is offered as rationalization for his role which helped Reagan nationally
and D'Amato in the state. He offers us the consolation that Reagan may not be
that bad because of the traditional operation of consensus in this c
Schlesinger's support for the greater-evil theory can have disastrous
consequences, as witness the Anderson-Javits split of the liberal and moderate
vote that gave us D'Amato by a very narrow margin. Is Schlesinger really proud
of that triumph?
JOSEPH CLARK, New York, Nov. 7, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

2 AFGHANS WHO FLED

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 935 words


SAY REBELS LANGUISH

By DREW MIDDLETON

The military position of the Afghan insurgents fighting the Soviet forces
occupying their country has dete riorated rapidly and verges on the desper ate,
according to two University of Kabul professors who fled this year and are in
constant contact with the insurgent forces.

In an interview, the professors, Sayd Bahouddin Majrooh and Saduddin Shpoon,
said the insurgents had received no substantial military assistance from the
United States and only a small amount of arms from the Arab nations. A few
weapons, they said, found their way across the frontier from China.

The two Afghans dismissed the latest appeal by the United Nations General
Assembly, made Thursday, for a Soviet withdrawal as, in Mr.  Shpoon's words,
''no help at all.'' What is required, he said, is military and political
pressure on the Soviet Union, not moral support.

The ability of the insurgents, who are short of weapons, to exert military
pressure is limited, according to the Afghans. They estimated that there were
only about 1,000 insurgents in daily contact with a Soviet force of about
85,000; they asserted that the total insurgent force was far greater.

Soviet Gunship Effective

The Soviet Mi-24 helicopter gunship has proved effective and the insurgents have
only four launchers for antiaircraft missiles and few missiles to arm them.
Ammunition for the British-made Lee-Enfield rifle, the standard firearm of the
insurgents, is scarce and costly.  A round purchased in Pakistan costs the
equivalent of $2.50 and many rounds are defective.

The insurgents, it is said, have had some success against Soviet tanks using
captured mines and gasoline bombs, but Mr. Shpoon pointed out that the bombs
take perhaps 15 seconds to ignite, giving a tank's machine gunner time to fire.

The professors saw little prospect of receiving more arms through Pakistan,
which they regard as the natural avenue for aid, unless the Pakistanis got an
American guarantee against Soviet aggression and promised arms aid far in excess
of the $400 million offered by the Carter Administration this year.

The Russians have repeatedly violated Pakistani airspace in punitive operations
against fleeing insurgents, Mr. Shpoon asserted, and have attacked Pakistani
border posts from the air.

Thousands Flee Across Border

Soviet air operations have driven hundreds of thousand of refugees into Pakistan
and depopulated whole regions, he maintained. A guerrilla making his way through
the Kunar Valley found that, aside from two cows, he was the only living thing
in a village; the valley once had a population of half a million people. Similar
depopulation has been reported recently from Paktia Province.

Many of the insurgents' reports of successful military resistance to the
Russians, which led some to see Afghanistan as a Soviet Vietnam, are not in
accord with the testimony of the two professors.  They put the Soviet death toll
at 2,000 since the invasion late last December - a casualty rate that Moscow
probably finds acceptable, according to American analysts. The professors also
said the operations cost the Russians $15 million a day and said that in
consequence Moscow had cut military aid to Vietnam and Cuba.

With winter approaching, the Afghans predicted a lower level of resistance in
the next few months, but they were confident that despite the lack of modern
weapons resistance was general.

''If we do not get help the situation will be precarious,'' Mr.  Majrooh said.
''But the Russians cannot kill us all. We will continue to fight.''

Removal of Intellectuals Reported

The two men, who came to the United States under the spon sorship ofFreedom
House, a nonprofit organization devot ed to strengthening the institutions of
freedom, reported that there were six political groups in the insurgency. Some
of the more fu ndamentalist Islamic groups have received small amounts of
assista nce from Iran, they added.

The Russians and the Afghan Government of President Babrak Karmal have combined
to eliminate most intellectuals, the two men said, putting the number killed,
imprisoned or forced to flee at around 50,000. ''The cream of our society has
been wiped out,'' Mr. Majrooh said.

He and his colleague put the number of collaborators with the Soviet Union at 5
percent of a population estimated by the Central Intelligence Agency at 14.8
million, with only a small part of this group actively pro-Soviet.

They said that the Russians, in addition to wooing urban groups, had attempted
to buy tribes with the wholesale distribution of money and food. An Afghan
collaborator who had landed by helicopter with cash and food was shot by local
people, they said.

According t o the professors, the morale of the Soviet forces began to
deteriorat e once its members discovered that there were no Americans or Chinese
in Afghanistan, as the propaganda had said.

Mr. Shpoon and Mr. Majrooh repeatedly emphasized that American help for the
''Pakistani sanctuary'' could help turn the tide.  Asked whether they saw any
political resolution of the situation, they emphasized that the first course
must be to continue fighting.  Then, Mr. Shpoon said, the Russians, viewing
their own insecurity in a neutral, nonaligned country, might start thinking
about a way out.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA IS GAINING A HINT OF STABILITY

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 22


After a long period of war and famine, a measure of stability appears to have
returned to Cambodia for the first time in a decade, specialists report.

Relief officials say that since last year's catastrophic famine the costly
international aid campaign has been largely successful in providing minimal
rations to most Cambodians. The number of Cambodians is estimated at between 5.5
and 6.5 million; pre-1970 estimates, made before Cambodia was fully drawn into
the Indochina war, placed the population at nearly 8 million.

A satisfactory rainy season between June and October has produced ample crops of
subsidiary foods like corn, yams, edible roots and vegetables, helping to fill
stomachs in place of rice, the national staple. The favorable rains are expected
to produce a respectable rice crop for harvesting next month. The size of the
crop has been diminished only by the scarcity of seed during the planting
season.

The crop is not expected to cover all needs for next year, but the outlook has
been good enough to persuade the principal relief organizations acting on behalf
of Western nations to propose a marked tapering off, or perhaps even a
suspension, of food deliveries until the critical period shortly before the next
harvest. The main aid organizations are the United Nations Children's Fund and
the International Committee of the Red Cross.

Vietnam Maintains a Tight Hold

Militarily, analysts say that 200,000 Vietnamese occupation troops control all
of populated Cambodia - the towns and villages as well asthe roads, railroads
and waterways that link them. Rebel ambushes occur mainly in western Cambodia,
where marau ding squads of soldiers controlled by remnants of the Pol Pot regime
occasionally venture out of their enclaves along the Thai border.  The regime
under Prime Minister Pol Pot was driven from Phnom Penh i n January 1979.

To an even lesser extent, resistance is continuing by guerrillas of the Khmer
People National Liberation Front, an anti-Communist force led by Son Sann,
another former Prime Minister.

But analysts say that the essential activity of Mr. Pol Pot's forces is to stay
in action on Cambodian soil to justify political pressure blocking diplomatic
recognition of the Cambodian Government installed by the Vietnamese Army. The
United Nations General Assembly voted 74 to 35 last month to continue formal
recognition of the Pol Pot regime.

The campaign on behalf of the fallen government is led by China and, with
varying degrees of enthusiasm, by the five members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations. The members are Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia,
Malaysia and the Philippines. The United States and most other Western nations
have also supported their position.

Rebels Control Small Enclaves

Despite this strong diplomatic backing, the Pol Pot forces control only enclaves
in formerly uninhabitated areas. The enclaves are populated solely by soldiers
and their families. They control no roads and own no vehicles. Their leaders
cross into Thailand to travel from one enclave to another.

Only inconsequential amounts of food are grown in the enclaves, and the people
live almost entirely on food provided by international relief organizations, who
get about a third of their funds from the United States. Although the aid is
supposed to be given only to noncombatants, the organizations that distribute it
have almost no access to the enclaves and monitoring the flow of aid is nearly
impossible.

Thai military authorities control the activities of aid organizations not only
along the border but also as they deliver aid through Thailand to
Vietnamese-controlled Cambodia. If the aid organizations declined to provide
rations for what they estimate to be about 60,000 followers of Pol Pot, the
feeding and medical assistance for other Cambodians would be jeopardized.

The Phnom Penh regime allows few international relief officials into the country
and movement inside Cambodia is so restricted that monitoring of the
distribution and use of the relief supplies is extremely difficult. It is not
known how much of the food is delivered to civilians not employed by the
Government.

Danger Continues for Refugees

Analysts and relief officials say they are concerned that the current political
situation presents serious risks to about 200,000 Cambodians who have sought the
scant safety of ''holding centers'' in Thailand and camps on the Cambodian side
of the Thai border.

Their care and feeding is the responsibility of the international relief
organizations, which are tightly controlled by the Thai Government. Any
political change, such as abandonment of the Pol Pot regime or greater emphasis
on relief programs for the Phnom Penh side rather than the Pol Pot side, could
prompt the Thai Government to end its tolerance of the refugees on its territory
or the feeding of Cambodians via Thailand.

With Vietnam on one side and China and Thailand on the other entrenched in hard
and diametrically opposed positions, high officials of the most interested
Western governments and their diplomats and intelligence analysts foresee slight
chances of change in the stalemate.

A return of the former chief of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, a compromise
pushed earlier this year by the United States and other Western countries,
failed when the Prince, evidently feeling that his chances were slim, bowed out
and returned to exile in North Korea.

Although public opposition to recognition of the Vietnamesesupported regime
remains firm, diplomats doubt that support of the Pol Pot forces can last
indefinitely unless China takes independent measures, possibly military, to
weaken the Vietnamese position.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMICS AND CHANGING PUBLIC INTEREST TURN MIDWEST INTO A FILM-MAKING CENTER

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 751 words

DATELINE: YOUNGSTOWN, Ohio, Nov. 21


Smoke and steam belched from the stacks at the Youngstown Sheet & Tube mills the
other day, and old-timers looking down into the Mahoning Valley wondered if they
were seeing things .

It did not mean the steel mills were back in business again, however. It was the
special effects people from Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer at work, pumping an appearance
of life into grimy old factories whose hearths have been cold for years to
create a convincing backdrop for Peter Falk as he shambled and squinted his way
down the gritty streets of this old steel town.

The midcont inent, that faded star of America's industrial might, has been disc
overed by Hollywood as a leading extra in a growing number of fil ms and
television movies in recent years as producers look for ways to hold down costs
and directors explore the particularphysical and mental landscape of the Middle
West.

''We've really been busy lately,'' said Mari Barnum, head of the Ohio Film
Bureau, who helps promote shooting on location in her state.

''The East and West Coasts are really saturated,'' she said, ''and it's easier
to shoot here. You've got steel in trouble, automobiles in trouble, and when
they see all these people out of work the unions are really anxious to cooperate
with the film makers to put people to work.''

Lucy Salinger, who runs the Illinois Film Bureau, said: ''We've doubled what we
shot last year, and every year for the past five years we've doubled or
increased by a third over the year before.  It's really taking off.''

''There are very definite economic reasons for it - just look at the cost of
hotels in New York - and along with the breaks in cost, there are enormous
breaks in cooperation,'' she went on. ''It's still new here, and people are very
excited by it.''

Well, almost everywhere. The Detroit suburb of Birmingham, where the auto
executives live, recently rejected an application to use city property in
shooting ''Word of Honor,'' a television movie starring Karl Malden as a
reporter who uncovered a murder, because it was a story of sex and violence.

So Mr. Malden and the crew moved to Plymouth, a town west of Detroit, where they
were more welcome.  Besides the welcome, there seems to be a growing interest in
the industrial cities as a background against which to explore the lives of the
people who gave meaning to the term ''blue collar.''

''The Deer Hunter,'' the 1979 Oscar winner about young steelworkers and the
Vietnam War, was partly shot in Cleveland. ''The Pride of Jesse Hallum,'' a
made-for-television movie starring Johnny Cash, deals with an illiterate
Kentucky coal miner forced to find his way in Cincinnati. It has not yet been
released. Steven Tesich, whose ''Breaking Away'' portrayed the lives of
working-class youths pitted against the snobbishness of university life in
Bloomington, Ind., has completed shooting ''Our Friends'' against the steel
mills of south Chicago and Indiana.

And Mr. Falk is now in Youngstown and a suburb, Campbell, playing the grubby
manager of two women wrestlers in ''All The Marbles,'' which Miss Barnum
described as ''a kind of female 'Rocky.' ''

Why the interest in working-class lives and locales? Robert Aldrich, who is
directing ''Marbles,'' was asked.  ''Everybody made their beach-blanket party
movies for 10 or 20 years,'' he replied, ''and I think people want to see
something different, something they can identify with today.''

William Aldrich, his son, who is the producer of ''All The Marbles,'' added:
''People nowadays see the problems this part of the country is having every
night on TV, and there's a lot of interest in it now. Most people don't realize
that everything they have in their houses and on their tables or in their
garages comes from here.''

Robert Aldrich said: ''You don't have to be very smart to make a movie here -
you put the camera down any place and it's just right.  These streets have such
a dejected, defeated, unusable look.''

David Chasman, senior vice president for worldwide production at M-G-M.,
cautioned against believing that a new wave of gritty, sliceof-real-life movies
was about to break over the nation's theaters, noting that last summer's big
money makers - ''Airplane,'' ''The Empire Strikes Back'' and ''Blue Lagoon'' -
''all took place in never-never land.''

''But there may be something to it,'' he added. ''I can see a quest for American
values, for the restoration of frontier values, and if I were looking for these
things in a movie, I'd look to the Midwest.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Peter Falk Photo of Robert Aldrich

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GARWOOD TRIAL OFFERS LOK AT HARSH LIFE OF P.O.W.'S

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 619 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Nov. 22


The first full week of testimony in the trial of Pvt. Robert R. Garwood of the
Marine Corps provided a glimpse of the harsh methods used by the North
Vietnamese to elicit information from American prisoners of war.

The long-delayed court-martial opened at this military base last week before a
jury of five marine officers. Private Garwood is accused of deserting,
collaborating with the enemy, assaulting two fellow prisoners of war and trying
to entice other Americans to surrender.

Private Garwood, a native of Indiana, disappeared while driving a jeep near
Danang in 1965. He returned to the United States 14 years later after slipping a
note asking for repatriation to a Finnish businessman in Hanoi. Private Garwood
is the only American serviceman from the Vietnam War era to be tried since the
war for desertion and collaboration with the enemy.

In voices charged with emotion, prisoners held at the same camps as Private
Garwood described their suffering at the hands of the North Vietnamese.

A Pit of Blood-Sucking Leeches

Gustav A. Mehrer, a disabled Army veteran from Colorado Springs, Colo., told of
being placed in a pit of blood-sucking leeches. He testified that Private
Garwood tried to persuade him to join the Communists.

''They tied me to a tree and said they were going to kill me,'' said Mr. Mehrer,
who broke into tears, causing a brief recess in the court-martial.

''They fired but the bullets went above my head,'' he testified.  ''Then they
did it again. I realized then they were playing with me.''

''There was this leech pit, not really a pit but I think of it as a pit,'' he
said. ''It was an area in which bamboo stalks and trees had fallen down and was
all overgrown. It was a breeding ground for leeches.''
Testimony in Tears

''They took me in there and tied me up until I was covered with leeches,'' Mr.
Mehrer said, coughing and crying.  ''The leeches would stand up on their tail,
they had a kind of heat-seeking device,'' he said. ''They would turn and go like
this until they found me. They would crawl on me until they would find an artery
and fill up with blood until they were fat and fell off. Then another would take
their place.''

Another time, Mr. Mehrer said, his wrists were bound behind his back and he was
hanged by his elbows from a rafter of a hut, causing him so much pain that he
pleaded with his guards to shoot him. He said guards once broke his nose and
manipulated it as he choked on blood.

Mr. Mehrer said he gave the enemy bits of information in order to end the
tortures. He said he felt guilt that drove him to attempt suicide by hanging
from a vine, but his guards stopped him.

'He Was a White Vietnamese'

Testifying about Private Garwood, Mr. Mehrer said the marine wore a uniform of
the North Vietnamese Army, carried a rifle and had documents urging American
soldiers to lay down their arms.

''His actions were Vietnamese,'' Mr. Mehrer said. ''He was a white Vietnamese to
me.'' ''He invited me to cross over, to work with him,'' he added.  Another
former prisoner, former Pfc. Luis Ortiz-Rivera of the Army, a Puerto Rican
testifying through an interpreter, said that Private Garwood had been freed by
the North Vietnamese but chose to remain with them.

He testified that Private Garwood ''said he felt better with the Vietcong,
because they treated him better than the U.S. Army.'' The court-martial was
recessed for the weekend. Testimony is to resume on Monday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE CARTER PROMISE;
by David H. Berg

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 880 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON


On the first day of his Presidency, Jimmy Carter issued his promised pardon for
civilian Vietnam War resistors, a document I had drafted. That evening, his
pollster Pat Caddell, his media adviser Jerry Rafshoon, and I drove away from
the west wing of the White House. We spoke of the lingering division in the
country over Vietnam, between black and white, and even between North and South.
Rafshoon sat with his hands in his trench-coat pockets, and as heat thawed the
car he spoke enthusiastically of the new President: ''He can be a great healer.
He's Southern. He's progressive. And he attracts great people.''

We thought Mr. Carter was an idealist at the center of a group of pragmatists.
Yet he was to abandon his litany of seemingly highminded campaign promises at
the first sign of resistance. All too soon, it became clear that he believed
deeply in very little and passionately about nothing at all - except in getting
elected.

I was not only to draft the pardon of civilian war resistors but also to make
recommendations concerning the upgrading of about 400,000 less-than-honorable
discharges. These men, in disproportionate numbers black and Hispanic, were
disqualified from G.I. benefits, discriminated against in the job market, and
with alarming frequency convicted of stateside crimes.

During the transition, I was to work with Charles Kirbo, the President's close
friend, and then report our recommendations to Mr.  Carter. For weeks I met with
such diverse groups as the American Legion and Amnesty International. Despite
Mr. Kirbo's objections, I decided to recommend a universal upgrading, except for
persons convicted of violent crimes. I drafted my own options paper, Teletyped
copies to Mr. Kirbo and Mr. Carter, and left for Plains, Ga.

Jimmy Carter's icy glare was not yet famous but I recognized it straight off
when I arrived at his home. ''Charley disagrees with everything yo u
recommended,'' he said, referring to the upgrading.  While Mr. Car ter and I
argued about every proposal, Walter Mondale and Stuart Ei zenstat listened with
chilling indifference. Concerning the cost of i ncreased G.I. benefits, he
snapped: ''This kind of plan will bankrupt us. The cost is over $100 billion.''
I responded that the transitio n economists had fixed the increase at $100
million. Mr.Carter found the error in his math, shrugged, and said with the
equanimity of the recently elected: ''They don't know anything.'' Then we discu
ssed overseeing the upgrading program in the White Houserather than i n the
Pentagon. The public would not trust the military to act agains t itself, I
argued. Mr. Carter slapped his hands to his knees and, wi th seeming prescience,
said: ''I don't need public approbation.' ' Apparently growing impatient, he
centered his attack on me, as mes senger of his campaign promise: ''The point
is, David, Iwould have fo ught in that war.''

If his underlying attitude was exposed by our colloquy, he was nonetheless
trapped by his promise. He had to issue the pardon.  However, there was no
clear-cut campaign promise regarding lessthan-honorable discharges;
consequently, his plan upgraded fewer than 14,000 discharges -hundreds of
thousands of disadvantaged men were ignored.

Bert Lance had told a group of Houston businessmen during the 1976 campaign:
''Carter runs left, but governs right.'' Predictably, those who were forced to
leave his staff or those who quit shared a common political denominator: They
were invariably left-leaning and quite willing, often eager, to disagree with
Mr. Carter. I was the first to go. Pat Anderson, the campaign's chief
speechwriter, left before the inauguration, his eloquent texts supplanted from
the start by sloppy rewrites. Midge Costanza, who was Mr. Carter's liaison with
interest and minority groups, met with a group of gay-rights advocates in the
White House and was forced out within a year. Barry Jagoda, the thoughtful media
adviser, was replaced by Mr. Rafshoon, the ad man, when Mr. Carter concluded
that the fault in his Administration lay only in the way it was perceived.
Later, Mr.  Carter fired Joseph Califano with scant justification and excoriated
Cyrus Vance after his resignation with a gratuitous public rebuke. In every
case, he turned, if not from the best, then surely from the better minds and
hearts at his disposal.

In a few years, especially if there is Middle East peace, there maywell be a
groundswell of public sentiment for Jimmy Carter. Until then he will be left to
wonder, as have been the men and women he deposed, what he could have done
differently to make it turn out better, and how he came to lose the promise o f
Mr. Rafshoon's reverie: In the end, he neither helped nor he aled this troubled
nation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
David H. Berg, who worked for Jimmy Carter from April 1976 until the day after
his inauguration, is a lawyer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PARKINSON'S LAW AT THE U.N.

BYLINE: By Bernard D. Nossiter

SECTION: Section 6; Page 60, Column 6; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4089 words


By Bernard D. Nossiter

Each morning at 9, Li Quingyuan, slim, darkhaired and serious, leaves her room
in a converted motel on 12th Avenue at 42d Street, where the Government of China
houses its members of the United Nations Secretariat. She takes the crosstown
bus to the United Nations' gleaming glass-and-concrete skyscraper on the East
River and hurries to the 39th floor attic. There, Miss Li, a simultaneous
interpreter in Chinese and English, takes a French lesson. ''To understand
another foreign language,'' she explains, ''will be very helpful in our work.''
After a long training session, she spends a tense five hours in a cramped
interpreter's booth and then hurries back to 12th Avenue for more study at
night.

An old saw on the East River runs: ''How many people work at the Secretariat?''
The answer: ''About half.'' The jibe contains more than a germ of truth. The
United Nations' Secretariat is a peculiar array of barely coordinated
departments, offices and centers. Some perform obviously useful tasks, some
engage in activities that might better be suppressed and some keep busy at no
discernible work at all. Most criticism of the United Nations centers on its
politics.  But not much attention is paid to how the international civil
servants do their jobs.

Miss Li is not typical of the 4,848 United Nations employees in New York or the
10,058 in Geneva and elsewhere around the world. For one thing, she took an
examination for her job and only some low-level posts require tests in the
United Nations' curious civil service.  For another, her task is unambiguous -
making China understood and helping the Chinese to understand others. Above all,
she works hard.

The Secretariat that employs Miss Li loosely resembles the executive arm of a
government, a supposedly impartial civil service performing tasks legislated by
a parliament. For example, if the General Assembly (where 154 members from the
Seychelles to China enjoy an equal vote) directs the Secretariat to promote
black rights in South Africa, the Secretariat creates a ''Center Against
Apartheid.'' It is equipped with a director, a Committee Services and Research
Branch, and a Publicity, Assistance and Promotion of International Action
Branch. Branches sprout jobs, meetings and lots of paper.

The Secretariat is also a housekeeper, servicing endless meetings in New York
and elsewhere. The Secretariat provides guards, firemen, interpreters, legal
advisors, other technicians, and, above all, produces a flood of paper that
often drowns even the hardiest swimmer in the United Nations tides.

At the apex of this institution is the Secretary General, Kurt Waldheim. The
Secretary General is picked by the 15-member Security Council - in reality,
after the Russians and Americans agree - and the Council's choice is ratified by
the General Assembly. He is not like a president or premier, because, as Mr.
Waldheim says, ''You have no constituency.'' Dag Hammarskjold, who was Secretary
General from 1953 until his death in 1961, tried to act like an independent
executive, but this so enraged the Russians that they tried to divide his job
into three parts. His successors, U Thant and Mr. Waldheim, drew the appropriate
lesson and have acted with more discretion.

The one clear characteristic of the Secretariat is growth. Thirty years ago, it
enjoyed a modest staff of 4,117 and an equally modest budget of $41 million.
Today, the staff has expanded to 14,906 and the budget to a projected $624
million. Two kinds of inflation have been at work, the monetary variety that
afflicts all institutions and the nationalist breed that has enlarged the United
Nations from 51 members to l54. All members are entitled to Secretariat jobs. To
insure a fair share of the pie, a quota is assigned each nation.

The Secretariat's budget originates with Mr. Waldheim or, more precisely, his
Department of Administration, Finance and Management.  It is examined by a
16-member committee and approved by the General Assembly. That body can subtract
but is more likely to add units, sections and offices. Much of the work of the
United Nations is done by specialized agencies that look after refugees, grapple
with global health and hunger, and promote a press subservient to governments.
But these agencies - the United Nations Commissioner for Refugees, the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, and others - enjoy a large degree of autonomy.

It is difficult to assess the usefulness of the Secretariat. Some of its people
are dedicated international civil servants whose first loyalty is to the
principles in the United Nations Charter. Others make work, fill the Delegates'
Lounge and take orders from their governments.

The Russians and East Europeans, for example, have never accepted the concept of
an independent international civil service. Their nationals are attached to
their home ministries and simply released for a few years' duty at the United
Nations. This practice was highlighted r ecently when the Soviet Ambassador,
Oleg A. Troyanovski,wrote Mr. Wal dheim, requesting that one of the Secretary
General's two personal assistants, Victor M. Lessiovski, be allowed an extra
year's stay e ven though he had reached the compulsory retirement age of 60
years and six months. The fact that Mr. Lessiovski is an alleged K.G.B. officer
underscored Moscow's breezy disregard of United Nations regulations. Mr.
Waldheim points out that other governments, including the United States, also
ask him for jobs, although usually with a casual word rather than a formal
letter, and rarely in breach of the personnel rules.

Interpreter Li, who is 30, works at a level less likely to involve her
Government and the Secretary General. A Grade 2 Professional, she grosses
$27,444 a year but her take-home pay is less. The checks of all foreigners at
the United Nations are reduced by an amount roughly equal to the tax paid by a
United States citizen; many, however, receive perquisites in cash and kind. In
any case, Miss Li and others in the Communist world see only a fraction of their
pay. The rest goes to their governments. Miss Li will not say how much she gives
up but justifies it in the name of ''the hard-working peasants at home.''

The value of simultaneous interpreters like Miss Li is obvious. But there are
others at the Secretariat whose purposes are not easy to divine. For example,
Hubert Y. Noel, a Frenchman, runs the Peace and Security Studies Section of the
Department of Political and Security Council Affairs. He makes an estimated
$61,347 a year (the United Nations will not release pay figures and those
reported here are based on the published scales) and, with four others rated as
''professional,'' spends most of his time compiling, digesting and analyzing
decisions of United Nations bodies. The latest printed edition of his
''Reportory of Practice of United Nations Organs'' goes only up to 1966. He
hopes a successor will be off the press by early 1981. If it does arrive next
year, it will be seven years out of date.

Mr. Noel devotes, he says, 75 percent of his time to this ''Repertory'' and to
his ''Repertory of the Practice of the Security Council,'' which catalogues
Security Council decisions on procedural questions - for example, ''Special
cases concerning the application of rules 41-47 (LANGUAGES).'' The newest
edition is nine years out of date.

''This is a monklike business,'' Mr. Noel confides. ''We work in our cells.''
The work of the eight people (three secretaries buttress the ''professionals'')
in Mr. Noel's cell is no more mysterious than the fact that South Africa and its
problems are dealt with by two separate departments - Political and Security
Council Affairs, and Political Affairs, Trusteeship and Decolonization - and one
office, the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia. This last is run by Martti
Ahtisaari, a Finn who earns $88,359 a year. Mr. Ahtisaari is deeply involved in
the prolonged negotiations aimed at persuading South Africa to permit a United
Nations-supervised election in Southwest Africa or Namibia. His task - bringing
an end to the guerrilla war and to white minority rule in the territory - is
serious. His counsel is respected.

The multiplication of South African-related entities, however, is less baffling
than the brand-new Center for Science and Technology for Development and its
leader, Assistant Secretary General Amilcar Figueira Ferrari, who holds a
graduate degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and earns $96,710
a year. Admiring United Nations hands regard the center as a growth area for
jobs. Before Mr. Ferrari got his feet under his desk, he had doubled his
bureaucratic strength. He began the year with a budget of .4 million to pay 16
persons, including eight classed as ''professional.'' In short order, he
expanded this to .9 million for 32 persons, including 17 ''professionals.''

Mr. Ferrari's center holds the view, common at the United Nations, of science
and technology as a tangible substance wrongly monopolized by the industrialized
nations and wrongly withheld from the developing countries. In this view, the
substance can be subdivided, delivered and transferred from former colonialists
to their former colonies, from the haves to the have-nots. ''Our objective,''
Mr. Ferrari said, ''is to strengthen the capacity of the developing countries in
the science and technology they use.'' He added, ''We have a rather specific
program,'' although he had trouble defining it.

In fairness to Mr. Ferrari, the General Assembly resolution that created his
center is not much of a guide. The resolution recalls that the New International
Economic Order (a third-world program to extract economic concessions from rich
nations) says that science and technology can promote development. It emphasizes
the ''urgent need'' to develop science and technology in ''developing''
countries. It ''affirms'' that the United Nations has a ''central role'' in this
task. It abolishes the existing Office for Science and Technology and orders
that ''most'' of its money and staff go ''immediately'' to the new center. The
resolution devotes three and a half single-spaced pages to raising money for the
center and containsan annex of 12 pages, also single-spaced, on the same theme.

''I don't believe developing countries will gain anything tangible from this,''
said a high United Nations official, who fights mostly losing battles to keep
the United Nations staff trim.

In contrast to the seemin gly useless activity of some bureaus in the
Secretariat, the United Nations has one crucial task to perform: maintaining an
uneasy peace along some of the world's tension-ridden borders. This serious work
is directed by Brian Urquhart, an urbane, irreverent 61-year-old (he is regarded
as so valuable that an exception to the retirement rule was made for him)
graduate of the elite Westminster School in London, Christ Church at Oxford and
Britain's First Parachute Battalion.

Mr. Urquhart, an Under Secretary General ($98,836) for Special Political
Affairs, is a dying breed at the United Nations, a career international civil
servant who rose through the ranks. He was the second man recruited into the
fledgling organization in 1945, wrote the semiofficial but remarkably useful
biography of Dag Hammarskjold and runs a tight shop.

Only 13 professionals, including a brigadier and a major, help Mr.  Urquhart and
another Under Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar ($98,836), direct the
far-flung peace-keepers. There are 5,995 in overheated southern Lebanon; 2,388
in the buffer zone separating Turkish and Greek Cypriots; 1,274 on the Golan
Heights, the bleak ridge that Israel seized from Syria in 1967; and 37 observers
in Kashmir, where India and Pakistan have tacitly agreed to accept a cease-fire
line as a border.

''I don't want any more than this,'' Mr. Urquhart says crisply. ''I don't need a
large staff. It just means endless floating paper.'' When a crisis breaks, Mr.
Urquart's forces are raised from units currently contributed by 25 nations. He
is very clear about what they can and can't do. ''Our staple, practical task is
peace-keeping.  Entertaining it is, too. Our whole point is presence. We're the
excuse for everybody to knock it off. If they don't want to knock it off, you
don't have a peace-keeping operation.''

As a practical political matter, the United Nations cannot use force to stop a
war. It would be folly to move in the lightly armed, blue-helmeted troops unless
the principal antagonists on the ground welcomed their presence. Moreover, Mr.
Urquhart can enlist units from India, Canada, Fiji, Sweden, Ireland and others
only when the superpowers agree they should move to some troubled place. Both
the United States and the Soviet Union can veto any peace-keeping operation of
which they disapprove. So can Britain, France and China, the other permanent
members of the Security Council.

''You can't descend into the conflict,'' Mr. Urquhart says.  ''That's what we
did in Katanga and we got clobbered.'' There, in 1961, a United Nations force
tried to stop Moise Tshombe and his mercenaries from taking the rich Katanga
province out of the Congo.  The United Nations troops were badly mauled and Dag
Hammarskjold lost his life in a plane crash en route to a rendezvous with Moise
Tshombe.

The peace-keepers aren't equipped to fight anyone seriously. They normally carry
rifles, mortars and machine guns, although they have added antitank missiles in
seething southern Lebanon. Their ground rules make offensive operations
unthinkable.

''We musn't do anything beastly and we can't stand casualties,'' Mr. Urquhart
says. ''Both hands are tied behind your back.'' In fact, the Lebanon
peace-keepers have suffered 46 dead, shot at by the Israeli-backed ''Christian
militia'' of Maj. Said Haddad as well as by left-wing Arab forces. Nations
contributing units face political trouble at home if too many of their soldiers
are lost.

Mr. Urquhart is careful to confer with Secretary General Kurt Waldheim
($140,890) on any major decision. Occasionally, there is no time. Mr. Urquhart
has been awakened at 3 A.M. by Maj. Gen. Emanuel A. Erskine, the Ghanaian
commander of the Lebanon troops, asking what to do about a column of Major
Haddad's Christians threatening to seize a village in the next half hour. Mr.
Urquhart told him on the spot to block the road and see whether the Christians
would try to shoot their way through. They didn't.

Secretary General Waldheim and Mr. Urquhart together decide whether to seek
Security Council approval for a peace-keeping force.Thailand, for example, wants
one on its border with Cambodia to keep out Vietnamese troops. On paper, this is
a model place for peacekeepers. But neither the Russians in the Security Council
nor their Vietnamese allies on the ground would hear of it. The peace-keepers
would interfere with Hanoi's pursuit of guerrillas fighting the regime Vietnam
has installed in Cambodia. So the scheme is a dead letter - until, perhaps, the
Thais agree to a demilitarized zone that puts peace-keepers on both sides of the
border. But in that case, the guerrillas, whom Bangkok favors, would lose their
sanctuary and a base from which to operate.

Mr. Urquhar t attracts able people because, he says, ''We're a prize operation.
We run a decent show. It's where the political and the practical meet. You can
see something happening.''

For all its limitations, peace-keeping, where it exists, is obviously valuable.
In Mr. Urquhart's words, it is ''keeping the cap on in places when the
superpowers are getting pushed into confrontation.'' That is no small
achievement. Almost by itself, it justifies the $1,247,793,200 that the entire
Secretariat expects to spend in 1980 and 1981, a budget to which Uni ted States
taxpayers contribute one dollar in four.

If Brian Urquhart's task is clear, so is Yogaraj Yogasundram's. It is
propaganda, pure and simple. Mr. Yogasundram is an agreeable former diplomat
from Sri Lanka who, with some other former diplomats and secretaries, runs the
Special Unit on Palestinian Rights at a salary of $61,347.

The unit was conceived by Arab states to ''promote maximum publicity'' for the
''inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.'' These are, according to the
General Assembly resolution that fathered the Yogasundram unit, ''the right to
national independence and sovereignty'' and the right of Palestinians ''to
return to their homes and property from which they have been displaced and
uprooted.''

Neither the resolutions nor any of the materials produced by the unit ever
suggest that the Palestinian problem is complex and manysided, that Israel has
any right to survive as a state or that there may be legitimate fear over a
Palestinian state run by men who employ terror against civilians.

In its early days, the unit published a legal study by two American academics.
They concluded that the United Nations supports both an Israeli and a
Palestinian state. By contrast, the Yogasundram office promotes pamphlets,
calendars, posters, stamps and photo exhibits that scrupulously refrain from
drawing attention to Israeli rights.

''We're bound by these (General Assembly) resolutions,'' Mr.  Yogasundram
explains. ''We can't say the G.A. is wrong.'' Mr. Yogasundram's unit has been so
successful that it is due to be upgraded to a division. That means higher pay
for everybody and more jobs. ''My argument is we are understaffed,'' he says.
''We find ourselves working long hours.''

Some parts of the Secretariat defy biological wisdom, and not only survive but
grow long after the function that created them has ceased to exist. When the
United Nations began life in 1945, no fewer than 11 territories were placed
under its tutelage, administered by some nation in trust for the global
organization. They ranged from Togoland (now part of Ghana) to New Guinea.
Today, all but one, Micronesia, the Pacific island group run by the United
States, has won freedom. Sometime next year, Micronesia, too, is due to graduate
from trusteeship and become ''freely associated'' with the United States,
enjoying full control over its domestic affairs.

But this shrinkage does not trouble the 64 persons - 38 ''professionals'' and 26
lesser hands like secretaries or file clerks - who earn their daily bread in the
Department of Political Affairs, Trusteeship and Decolonization. A tribute to
bureacratic survival, the department expects to continue and even expand. ''We
are understaffed,'' insists Najmuddine Rifai ($74,284), a former Syrian envoy
and second man on the department's ladder.

He and his colleagues fill their days poring over parent governments' reports on
several dozen places that do not govern themselves - Bermuda, Pitcairn Island,
the Virgin Islands, Namibia, Gibraltar and others. Most never will govern
themselves, but that is not the point.

Mr. Rifai and company boil down these reports for still another United Nations
committee. From the Virgin Islands study, for example, the envoys can learn of
the local governor's congratulations to delegates at a constitutional
convention, the state of tourism and how housing is doing. The United Nations
committee will then solemnly incoporate this in its own report and invariably
urge the governing power, the United States, to do more to instruct Virgin
Islanders in the joys of independence.

Did Mr. Rifai and his aides play any part in easing Micronesia out of
trusteeship? ''It would be difficult to accomplish the task of supervising the
independence of Micronesia if we didn't exist,'' he says proudly. As it happens,
there is a classic work on the plight of the islanders, ''Micronesia: Trust
Betrayed,'' and it played a considerable part in shaping Washington's thinking.
It was written by Donald F. McHenry, now the United States delegate to the
United Nations. Mr. Rifai has not read it.

The strange state of the Secretariat has many causes. At bottom, it reflects the
wishes of its 154 overseers. If the Secretariat embraces obsolete or marginal
sections, they were, after all, approved, if not created, by the General
Assembly. It was suggested to Secretary General Waldheim that he is a creature
of the Assembly in these matters. ''I take strong exception to that,'' he
replied.  But, reminded of the questionable units beneath him, he said, ''It's
up to the General Assembly. It's not in my hands. They are the sovereign member
states.''

At budget time, he can propose, but the Assembly disposes. ''There are groups
that say the program is important for us. You have to take into account the
facts of life. Different interests have to be ironed out. You must take into
account divergent interests.''

Mr. Waldheim insisted, ''I attach much importance to t he concept of an
international civil service, to maintainin g the independence of an
international civil service.'' But many nations, notably the United States and
the Soviet Union, regard so me key jobs as their property and even insist on who
shall fill th em. A few brave department chiefs resist the pressure; it is
easier to go along.

It is written into the United Nations' rules that jobs must be spread around
fairly among members. There are even quotas for the ''desirable range'' of jobs
for each nation. In Secretary General Waldheim's latest report on the practice,
for example, Algeria, holds 17; Togo has 8; the Soviet Union is owed 171 to 232
and has 175; the desirable United States range is 381 to 516 and it enjoys 501
professional posts. The Russians would have more but they allow their loyalists
only a limited stay in seductive New York, which makes filling their quota a
terrible chore. Nobody worries much about the lesser breeds, the secretaries,
office cleaners and the like. The United Nations is not only hierarchical; it is
snobbish.

This system seems at odds with the United Nations Charter's Articles 100 and
101, which forbid staff members from receiving instructions from their
governments and say that they shall be hired to assure ''the highest standards
of efficiency, competence and integrity.''

A high United Nations official with a professional knowledge of the
organization's personnel practices says: ''We've moved from the idea of 1946, a
group of dedicated international civil servants, highly competent with a keen
sense of integrity. This place is now corrupt. There are too many here who
simply want to survive, who have abandoned principle.''

Indeed, there are uglier explanations for the depressed quality of the United
Nations staff. For weeks, the corridors have buzzed with tales of a ring of Arab
officials who have allegedly extorted ''loans'' from subordinates seeking jobs
and promotions. The rumors have reached Mr. Waldheim, who has asked his legal
advisor, Erik Suy, to receive any evidence, if it exists. But people who buy
jobs are not likely to bare their souls and, so far, neither Mr. Waldheim's
investigations nor press questions have turned up a complaint or an
incriminating document.

It has been suggested that if a Secretary General were limited to one term, now
five years, he might be more willing to stand up against governments. But Mr.
Waldheim, whose aides have already launched his campaign for an unprecedented
third term, says that the lure of continued office ''does not in any way
influence the attitude of the Secretary General.'' A one-term limit, he says,
''puts in jeopardy the quality of the Secretary General.''

Reformers do give Mr. Waldheim high marks for appointing James O.C. Jonah of
Sierra Leone as the new Assistant Secretary General at the Office of Personnel
Services ($88,359). A graduate of Brian Urquhart's peace-keeping office, Mr.
Jonah is trying to make some changes. He wants all vacancies widely advertised
and removed from the control of member states. He wants competitive examinations
for the lowest two professional grades, a civil-service reform adopted in the
United States a century ago. He has said that he will not bend the retirement
rules for the Russians and Victor Lessiovski. Mr.  Jonah's behavior is expected
to shorten his own career at the United Nations.

The critical point is that the United Nations is not sovereign.  This was
recognized at the founding when the great powers were given their veto in the
Security Council. It is governments that pay the United Nations' pipers. It is
governments that will continue to call the discordant tunes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Under Secratary General for Special Political
Affairs;Brian Urquhart (Page 72) Photo of Hubert Noel (Page 76) Photo of Yoraraj
Yogasundram Photo of Amilcar Ferrari Photo of Li Quingyuan Photo of Photo of
James Jonah

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE REFUGEE E XPLOSION

SECTION: Section 6; Page 136, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3214 words


Tad Szulc is a Washington writer who specializes in international affairs. By
Tad Szulc Day and night, inexorably, the silent ghost armies straggle over
deserts and through jungles, thread rocky mountain passes, cling to darkened
tramp freighters and fishing smacks across miles of heavy seas. They include
vacant-eyed women made sterile by malnutrition, and grotesquely skeletal
children a breath away from death - but there are fierce guerrilla fighters as
well, and a motley assortment of merchants and lawyers, criminals and madmen.

The greatest wave of refugees and displaced persons in modern times -far beyond
that created by the dislocations of World War II - will grow this year by at
least two million people. That will bring the total number of men, women and
children uprooted by war and famine to an unprecedented 17 million, equivalent
to the population of the state of New York. And the actual numbers could be much
higher. ''We are at a point where it's a give-or-take-a-million situation,'' a
harried aide at the Geneva headquarters of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees said recently. ''Nobody knows for sure. Hundreds of thousands,
maybe millions, don't register with us. You just can't keep track of them.'' The
High Commissioner's budget, which is specifically earmarked to meet refugee
emergencies, has jumped tenfold in five years, to $500 million.

Unlike many earlier counterparts -the Hindu and Moslem refugees, for example,
after the partition of India in 1947 - most of today's displaced masses will not
be able to return to their homes or even to be permanently resettled for years,
if ever. And the experts insist that their numbers will rise relentlessly
through the balance of the century.

Moreover, there is evidence of a mounting unwillingness among the industrialized
countries, including the United States - and among the less-developed nations as
well - to continue to welcome the refugees at home or to keep them alive in
hundreds of camps across the globe. As economic resources and tempers are
stretched thin, world leaders are facing an awesome question: Has mankind's
compassion reached its limits? Has the quality of mercy been strained to the
breaking point?

West Germany, which has taken in some 90,000 refugees in the last few years,
making it second only to France as a nation of asylum in Europe, does not want
any more. In July, for example, the city of Frankfurt simply turned away 113
persons fleeing Afghanistan and 71 from Eritrea. Thailand considers its 300,000
Cambodian and Laotian refugees to be illegal immigrants, few of whom are let out
of the camps; on several occasions, the Thais have forced Cambodians back across
the border. In the Indian state of Tripura, at least 1,000 Hindu refugees from
Bangladesh were massacred last June by local inhabitants, and, according to an
Indian Government official, 200,000 were made homeless. When the wave of ''boat
people'' fleeing Vietnam peaked in 1979, Malaysian authorities towed thousands
back to sea, leaving them to founder and drown.

The United States has accepted more refugees than any other Western nation. By
year's end, some 350,000 people will have entered (most of them either from
Indochina or from Cuba and Haiti), and this year approximately 135,000 refugees
will be eligible to become United States citizens, the largest number ever.
American expenditures for refugee programs - almost $4 billion in 1980 - exceed
those of any other country. But even here, the mood may be changing. A
Presidential commission report due next year is expected to call for legislation
to unravel America's chaoti c immigration and refugee lawsand put some kind of
''cap,'' as it is called, on the number of refugees and immigrants admitted. The
influx of almost 150,000 Cubansand Haitians this year has aroused an antirefugee
sentiment that contributed t o Jimmy Carter's loss of 17 electoral votes in
Florida and may well be reflected strongly in the new, more conservative
Congress of 1 981.  Sometimes, as in parts of East Africa today, it is famine
that sends the gho st armies on their way. More often, though, it is another of
th e Four Horsemen of the Apocalpyse: war. The history of recent decade s
demonstrates that war makes refugees. The generations of Palestinia ns, for
example, in Jordan, the Gaza Strip, Lebanon, Syria and the West Bank - 1.8
million of them. The 10 million refugees of t he 1971 war between India and
Pakistan. The millions displaced by the African wars in Biafra and Uganda and
Angola. The half-million uprooted by the civil war in Lebanon. The 200,000
displaced by the war and partition of Cyprus in 1974-75. The boatloads of people
fleeing Vietnam who became the prey of Thai pirates in th e Gulf of Siam. The
1.7 million people uprooted by war and famine in Somalia.

The drum roll of statistics loses any quality of reality after a while, but the
numbers signal a series of basic changes: the increase in the number of
third-world conflicts, for example. Lincoln P.  Bloomfield, professor of
political science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and, until
recently, a White House adviser, says that during the last 10 years, 90 percent
of small wars have been fought in the third world. A decade ago, those parts of
the world averaged a total of less than one new conflict a year, he says. Now
the rate is 1.6 a year, and, he adds, ''it will be t he same over the next
decade.'' Thus the third world becom es ever more unstable, generating ever more
refugees.

When Russian troops invaded Afghanistan last December, the nation's total
population was 15 million. Today, though the figures are far from precise,
probably 10 percent has been uprooted. Some 1.1 million Afghan refugees had been
registered in Pakistan as of July 1, and United Nations officials believe that
between 100,000 and 200,000 nomads may have blended with the Pakistani border
populations. Some sources think that an additional 200,000 refugees have fled to
Iran.

Despite its technological superiority and the commitment of 100,000 combat
troops, the Soviet Union has been unable to put down resistance by
anti-Communist guerrillas. Years may pass before the conflict is ended and the
displaced Afghan families can return to their war-torn villages. There are no
plans for their resettlement overseas. In fact, they prefer to remain in refugee
camps near the border, for many of the uprooted have become guerrillas who fight
the Russians from Pakistani sanctuaries, shuttling back and forth over the
unmarked frontiers. Should the Russians succeed ultimately in dominating the
country, many Afghan refugees may never go home.

The Indochina conflict - an earlier case of a superpower at war in the third
world - produced several million refugees as American, Vietnamese, Cambodian and
Laotian armies battled back and forth across Southeast Asia. When it was done,
the vast majority of the uprooted returned to their homes. Internal political
and economic conditions triggered the post-1975 flight of 900,000 people from
Vietnam; some crossed overland to China, others became ''boat people,'' making
their way across the South China Sea to Malaysia, Thailand and Hong Kong. Most
of this wave of Vietnamese refugees will be resettled by the end of 1980, more
than 450,000 of them in the United States.

Yet there remain close to 200,000 Indochinese in refugee camps today. Many will
no doubt be resettled; only the Cambodians on the border of Thailand, in camps
heavily infiltrated by soldiers of the forces still battling in Cambodia, seem
to have no future.

War and hunger blend in a maddened vicious circle in Cambodia. In the last
decade, as the result of wars and massacres, the population has plummeted from
seven million to five million. Famine is causing hundreds of thousands of new
deaths. Another million? Nobody knows.  The continuing war in Cambodia renders
food production impossible: United States satellite photography shows that only
25 percent of the country's rice acreage was planted in 1979, while opposing
factions in the Cambodian conflict prevent significant food deliveries from the
outside.

A recent study by the Central Intelligence Agency stated that the Khmers of
Cambodia ''now may be threatened with virtual extinction as a people.'' It
added: ''In July 1979 about 3.5 million people were estimated to be in danger of
starvation. ... A conservative estimate is that for every Cambodian born during
July-December 1979, 10 died.''

Africa is by far the world's largest repository of refugees and displaced
persons - at least five million of them. Many have been uprooted by a famine in
East Africa that has spread from Somalia to Uganda and Mozambique; observers
fear a repetition of the famine in West Africa of the early 1970's, when 250,000
died. In Uganda's Karamoja region, for example, more than 20,000 have died this
year, and in East Africa as a whole, the State Department says, 20 m illion
people are in the ''critical starvation category.''

The roll call of the dispossessed includes two million within Ethiopia and a
half-million in the Sudan, mainly from Eritrea and Chad. The Ethiopian refugees
include several thousand Falasha, Jews who follow biblical Judaism in its purest
form. Cameroon holds another 100,000 refugees from the recent political
upheavals in Chad and Equatorial Guinea. Tanzania is host to nearly 200,000
refugees, chiefly from Burundi. Zaire has more than 250,000 Angolans who have
fled Marxist rule in their own country.

And then there are the refugees in Somalia, the most hopeless of all.
Officially, Somalia's population is 3.5 million. Since last year, it has been
inundated by families fleeing the renewed fighting in Ogaden, the province
disputed by the Somalis and the Ethiopians - or fleeing famine. As of the end of
September, there were 840,000 refugees in 26 camps in Somalia and another
840,000 simply wandering across the sands from village to village. Approximately
every third person in this immensely impoverished land - its estimated 1979
annual per capita income was $110 - is today a refugee.

At one of the Somali camps, holding 45,000 refugees, there is only one doctor to
cope with everything from tuberculosis to leprosy.  There are camps where
thousands of children die each week. Because of protein malnutrition,
3-year-olds look as though they are six months of age. And there is no hope, not
even the beginnings of an international plan to resettle these homeless masses.
The scope and nature of the refugee flow in the last decade have foiled the
efforts of the world community to cope with the problem.  The United Nations
Convention on the Status of Refugees, for example, came into force in 1954. I t
defined a refugee as ''a person who, owing to a well-founded fear of persecution
f or reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a partic ular social
group or political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is
unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling to a vail himself of the protection of
that country.'' It became clear that such a definition left out a large
proportion of the world's up rooted - those in flightfrom famine, for example -
and later U.N. dec isions vested in the High Commissioner for Refugees the
additional responsibility for ''special humanitarian tasks'' including prog rams
for certain groups of persons ''displaced within their own count ries.''

As of last May, 9.5 million people in more than 80 countries, including the
United States, were declared to be of ''concern'' to the High Commissioner's
office. By September, the figure was believed to be close to 12 million. That
does not include nearly two million Palestinians, for whom another U.N. agency
is directly responsible, nor does it account for the millions who, as one U.N.
official put it, ''fall between two stools'' and are not cared for by any
organized programs.

The United States Refugee Act of 1980 incorporates almost verbatim the U.N.
definition of what constitutes a refugee. It allows the President, in
consultation with Congress, to resettle in the United States a certain number of
those formally qualifying as refugees.  But, like the U.N Convention, it does
not recognize the concept of an ''economic'' refugee, a category ranging from
victims of starvation to persons simply seeking a better livelihood.

This year, however, more than 20,000 Haitians arrived here, fleeing the poverty
of their country and the dictatorship of the Duvalier regime. And President
Fidel Castro dispatched more than 120,000 Cuban ''boat people'' from the port of
Mariel to the shores of Florida. The Cuban contingent included a certain number
of former political prisoners, who met the requirements of the Refugee Act, but
most were relatives of the approximately 800,000 Cubans already in the United
States, and they included unemployed young men, terminal cancer patients and
common criminals.

After much soul-searching and confusion, the Carter Administration resolved that
the newly arrived Cubans and Haitians would not be classified as refugees
because, as a Justice Department document declared, many of them ''would not
qualify under the strict standards for asylum.'' But to give these groups
something of a legal status and make them eligible for federally financed
assistance - at least to some degree - the Administration invented a
''Cuban/Haitian entrant'' status, which has yet to be ratified by the Congress.
But this new category covers only those who arrived between April 20 and Oct.
10. And, for all Washington knows, Castro may organize another exodus one of
these days.

Clearly, a long-range solution is needed, and a Select Commission on Immigration
and Refugee Policy is preparing recommendations to revamp once again United
States immigration and refugee laws. A major concern of the commission has been
illegal aliens, a category covering just about everybody who does not hold a
valid United States visa. Aside from this year's Cuban-Haitian influx, says
Lawrence H.  Fuchs, the commission's executive director, there were ''no fewer
than 3.5 million and no more than six million'' illegal aliens in the United
States at any one time during the late 1970's. They are not included in the
world refugee totals.

Half of the se illegal entrants are Mexicans, but the rest come fromall over the
world. The United States remains the premier land of promise for t he refugee.
Many of the 50,000 Jews who emigrated from the Soviet Un ion with Israeli visas
last year changed their destination t o the United States once they had arrived
safely in Vienna. Volun teers from the American Friends Service Committee who
have spent lo ng months in Vietnamese refugee camps tell of being quizzed by In
dochinese escapees. ''They ask,'' one volunteer says, ''how easy it is to enroll
in a university, how much a house costs, how easy jobs are, how many black
Americans there are.''

The Vietnamese have done well in this country. Of the 130,000 airlifted here in
1975 after the fall of South Vietnam, some 80 percent are now self-supporting.
The Cubans who came to the United States in the 1960's have done as well or
better, but the new wave has aroused great controversy.

Soon after President Carter announced the special category to cover the Cuban
and Haitian influx last spring, states and municipalities caring for the
newcomers started complaining that they were not receiving full Federal
reimbursement. Many residents in areas where the Cubans settled charged that the
refugees were taking away their jobs, though some studies insist that immigrants
are an asset to the economy because they will take jobs that citizens don't
want. Public protests peaked after a series of riots at some of the refugee
camps because of the Cubans' anger at delays in their resettlement.

The prospect for increased American acceptance of refugees, in general, is far
from bright. The select commission's report, due March 1, will include
suggestions for new ways to deal with the continuing influx of immigrants and
refugees - including a new limit on the numbers permitted to enter. Customaril
y, such a report would lead to hearings in the United States Senate and the
drawing up of legislation. However, the report faces an unc ertain future. It
will not be delivered to the President who sought it. Ronald Reagan has not set
forth a policy as regards immigration , but the soon-to-be newchairman of the
Senate Judiciary Committee - through which any new immigration law must pass -
has made himself very clear. Senator Strom Thurmond, Republican of South
Carolina, is on record in opposition to what he has called ''liberal im
migration policies.'' And that suggests that the ''cap'' placed on the number of
immigrantsor refugees will be a tight one. The politica l uproar over the Cuban
refugees in Florida is not likely to alter th at outlook.  Meanwhile, the
surging third-world refugee problem remains a dire threat to international
stability. A flow of black refugees from South Africa is strongly anticipated.
With un rest growing in Cuba, Haiti, Jamaica and the eastern islands, the C
aribbean is another probable source of new refugees. The latest d ifficulty in
Israeli-Egyptian negotiations over West Bank autonomy dampens once again any
hope of a solution for the Palestin ian refugees. The Iraq-Iran war may produce
another stream of r efugees. The Cambodian problem is certain to fester for
years, and a possible war between Vietnam and Thailand could create a new wave
of boat people. There isno end in sight for the Somali war and famine , and
starvation is on the rise in the rest of East Africa as well.  In Mozambique,
l.5 million children are starving. Will they star t wandering? To Zimbabwe, say,
or Tanzania? Will they be care d for when they arrive?

The statistics mount, the horror grows. The third world countries inundated by
refugees cannot cope with the economic and political strains. The developed
nations show no signs of being able or willing to take on this ever-growing
load. The ghost armies are marching.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of refugees map indicating whereabouts of major
refugee groups

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AFTER MAO: REPORTS ON A PEOPLE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1193 words


THE CHINESE By David Bonavia.  Illustrated. 290 pp. New York: Lippincott &
Crowell. $12.95.
THE CHINESE Portrait of a People.  By John Fraser.  Illustrated. 463 pp. New
York: Summit Books. $14.95.
By ROBERT ELEGANT

Since the discovery of Cathay, Western writers have regaled their readers with
the almost unbelievable wonders of that fabled land.  Some accounts have been
none the less astounding for being largely true, while others have described a
nation-continent that existed primarily in their authors' imaginings. Since the
establishment of the People's Republic of China 31 years ago, the production of
both genres has been a thriving industry.

The contributions of David Bonavia and John Fraser are truly new and largely
true. Their books' identical titles are pretentious, though Mr. Bonavia's
shorter, more rigorously factual book has a more valid claim to offering a
portrait of a people than does
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Robert Elegant, author of ''Dynasty,'' has studied and written about China for
more than three decades. His latest novel, ''Manchu,'' was just published.
Mr. Fraser's longer, more impressionistic work.  The two describe the China that
emerged - and is still emerging - from the frightful chaos of the Great
Proletarian Cultural Revolution of 1965 to 1976. Both are fruits of the new
realism within China itself and of the greater - though still limited - freedom
allowed foreign observers. Both are more realistic and more penetrating than the
majority of books written during the past three decades by foreigners who were
hampered by obsessive Chinese secretiveness as well as by their own illusions
and prejudices.

Messrs. Bonavia and Fraser depict neither para dise nor hell, neither a pui
ssant giant nor an anarchic sham, but a people striving amid manifold
difficulties, many self-imposed, toward selfimproveme nt and international
power. Otherwise, their books are quite differe nt, complementing each other so
neatly that they might have been pub lished as companion volumes.

Mr. Bonavia, who has recently returned to China for The Times of London, is an
old China hand of the new school, which is well schooled. He has been reporting
on that nation (with a brief and obviously illuminating time-out in the Soviet
Union) since taking his degree in Chinese history and language at Cambridge in
the 1960's.  His sense - and knowledge - of history permeate his book.

While Mr. Bonavia has written a trenchant guide to China today, Mr. Fraser,
whose work might better have been subtitled ''My Two Years in China,'' offers a
highly personal account of the impact of the People's Republic on a man who, by
his own declaration, knew virtually nothing about that country before he was
transformed from the drama critic of The Toronto Globe and Mail into its Peking
correspondent in 1977.
A neophyte of great - sometimes excessive - sensibility, Mr. Fraser suffers from
the newcomer's inclination to believe that history began when he himself arrived
on the scene. Marred by sweeping - and occasionally erroneous - generalizations,
his book is, nonetheless, immediate and moving. Reading Mr. Fraser, one recalls
poignantly what it was like to meet the Chinese for the first time.

Mr. Bonavia could, presumably, have written Mr. Fraser's book if he had sat down
to his typewriter after his first tour in China. Mr.  Fraser could not have
written Mr. Bonavia's book because he simply does not possess the essential
historical wisdom or linguistic facility. Although his unremittingly breathless
tone irritates, Mr.  Fraser's naivete is at times, however, an advantage. He
approached China in much the same spirit as might the putative ''average
intelligent reader,'' unburdened by preconceptions. (Mr. Fraser's horror at the
poverty and oppression he encountered in Communistruled Vietnam is, on the other
hand, both illuminating and convincing precisely because he had previously
shared the widespread admiration of the Hanoi regime.)

Mr. Fraser is at his best in scoring off such outmoded sycophants as Rewi Alley
and Han Suyin and in describing the men and women he encountered when the regime
permitted some intercourse between foreign correspondents and nonofficial
Chinese. The reader sees them as did the writer - as beset personalities, but
without depth, because he knew only the faces they presented and little of their
actual lives.

Apparently assuming that his particular experience revealed universal truth, Mr.
Fraser greatly overstates the role of the dissidents who were briefly per-
mitted to publish unofficial magazines and to paste up ''big character posters''
on the so-called Democracy Wall near Xidan in Peking. He tells us that Wei
Jingsheng, the jailed editor of the magazine Exploration, is ''by any critical
standard ... the best political essayist since Lu Hsun, China's greatest writer
of the 20th century.'' That is just nonsense.

Mr. Bonavia, on the other hand, is always sound -and frequently brilliant. ''A
whole generation of Europeans and Americans,'' he points out, ''have been
influenced by the concept of a utopian China, where poverty is somehow or other
...  noble, and where the personal freedoms ... may be denied to Chines e
people, who somehow seem able to get along without them. ... It i s dispiriting
for China's admirers to be told every few years ( by the official press) that
the policies which seemed so hopeful and idealistic were actually just a cloak
for ... treacherous sch eming. ...''

Mr. Bonavia systematically illuminates the peasants, sex, birth control,
medicine, officials, industry, and other major aspects of the People's Republic.
He even includes one of the most lucid expositions of the nature of the Chinese
language and Chinese literature for neophytes that I have seen.

It is a pity that Mr. Bonavia and Mr. Fraser did not collaborate, since it would
not then be necessary to urge strongly that all who are interested in China read
both of these excellent books. The knowledge that Mr. Fraser lacks Mr. Bonavia
possesses, while Mr.  Fraser's enthusiasm might have animated Mr. Bonavia's
occasionally excessive earnestness. But both offer revealing pictures of the
''New China'' with its strengths and weaknesses, a China seen sympathetically,
but without rose-colored glasses.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A JOURNALIST IN LOVE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1156 words


A MAN By Oriana Fallaci.  Translated by William Weaver.  463 pp. New York: Simon
and Schuster. $14.95.

By VIVIAN GORNICK

T becomes more and more common that a book feels like a memoir, essay or
reportage but is called fiction, and at book's end one finds oneself protesting:
''That's not a novel.'' The source of the protest is not, I think, either
devotion to literary orthodoxy or a concern that a spade be called a spade. It
is just that most often when journalism is called fiction, the authority of
honest reportage is mysteriously lost without the command of imaginative
transformation having been gained, and sometimes atrocities of language clearly
related to the ambition released by the words ''a novel'' are committed as well.
The book under review is a case in point.

Oriana Fallaci is an Italian journalist famous the world over for her political
interviews. Indignantly democratic and possessed of a vigorous hatred of
dictatorship, Miss Fallaci's work is characterized by a pugnacious insistence,
somewhat like that of an aroused child stamping her feet and demanding to be
told the truth. From her inviolate position behind the microphone she points,
probes, insinuates and mocks, provoking her subjects - mainly men of great power
- into regretted revelation. The results are almost always scandalous,
distasteful and remarkably effective. Miss Fallaci the journalist is master of
her trade.

In August 1 973 Miss Fallaci flew to Athens to interview Alexander Panagoulis, a
Greek political dissident who had spent five years in prison for an attempted
assassination of the dictator George Papadopoulis, and who had just been freed
by a general amnesty. Thesetwo took one look at each other and both knew
instantly that destiny had been achi eved. Especially Miss Fallaci. She really
knew. When Panagoulis as ked her why they hadn't met before, where had she been
when he'd bee n caught, tortured and imprisoned, she had to answer: ''Saigon . .
. Hanoi . . . Sao Paulo . . . Amman . . . Calcutta.'' But she haste ned to
assure him that they had met before - many times in fact: ''Yo u were to have
many faces, many names, in those years.  In Vietnam yo u were a Viet Cong girl
with cheeks and chin and forehead defa ced by scars. . . . In Bolivia you were
the last of the Peredo brothe rs, the first (of whom) had died with Che Guevara.
. . .And then you were a Dominican monk whose face and age I didn't even know.''
Only in order to accomplish their fate, it had been necessaryto wait until this
moment for them actually to come together.

''A Man'' is a 463-page account of the three-year-long affair between Miss
Fallaci and Panagoulis,
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Vivian Gornick is the author of ''Essays in Feminism'' and ''The Romance of
American Communism.''
begun at their meeting, conducted through a nonstop disheveled flinging about
between Athens and Rome, and brought to a distraught end in May 1976 when
Panagoulis was ambushed and killed in Athens.  Written in the form of an elegiac
address to the dead man, it is in effect a journalist's recital of the events of
those years, masquerading as a historical romance of the kind that can only be
called torrid-mythic. Panagoulis is for Miss Fallaci openly and unashamedly a
figure of fantasy - a hero of legendary proportions, not an actual man at all
but an incarnation of spiritual resistance (political resistance is here clearly
a metaphor). As such, he - his life, his person, his immediate history - is
described in language that would draw from D'Annunzio an admiring ''So that's
how you do it these days.''

The words ''destiny'' and ''fate'' are used repeatedly in this book, along with
a steady, rhythmic variation on the phrase ''This is the tragedy of a man
condemned to be a poet, a hero, and thus to be crucified.'' These words and
phrases, surrounded by whole paragraphs of a suffocating thickness, are like
bits of lard studded throughout an old-fashioned dish of hearty melodrama being
offered as though it were the cuisine of tragedy.

There is a certain sense in which ''A Man'' is not only ludicrous, but offensive
as well. In a time of unimaginable cruelty, when we are surfeited by accounts
without number of daily atrocity, the only way to convey the pain and dread of
an honest rebel's life in some police-state part of the world is through the
sparest of prose, the leanest of eloquence. What one feels here is not only Miss
Fallaci's inability to trust in the emergence of the inherent power in
Panagoulis's life by writing quietly about it, but her unwillingness as well.
The syntax must be inflated to include a self-portrait of Oriana running about
Greece and Italy with her freedom fighter, he acting out the anti-social
behavior his existential tragedy has entitled him to in her eyes, she all
self-important nerve endings, registering herself hourly as an intimate of
history.

In a rather astonishing passage toward the end of the book, Miss Fallaci -
writing as though she's now going to set the record straight with an ''honest''
admission - annou nces that she never did love Alekos. He was sexually repellent
to her (not to mention compulsively unfaithful), had the character o f a
primitive and a mindin a state of permanent intellectual arrest.  In those pages
we suddenly see Panagoulis for what he Continu ed on Page 35
is: A caricature of smoldering force (shoulders braced, eyes narrowed, one foot
pawing the ground) being made flagrant use of by a writer whose sense of things
is foolish and self-deceived. The other side of Miss Fallaci's foot-stamping
righteousness in the presence of dictatorship is the eager plunge into
''passionate enslavement'' to the poetic ideal: two parts of an adolescent's
rebelliousness, neither one having much to do with independence of mind or
spirit.

What makes Miss Fallaci's journalism useful is her mythic sense of political
evil. What makes her ''fiction'' trashy is her mythic sense of the hero. In the
first instance, since it is in her psychic interest to distance herself, her
intelligence and temperament serve her well. Since it is also in her psychic
interest to merge herself in the second instance, she comes to disaster. It is
conceivable that ''A Man'' might have had power and integrity if Miss Fallaci
had had the wisdom and self-control to write an honest piece of reportage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

2 IN WEATHER UNDERGROUND ARE BARGAINING TO SURRENDER

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL SHEPPARD Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 621 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Nov. 23


Bernardine Dohrn, the reputed leader of the radical Weather Underground who went
into hiding in 1970 after being indicted on Federal and local riot charges, has
offered to turn herself in to the authorities if a plea-bargaining arrangement
can be worked out.

Negotiations toward the surrender of the 38-year-old Miss Dohrn, who led violent
demonstrations by the group, then known as Weatherman, protesting the American
involvement in the Vietnam War, are being conducted by Michael Kennedy, a New
York lawyer.

Mr. Kennedy remained unavailable for comment today but his efforts on behalf of
Miss Dohrn and William Ayers, another Weather Underground leader who has been in
hiding since 1970, when he fled Federal prosecution on riot charges, were
confirmed by Gregory Ginex, head of the felony trial division of the Cook County
State's Attorney's office.

Mr. Ginex said efforts were being made to arrange for the surrender of the two
radicals but that Bernard Carey, the State's Attorney, would turn the matter
over to Richard M. Daley, who defeated him in the Nov. 4 elections.

Local Charges Still Pending

Federal charges against Miss Dohrn, Mr. Ayers and 10 other members of
Weatherman, a splinter faction of the Students for a Democratic Society, were
dropped in January 1974, but Miss Dohrn still faces local charges stemming from
violent demonstrations that her organization led here in 1969.

There were no local charges pending against Mr. Ayers, the son of Thomas G.
Ayers, a prominent Chicagoan who was chairman of the board of the Commonwealth
Edison utility. It remained unclear why the younger Mr. Ayers did not come out
of hiding after the Federal charges were dropped.

On Oct. 8, 1969, the first day of what Weatherman had billed as its ''Days of
Rage,'' a group of about 300 antiwar demonstrators, wearing helme ts and
dungaree jackets with the Vietcong flag sewn on the back and carrying clubs,
charged from a bonfire in Lincoln Park into a neighb oring area, smashing the
windows of stores, homes and automobiles.

Attack by Women's Group

The next morning, a 50-member women's contingent of the organization called the
Red Army Women's Militia attacked an Army induction center. Twelve of the women
were arrested.

On Oct. 11, the Weathermen rallied at Haymarket Square, the site of bloody labor
unrest in 1886, and marched from there to Chicago's downtown Loop business
district.

There the demonstrators charged through police lines and engaged in a
rock-throwing and window-smashing battle in which scores of policemen and
demonstrators were injured. Miss Dohrn was arrested in that encounter.

The demonstrations coincided with the so-called Chicago Seven trial, in which a
separate group of antiwar activists was accused of plotting the disorders that
occured during the 1968 Democratic Convention here.

On April 2, 1970, Miss Dohrn, Mr. Ayers and 10 others said by Federal
authorities to represent the leadership of the Weather Underground were indicted
here on charges of traveling and using interstate facilities to organize and
incite the October 1969 disorders.

Two months later, Miss Dohrn and 12 other Weather Underground leaders were
indicted by a Federal grand jury on charges of conspiracy to bomb and kill,
stemming from the group's activities in that city.

During her days in the underground, Miss Dohrn emerged as the leader of the
organization, replacing Mr. Ayers and Mark Rudd.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Bernardine Dohrn

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
HAIG'S PINCH;
by William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 943 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Get out your yellow pad and put yourself in the loafers of the President-elect
as he weighs the pros and cons of his choice for Secretary of State.

One name that appears on the final four-name short list is General Alexander M.
Haig Jr., former Deputy to National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger, former
Army Vice Chief of Staff, former White House Chief of Staff, former NATO
commander, former man on slow horseback.

The assets are impressive: 1. Demonstrated bravery. The Distinguished Service
Cross is not handed out lightly: Al Haig was a genuine hero in the battle of Au
Gap, early in the Vietnam War. In addition, he won a battlefield promotion to
colonel of an infantry battalion for leading troops in An Loc. Performance in
combat -coolness under fire - is an important criterion in judging any man's
qualification for a job in the storm center.

2. Well-regarded by allies. After arranging for the resignation of Nixon, Haig
was assigned by President Ford to the top military post in Europe. As NATO's
Supreme Commander, he won the respect of most of our allies for his
intelligence, political sagacity and forcefulness. Europeans are familiar with
Haig and would be comforted by his appointment.

3. Firm grasp of the strategic threat. When he resigned from his NATO job last
year to test the political waters back home, Haig recommended that the Senate
hold the SALT II treaty in abeyance while its flaws were renegotiated. He was
especially critical of an agreement permiting the Soviet backfire bomber and
SS-20 missiles to ''run free'' while limits were placed on our cruise missiles.
He was tough on SALT before Afghanistan.

4. Experienced cultivator of opinion-makers. Many of the books and articles
about the last days in the Nixon White House drew on details supplied - on deep
background - by Haig or his assistants; as a result, most accounts gratefully
portra yed Ha ig as the de facto President, saving the country from the potent
ial thrashing-about of awounded leader. Though Nixon loyalists fumed, practical
politicians admired Haig's ability to extricate himself w ith praise from the
key writers.

Liabilities of a Haig appointment are also to be considered.  1. Sycophancy
footwork. Haig is the only four-star general never to have commanded a division;
he speeded from colonel to major general under the sponsorship of Henry
Kissinger, who appreciated an efficient order-follower who would coolly tolerate
the most demeaning bullying. Like a Gilbert and Sullivan admiral, Haig knew how
to polish the top-brass handles of the Oval Office door.

2. The 17 i llegal wiretaps. Because of a personal interest in the 1969-71 eaves
dropping on newsmen and White House aides, I asked William Sulli van of the
F.B.I. in 1974 who was the man who transmitted t he White House request for the
unlawful surveillance, and who revie wed the transcripts. The reply: ''Colonel
Haig.'' When asked to say it wasn't so, my former colleague said of the tapping:
''It never ga ve me gas pains.'' To this date, Al Haig has never been
reprimanded f or - or shown any remorse for - his intimate role in this perversi
on of the national-security power. (I have forgiven him,but whenever there is a
click on my phone, I cannot help saying ''Hi,Al.''

3. Trotting out the tapes. At confirmation hearings, any embarrassing moments on
the Nixon tapes involving Al Haig are sure to be publicly played. A few
apple-polishing remarks are already known - ''Only you, Mr. President'' - but
Haig assures friends that no substantive improprieties will be revealed. Before
making any decision, Governor Reagan will have to make certain that Haig's
recollection is accurate and consider if he wants any Watergate-era associations
attached to his Secretary of State. (John Connally also had this problem; Shultz
and Weinberger did not.)

4. Running for President from State. Al Haig still wants to run for President;
as Ronald Reagan must be the first to know, that is not an ignoble ambition. The
question is: Does Reagan want a man at State afflicted with the need to factor
his political future into his diplomatic recommendations?

Now put down your Haig yellow pad. Pick up similar rundowns on the pros and cons
of other panel-recommended ''finalists'': George Shultz, who has asked that his
name be withdrawn but who was told to take that up with Reagan directly; William
Casey, who is everybody's choice for C.I.A. chief but is showing late strength
in the choice for State; and Casper Weinberger, who is closest of all to Reagan.

Add to that list Henry Jackson, who would contribute that note of
unlike-mindedness on domestic affairs so needed among the top handful. At the
highest level, good-soldierliness is an overrated virtue; it would be as much of
a mistake for Reagan to put a military mind at the head of State as it would be
for him to put his personal lawyer at the head of the Justice Department.

Where does a Cabinetmaker come out? In the case of Haig, his assets far outweigh
his liabilities - for Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, for chief SALT negotiator,
for Ambassador to NATO or Moscow, or to command a military-political operation
to provide Iran with a suitable trade for the hostages. Not for Secretary of
State. For State, four wiser choices stare out from the yellow pads.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 25, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

APPEALS COURT UPSETS A RULING FOR VETERANS IN SUIT OVER DEFOLIANT

BYLINE: By ARNOLD H. LUBASCH

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 315 words


An appeals court dealt a serious blow yesterday to efforts by Vietnam veterans
to conduct a broadscale Federal suit against five companies that manufactured
the defoliant known as Agent Orange.

A 2-to-1 decision issued in Manhattan the United States Court of Appeals for the
Second Circuit reversed a district court's ruling that would have permitted the
veterans to sue the companies in a consolidated Federal court case seeking
billions of dollars in damages.

In a series of suits consolidated in a major case in Federal District Court in
the Eastern District of New York, the veterans alleged that they had suffered an
increased risk of cancer, genetic damage and early death because of their
exposure to Agent Orange in the war in Vietnam.

The defendants are five of the nation's largest chemical companies: the Diamond
Shamrock Corporation, the Monsanto Company, the Thompson-Hayward Chemical
Company, Hercules Inc. and the Dow Chemical Company.

District Judge George C. Pratt ruled that the veterans and their families could
sue the chemi cal manufacturers in the Federal court, rejecting defense
arguments that the cases sh ould be tried individually in state courts.

The appeals court's decision, which Judge Amalya L. Kearse wrote with the
concurrence of Judge Ellsworth A. Van Graafeiland, said, ''While the Federal
Government has obvious interests in the welfare of the parties to the
litigation,'' Judge Kearse said, ''its interest in the outcome of the
litigation, i.e., in how the parties' welfares should be balanced, is as yet
undetermined.''

Judge Wilfred Feinberg said in dissent that in the case ''the paramount
interests of the United States are in the welfare of its veterans and in their
fair and uniform treatment.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 25, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. TO PAY $160,000 IN HOMOSEXUAL'S SUIT ON AIR FORCE OUSTING

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 294 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 24


Leonard P. Matlovich agreed today to drop his efforts toward reinstatement in
the Air Force in return for a $160,000 settlement from the service that ousted
him five years ago because of his homosexuality.

Both the Air Force and Mr. Matlovich claimed victory in the outof-court
settlement announced by the Justice Department. The effort by the 37-year-old
decorated Vietnam veteran to return to active duty with the Air Force had become
a rallying point for the national homosexual rights movement. He had forced the
issue originally, when he wrote a letter to Air Force Secretary John McLucas in
1975, declaring that he was a homosexual,

The settlement, which both sides filed in the United States Court of Appeals,
would vacate a Federal court order, issued last month, that the former sergeant
be reinstated with back pay. Mr. Matlovich agreed not to try to enlist in any
branch of the armed services.

Matlovich Is Elated

Interviewed by telephone from San Francisco, where he now sells automobiles, he
said: ''This is a great victory. The fact that they are willing to pay $160,000
shows they feel they did discriminate, because they don't just give that kind of
money away.''

Although the Government, in the settlement agreement, denied any illegality or
impropriety in its dismissal of Mr. Matlovich, it acknowledged that his back pay
since he was ousted Oct. 22, 1975, now amounts to about $62,000.

Air Force Secretary Hans Mark said, ''The Air Force agreed to the settlement
because we continue to regard homosexuality as fundamentally inconsistent with
military service and wanted to avoid returning Matlovich to active duty.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 25, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT EDUCATION;
SENSE OF HUMOR MAKES A COMEBACK IN LIFE ON CAMPUS

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 4, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1183 words


COLLEGE is no laughing matter - not, at least, for most students with graduate
school or jobs on their minds. But there are signs of a counterrevolution by
those who think that humor is not subversive.

At Stanford University, a respectable professor in the ordinarily sober field of
endocrinology has introduced a course in 20th century humor. All over the
country, college humor magazines, an endangered species only five years ago, are
back in force, making students laugh and making administrations nervous and old
grads Prof. Allan Pont of Stanford, who normally deals with th e mysteriesof
glands, said he volunteered to teach 10 two-and-a-half- hour seminars on humor
to give him temporary relief from his se rious medical students. He is
encouraged by the fact that the cl ass includes premedical students and
''computer freaks.''

Comedy, Professor Pont finds, is in good shape but going through a cycle of
silliness. Woody Allen is the Charlie Chaplin of the 1980's. Such movies as
''Animal House,'' a spin-off from college humor, and ''Airplane'' are in vogue.

''People give the humorous less analytic time because it is funny and therefore
presumed to be slight,'' he says.  Among the books the course analyzes is
''Portnoy's Complaint.'' Writing on the proposition that ''you have to be Jewish
to catch its humor,'' one student disagreed: ''You just have to be alive.''

Asked what makes him laugh, Professor Pont cited Lily Tomlin appearing on stage
with this line: ''I had a terrible dream last night. I dreamed that the man who
invented Muzak invented something else.''

He is reluctant to define what makes this college generation laugh except to say
that the new college humor is what ''Saturday Night Live'' was when it started:
Outrageous as nothing that had ever been on television. ''When it's them against
the world, they like it,'' he says.

Professor Pont's observations are corroborated by editors of college humor
magazines. Howard Gershen, associate editor of Columbia University's The Jester,
speaks of a renaissance of college humor after ''the big dry spell'' around
1973-74 when virtually all humor magazines folded. Vietnam, he explained, then
was no longer an issue and President Nixon was on the way out. For more than a
decade political humor had been dominant and now its sources had dried up.

Asked when the renaissance started, he said, ''Around the 14th century.'' Then
he added, ''I'm just kidding.'' The revival, he went on, began in 1977. Why? The
campuses, he guessed, were no longer politicized. Student activists no longer
competed with more traditional activities.

Like Professor Pont, Mr. Gershen considers the arrival of ''Saturday Night
Live'' in October 1975 as a turning point. Like the Monty Python television and
motion picture craze, it stressed the absurd, moderately shocking but not very
political comedy.

A poll of Columbia students last year ranked The Jester ahead of all other
campus publications in popularity.

Eric Schlosser, co-editor of The Princeton Tiger, describes the current campus
humor as sarcastic, cynical and irreverent. ''Some of it is pretty sick, and
there are very few conventions that aren't broken,'' he says. This confirms
Professor Pont's assessment that ''most college students today take for granted
that anyone can say anything he wants.'' Still, earlier this year, Stanford's
usually quite respectable Chaparral ran into trouble when it floated the
appalling hoax that the university's bowling team had been killed in a plane
crash. It was suspended by the administration and resumed publication only last
month.

At Princeton University, Mr. Schlosser says, the humor magazine gets an
excellent reception among students but finds it hard to get contributors at a
time when students rush mainly into extracurricular activities that might help
them with graduate deans or future employers. ''In such an atmosphere,'' he
says, ''our humor magazine is rather anomalous - a bit of ruckus ... a little
loud noise disturbing the calm.''

At Princeton as elsewhere, college administrations sometimes fail to see the
students' humor. They might, for instance, disagree with what Mr. Schlosser
considers the best issue in recent years, the fall 1978 parody called ''The
Princeton Alumni Weakly (sic).''

A West Coast editor says that he would like to ''keep it clean'' because ''we
want our mothers to read it,'' which may merely suggest that mothers have come a
long way.

Like the students themselves, their humor has turned inward, stressing the
campus. Ethnic jokes are out. Sexism is harder to eliminate in publications that
have always put a high priority on sex. Mr. Gershen describes the current brand
as ''cultural humor,'' with parodies of literature required in college as well
as of television programs.

What political humor remains seems to follow no particular ideological line.
Item (in The Princeton Tiger): Phillip Crane will withdraw from the 1988
Presidential race when a poll shows that his face is recognized by only 3
percent of his immediate family and friends.

Item (same page): The American Civil Liberties Union will file a class action
suit contending that all laws are unconstitutional.  Al Jean, vice president of
The Harvard Lampoon, says, ''We don't print political humor because it dates so
fast.'' This week's new iss ue will have a suburban theme in a parody of The New
Yo rker entitled ''The Center Heighter.''

Mr. Gershen says that in a field of uncertain historical records, The Lampoon,
founded in 1876, is thought to be the oldest of its genre in continuing
operation. Among other veterans are The Princeton Tiger, begun in 1882, and The
Jester, started in 1901, which was two or three years after the birth of
Stanford's Chaparral. The Yale Record, also among the oldies, collapsed a few
years ago but is preparing to start up again.

In the great humor drought of 1973, only a handful of the magazines remained in
business, but by 1978, when Joey Green of Cornell's Lunatic and Mr. Gershen
founded the National Association of College Humor Magazines, they identified 33
such publications.  Pelican at the University of California at Berkeley, which
was born in 1903 with Rube Goldberg as one of its original cartoonists,
illustrates the trend. It went into what looked like a terminal coma in 1971 but
celebrated its grand reawakening last year. Kevin Sweeney, its general manager,
says: ''Comedy is more in. There's more spoof and less politics in 1971.''

''Our modern politician,'' explains Professor Pont, ''plays the fool himself.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 25, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

'Moma' to Open Today At the 3 Muses Theater

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 145 words


''Moma,'' a new play by Tom Coble, will open today Off Broadway at the 3 Muses
Theater, at Broadway and West 73d Street. This work about an American family
that lost its ideals because of the Vietnam War, features Lorraine Spritzer, Pat
Legere and Mary Anisi. Joe Nikola is the director.

Mr. Coble's previous Off Broadway works were ''Time,'' ''For the Gentle People''
and ''Alley Cats.'' He also wrote ''Garbage Can Man,'' ''The Fighter,'' ''Get
Out and Get In'' and ''Aftermath.''

Reservations may be made by calling 869-3982. Tickets cost $8, exce pt on Friday
and Saturday nights, when th ey are $10. There will be performances Thursdays
through Sundays at 8 P.M., as well as Sundays at 3 P.M.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 25, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A LOSS FUND SET UP FOR 'HEAVEN'S GATE'

BYLINE: By THOMAS LUECK, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 6, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 417 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Nov. 24


The Transamerica Corporation said today that it had established a cash reserve
against losses that its subsidiary, the United Artists Corporation, may sustain
from the motion picture ''Heaven's Gate.''

At the same time, officials of both Transamerica, which is based here, and
United Artists, which is based in New York, said they were optimistic that the
movie could be made into a profitable venture after it was shortened and
re-edited.

''We believe that 'Heaven's Gate' is going to be an excellent film in its
shortened version and that it has tremendous worldwide commercial potential,''
said Andy Albeck, the president of United Artists. He said that the film's
director, Michael Cimino, wou ld reedit the work down to two hours from its cu
rrent length of close tofour hours, and that it would be released aga in in the
first half of 1981.

Officials of Transamerica declined to disclose how large a cash reserve would be
set aside against their investment in the film.  However, they said that the
action would have ''only a minimal effect'' on this year's consolidated income
for Transamerica, a diversified corporation that reported $4.04 billion in
revenues last year from its subsidiaries in insurance, financial services,
manufacturing and transportation, in addition to motion pictures.

''Because Transamerica as a whole is performing so well in a difficult economic
climate, the reserve will have only a minimal effect on Transamerica's overall
earnings for the year,'' said James R. Harvey, president of Transamerica.

Cost Put at $36 Million

Heaven's Gate, a Western that has so far accumulated production and promotion
costs of $36 million, is considered one of the most expensive movies ever
produced. Last week, after it was released to blistering and almost universally
negative reviews in New York, it was withdrawn from theaters at Mr. Cimino's
request.

Mr. Albeck said today that ''Heaven's Gate'' was among a handful of ''big
budget'' films that his company had traditionally released among the 20 to 24
movies it distributed each year. Among the other expensive films released by
United Artists, he added, was ''Apocalypse Now,'' the Vietnam war movie directed
by Francis Coppola. Mr. Albeck said that that film, which he termed a commercial
success, had been extensively re-edited after its initial previews.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 26, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Veteran Receives Probation In Holding of Hostages

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 146 words

DATELINE: CHARLESTON, W.Va., Nov. 25


A Vietnam veteran who held a church congregation hostage for four hours, was
placed on probation today by a judge who said he felt ''profound sympathy'' for
the emotional torment Mr. Mann had suffered because of the war.

Judge Andrew MacQueen of the Kanawha County Circuit Court said he had developed
the idea of ''conditional probation'' as a response to the twin demands of
justice and compassion for the problems of Vietnam veterans. Under the probation
agreement, Mr. Mann is to undergo extensive psychiatric treatment, with further
terms to be set later.

Brandishing a rifle, Mr. Mann held the congregation of the St.  Albans Church of
Christ hostage on Oct. 21, 1979, until he was allowed to make a statement
criticizing the Veterans Administration in a live radio broadcast.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 26, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Former P.O.W. Testifies Garwood Was on Camp Staff

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 176 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Nov. 25


The commander of a North Vietnamese prisoner-of-war camp ord ered his American
captives to treat Pfc. Ro bert Garwood of the Marine Corps as a member of the
camp's staff, a former prisoner testified today.

Sgt. 1st Class Willie Watkins said that Mr. Garwood, 34 years old, received many
special privileges denied other prisoners, including permission to leave camp.
Mr. Garwood is accused of desertion and collaboration with the enemy in his
nearly 14 years in Vietnam.

At an indoctrination class for prisoners, Sergeant Watkins said, the camp
commander said through an interpreter that Mr. Garwood ''was said to be a member
of the camp cadre and should be treated accordingly.

''There was some friendship between some Americans and Garwood, but after this
class there was no relationship by most,'' Sergeant Watkins testified at Mr.
Garwood's court-martial before a five-member jury.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 26, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
Man Is Released In Slashing Cases

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 114 words


A 39-year-old Vietnam War veteran with a record of arrests for violent crimes
was released from police custody after being questioned for 13 hours in
connection with the fatal stabbing of a woman and the wounding of five men near
Bellevue Hospital on Nov. 11.

The man was questioned by detectives and placed in a lineup that was viewed by
some victims and witnesses. One police source said the lineup failed to furnish
sufficient identification.

James T. Sullivan, the city's chief of detectives, said that the man was being
let go and that information on the case would be presented to a grand jury.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 26, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS AGREE DEFEAT MAY HELP IN REFORMULATING SOCIAL PROGRAMS

BYLINE: By TERENCE SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1065 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 25


An eclectic group of 22 prominent Democrats, discussing their party's plight in
light of the Reagan landslide, agreed at a private dinner here last night that
they needed the next four years to rethink and reformulate the traditional
Democratic social programs that the voters seemed to reject on Election Day.

President Carter came in for sharp criticism at the dinner, but the
participants, who represented different ideological sections of the party,
agreed that the problem went beyond Jimmy Carter to programs that the public had
found to be wasteful, inefficient and, ultimately, ineffective.

Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, the only 1980 Presidential candidate
among the group, contended that President-elect Ronald Reagan's economic
policies were ''doomed to failure'' and that this would provide an opportunity
for Democrats to rebound on the strength of what he called ''a planned and
agreed upon industrial-economic strategy for the 1980's.''

''Standard Brown rhetoric,'' muttered J erry Wurf, the president of the American
Federation of State, County and Municipal Employes, who contended that labor had
been lukewarm in its support of the Democratic ticket this year because Mr.
Carte r had turned out to be ''a very conservative President who had no in
terest in the Democratic Party we are talking about here to night.''

Possible Successors to White

This morning, after arguing about the party's problems until the small hours,
Governor Brown met with Mr. Carter at the White House and discussed possible
candidates to succeed John White as Democratic national chairman. He said later
that the new chairman should be a neutral figure, with no ties to any potential
1984 Presidential candidate, who could concentrate on rebuilding the party.

The dinner, which was held in a Washington restaurant, was arranged by Martin
Peretz, the editor of The New Republic, the liberal magazine that this year
endorsed John B. Anderson, the independent candidate, for President.

The dinner brought together a cross-section of Democrats that included Senators
Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, Bill Bradley of New Jersey and Patrick J.
Leahy of Vermont, Representatives David R. Obey of Wisconsin and James R. Jones
of Oklahoma, Joseph A.  Califano Jr., the former Secretary of Health, Education
and Welfare, several academics and representatives of the Carter Administration.

Notab ly abs ent from the group was anyone cloely associated with Senator Edwar
d M. Kennedy, who is regarded as a principal contender for party lea dership,
along with Vice President Mondale, in the post-Carter e ra.

Respite From Responsibility

The diagnoses of the party's ills varied sharply, but nearly everyone reflected
a relief that Democrats would now have a respite from the responsibility of
administering the Government's programs and a chance to rethink them.

''We have to back up and rethink the basic issues,'' said Sam W.  Brown Jr., the
former antiwar activist and director of Action, the volunteer agency. ''If we
can't articulate a clear vision of the future and a sustainable program to carry
it forward I don't see why the Democratic Party should be the majority party in
the future.''

As the conversation moved around the table, the following points were made:
Senator Moynihan: ''We ought to discuss why we, as a party, failed in 1980. Even
Herbert Hoover got more electoral votes than President Carter. We have to ask
what happened and why. There was no stock market crash, no Vietnam war.''

Senator Leahy: ''We pandered too much to single-issue politicss expounded by
labor and the left while being buffeted by the single issue politics of the
right. We in the Senate interview each other every day in the cloakroom about
the ills of the country. But have any of us talked to a factory worker lately?
Have we stopped listening to the people in this country?''

W. Bowman Cutter, associate director of the Office of Management and Budget:
''We failed because we refused to recognize that there are limits, that tax
burdens are too high, that the Federal Government does take up more of the
G.N.P. than it should. We were seen by the public as willing to trade off the
health of the economic system for the sake of our programs.''

Mr. Wurf: ''No one here and no one in the party is facing up to the facts. We
have an irrational tax system that places an unreasonable burden on the
taxpayer.''

Senator Bradley: ''We need to argue the merits of the internationalist outlook,
the importance of relations with the third world, the fact that we will never be
able to solve our problems in isolation. We need to offer the public a new
synthesis of ideas.''

Mr. Califano: ''Jimmy Carter was the most incompetent Democratic President in
history. That may sound like sour grapes coming from me, but let history be the
judge of what I say.''

Mr. Califano was dismissed from the Carter Cabinet in July 1979 along with four
other Secretaries.  Thomas Schelling, Harvard University: ''The Democratic
coalition was breaking down for a long, long time prior to 1980. There are very
sharp differences today between the interests and values of the poor and of
organized labor, for example, between Jews and other minorities. We are going to
have to define what collection of interests is going to prove viable for this
party in the 1980's.''

Governor Brown: ''Carter is the scapegoat for our problems, but the problem is
not him, it's us. I probably have attacked him more than anyone here, but let's
not fool ourselves. We are at the end of an era in this party and this country;
we have to change our whole industrial structure.''

Mr. Cutter: ''Reagan's orthodox y on economi c issues may be wrong, but ours is
not necessarily right. Some of th e programs we have supported - reflexively -
are wrong. We know that now, but the question is how do we get there from
here?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 26, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

G.A.O. Assails Care of Assets

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 142 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 25


The General Accounting Office, Congressional monitor of Federal efficiency, has
published a highly critical report on the Treasury's administration of blocked
assets of such countries as Iran.

The agency found that the Treasury ''lacked a complete and current inventory of
blocked assets, and its files were poorly organized and maintained.''

The frozen Iranian assets have been valued by the Treasury at more than $8
billion. Other countries that have had assets blocked include China, Cambodia,
Cuba, Vietnam, Czechoslovakia and East Germany.

Richard J. Davis, the Treasury's Assistant Secretary for Enforcement and
Operations, said that the report contained some useful observations but did not
adequately describe steps already taken to minimize the problems that were
spotlighted.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 26, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Suit Ended Against Chase Bank

SECTION: Section D; Page 4, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 166 words


A Federal judge dimissed a suit seeking to hold Chase Manhattan Bank responsible
for privately owned ships and bank funds seized when South Vietnam fell to the
Communists in 1975.

Plaintiffs in the suit included 10 former South Vietnamese maritime
corporations. They said they had suffered about $500,000 in losses because
Chase's Saigon branch failed to honor their demands for account withdrawals
before South Vietnam's fall.

The maritime companies also sought to have Chase made liable for the seizure of
nine ships valued at $7 million on the ground that their inablity to withdraw
funds from the Saigon branch prevented the ships from sailing before South
Vietnam was overrun.

In dismissing the suit, United States District Judge Robert L.  Carter held the
maritime companies had no standing to sue in his court because they had been
dissolved by the new regime in August 1975.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 27, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DEFOLIANT BATTLE NOT OVER

SECTION: Section D; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 82 words


After an appeals court setback, Frank McCarthy, a spokesman for Vietnam
veterans, said Tuesday that the group would continue its case against Agent
Orange in the Supreme Court, Congress and the Veterans Administration.  The
United States Court of Appeals for the second District rules Monday that the
veterans could not file a class-action suit under the Federal law but would have
to pursue the matter individually in home-state courts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AFGHAN STRIFE: NO EARLY EXIT BY SOVIET SEEN;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 992 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 27


Within the last few weeks, the Soviet Union has evidently decided to convert its
expeditionary force in Afghanistan into an army of occupation and to engage in a
long struggle against Afghan insurgents, according to American military analysts
here.

The Soviet Army, trained for massed land warfare in Europe or China, has been
only partly successful in its tactics of searching for Afghan nationalists and
destroying their villages.

Before that the Soviet Union was even less successful with a strategy of
political action that was intended to win the trust of the Afghans and to shore
up an Afghan regime and army loyal to Moscow.

''They watched us carefully in Vietnam,'' said a senior analyst after noting
Soviet mistakes, ''but they must not have paid close attention.''

Military analysts here have watched the Soviet experience in Afghanistan with
keen interest, because this has been the first time since World War II that they
have seen the Soviet Army in a protracted campaign.

Learning a Painful Lesson

The analysts said they had seen the Soviet Army learn painful lessons as they
studied the flow of information from satellite photographs and sensors,
electronic intercepts, interrogation of Afghan defectors and eyewitness accounts
from travellers and the more than one million Afghan refugees in Pakistan.

The evidence, they said, shows that the Soviet high command made the decision to
mobilize in late November 1979. The mobilization itself, in late December, was
relatively smooth and demonstrated the Soviet doctrine of relying heavily on
reserves.

Several divisions were already in a high state of readiness when they were put
on alert. But others, in the lowest level of readiness, took several weeks to
get up to strength as reservists joined groups already in place.

The pace of the mobilization was slower than some analysts might have expected.
B ut that, too, underlined a fundamental Soviet military prin ciple: that Moscow
and not the adversary will determine the time and place of the conflict.

First Troops Went by Air

The first of the 85,000 troops went in by air, but the traffic soon overwhelmed
the capacity of the airfields and their air-traffic controllers. Then the
Russians reverted to taking trains to the border and trucks the rest of the way,
only to have the troops come under sniper fire or to be ambushed.

''It was,'' said a Vietnam veteran, ''a helluva introduction to the country.''
The initial plan was to win the hearts and minds of the Afghans, but the people
soon made clear they were not receptive. The Soviet Army switched to
search-and-destroy tactics, and the troubles increased as it became clear that
the army was not trained for what was known in Vietnam as counterinsurgency.

For one thing, many of the reserve units called to duty came from Moslem regions
of the Soviet Union. Soviet officers soon found them reluctant to engage the
Moslems of Afghanistan. Those troops then had to be replaced with units from
other parts of the Soviet Union, mostly led by Russian officers.

In addition, the Soviet Army employed assault helicopters for the first time and
ran into trouble in the mounta inous terrain. Copying the United States, which
led the way in devel oping helicopters and air assault tactics in Vietnam, the
Russians found they lacked the experience to be effective. Some Soviet helic
opters were actually shot down by Afghan gunners firing down on th em from the
mountains.

Ran Into Trouble With Tanks

The Soviet Army has had far more experience with tanks but there again they ran
into trouble. The weapons quickly got hemmed in by the Afghan mountains, being
confined to the few main roadways.

The consequence was the classic standoff in which the Soviet Army controlled the
cities and the roads by day but the insurgents controlled the mountain villages
and the roads by night.

That led the Soviet leaders to begin brutal search-and-destroy tactics, using
helicopter assault troops, mountain troops and gunships to wipe out villages,
burn crops, and drive off livestock.

Moreover, the gunships have followed the stream of refugees both inside
Afghanistan and into Pakistan.  As the Soviet pilots, some of them flying
helicopters with Afghan markings, have adapted to the rugged terrain, they have
begun sowing antipersonnel mines, severely cutting into the Afghans' ability to
move at night. During the day, the insurgents have learned how to skirt the
mines.

Evidence Gas Was Used

Circumstantial evidence shows that the Soviet Army, particularly in the early
days of the search-and-destroy strategy, dropped cannisters of gas into villages
and onto suspected insurgent hideouts in the mountains.

Since the nationalists had no gas masks and were inexperienced in evading the
gas, it drove them into the open or made them so sick they were ineffective and
demoralized.

Despite the incessant pounding, the insurgents have proved to be resilient. That
has forced the Russians to become an army of occupation, stationing troops in
fire bases from which they sortie whenever the insurgents appear.

But, the analysts here said, there appears to be little evidence that the Soviet
Union is willing to apply the military power necessary to crush the insurgents.
On the other hand, the analysts have seen no military of political evidence that
the Soviet Army is preparing to withdraw.

''Afghanistan,'' said a veteran analyst, ''has become a good training ground for
Russian lieutenants.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SERGEANTS GIVE YOUNG SOLDIERS A POOR RATING

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 956 words

DATELINE: FORT CAMPBELL, Ky.


The sergeant major and the first sergeants in one air assault battalion here
were unanimous in asserting that too many young soldiers today were immature,
poorly educated or unwilling to accept discipline.

The top sergeants contended, moreover, that the causes of those faults lay far
beyond the gates of this post, home of the famed 101st Airborne Division.

''We receive our raw materials from society,'' said Sgt. Maj.  Harold D. Beck.
On the other hand, the first sergeants reported an improvement in the quality of
junior noncommissioned officers who lead squads and fire teams. And they agreed
that first sergeants have never been reluctant to criticize and that the
majority of their men were good soldiers.

120 Years of Service

It has been axiomatic since the days of George Washington that the first
sergeants of the United States Army run the Army day to day, know more about
what is really going on in the ranks than anyone else and have a reputation for
straight, unadorned talk. Sergeant Major Beck and the five first sergeants of
the Second Battalion, 503d Infantry, who have among them 120 years of service,
kept that reputation untarnished in a recent day of conversation.

In the continuing debate over the ability of the armed forces to defend the
nation, a critical issue has been the quality of manpower in the military
services, particularly in the Army.

The first sergeants, who serve in a battalion that is like many others in the
Army, were quick to point out the shortcomings of the young men joining their
unit.

As a visitor walked into the orderly room, First Sgt. Douglas R.  Smith of B
Company turned from chewing out a private who could not stand guard because he
had been intoxicated over the weekend to complain that the soldier, like others
in his company, was immature.

Motivation Called 'Haphazard'

''The motivation of young soldiers is haphazard,'' he said. ''Some are good,
some are not so good.'' He added that ''some of these guys, when they hit a hard
spot, they'll take off,'' dropping out of the Army.

First Sgt. John C. Whitmore of C Company said that a number of his soldiers,
including some who were high school graduates, ''couldn't live up to what's
expected of infantry soldiers.''

''It go es b ack to their home training,'' the sergeant said. ''They are not
train ed to take the demanding responsibility that this way oflife places o n
people.''

First Sgt. Thomas S. Loving of Headquarters Company said he recently helped
discharge six medics, who are usually handpicked.  ''They were unsuitable,'' he
said. ''They should not have been in the service in the first place.''

'Not Disciplined to Learn'

A common argument in the military debate is that weapons and equipment have
become too complicated for the average new soldier.  Sergeant Whitmore disagreed
that the problem lay in the weapons: ''A lot people cannot comprehend what they
read. They have not been disciplined to learn.''

The first sergeant of the Combat Support Company, Joseph A.  Robinson, had the
same view. ''We're getting a lot of people not educated enough for what we
need,'' he said. ''The kids can't understand what's going on even though we've
reverted to comic book training manuals.''

On the brighter side, First Sgt. Edmund L. Torres of A Company said: ''We are
bringing back the noncommissioned officers. We are getting back some of the
power we used to have.''

The first sergeants agreed that the quality of noncommissioned officers declined
in the war in Vietnam when too many officers tried to do sergeants' jobs and in
the years afterward when many good noncommissioned officers left the Army.
Some of Problem Linked to Money

Sergeant Smith said that junior noncommissioned officers, the sergeants who lead
squads and teams, ''are learning what to do, where to go to solve problems.''
''They're coming along,'' he said.
The first sergeants also linked some of the manpower problems to mo ney.
Sergeant Smith said that the recent military pay increase, in tended to enlist
and keep good people in the service, ''will serve it s purpose - providing it's
not the last one.''

Sgt. Maj. Beck was less hopeful: ''When we got the 11.7 percent pay raise, the
civilian community put up prices 12 percent. Some of the prices went up 30 days
before.''

Noting that many soldiers were eligible for food stamps, Sergeant Major Beck
said: ''A soldier should not have to apply for food stamps. He's in an honorable
profession, not a job.''

Sergeant Whitmore said that pride had kept at least two of his soldiers from
applying for food stamps. ''I had to get right down on them and tell them to
go,'' he said. Sergeant Loving added: ''It's been slow going. But when the
troops start looking around and seeing who's on stamps, they get going.''

Sergeant Torres contended that training had suffered from a lack of money,
reducing the amount of practice that young soldiers get in helicopter assaults
or firing live ammunition. ''We need that realism,'' he said. ''We need to get
that guy out there to put the round in the tube and fire it. We need that now.
Yesterday was too late.''

Sergeant Torres also said that too much equipment was old and worn. Sergeant
Major Beck agreed, saying, ''We can put a man on the moon and talk to him but we
can't even talk across this post on our old radios.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THICH THIEN-AN

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 122 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Nov. 27


Dr. Thich Thien-An, who founded the first Vietnamese Buddhist Temple in the
United States and became a patriarch and spokesman for refugees from Indochina,
died last Sunday at a hospital here after a brief illness. He was 54 years old.

Mr. Thien-An came to the United States in 1966 as a visiting languages professor
at the University of California at Los Angeles and later became a philosophy
professor at Los Angeles City College.

After the North Viernamese took Saigon in 1975, he helped to relocate Asian
refugees who came to Los Angeles and personally sponsored 50. He founded the
Vietnamese Buddhist Temple of Los Angeles and was its supreme abbot when he
died.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: TOM COBLE'S 'MOMA' STUDIES VIETNAM AFTERMATH

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 689 words


''MOMA,'' by Tom Coble, is a modest play. Three characters - a mother, son and
daughter -beat against life and sometimes against one another, and, dramatically
speaking, there is not much more to it than that. Ostensibly, the play is about
the aft ermath of the Vietnamwar, but Mr.  Coble is such a skillful writer -and
his play has been so well serve d by its cast - that it has resonances perhaps
beyond what even Mr.  Coble intended. ''Moma,'' which is at the 3 Muses Theater
in th e Ansonia Hotel, is a rich work, stuffed with hope, painand a feeling
about the inexorability of life.

Mr. Coble's characters are wounded, of course. The son, whose leg was shot off
in Vietnam, drives a taxi in New York. When we meet him he is offering up a
long, boozy monologue, and trying to call his mother. The mother, a crippled
arthritic, lives with her married daughter in Pacific Grove, Calif. The daughter
copes - with the mother, her own children, and life in Pacific Grove. A seedy
ordinariness is everywhere.

Then, in a flashback to the day that President Carter granted amnesty to draft
evaders, we learn that another brother had fled to Sweden rather than fight in
Vietnam, and that on the eve of the amnesty he died of an overdose of drugs. His
shadow, and the senselessness of his death, hangs over his survivors.

A striking thing about this is that Mr. Coble is dealing in cliches. The church
has failed the family. The disabled brother who survives was once a football
hero. The family had fled to California when the father deserted it in Maryland.
Still, the church is always failing, and rootlessness in America is a story told
and retold. A disabled veteran who was once a football hero (Mr. Coble has the
temerity to have him say he loved to dance, too) is the stuff of daytime
television. Mr. Coble is dealing with familar stuff.

But when the brother, brilliantly played by Pat Legere, cries out in his
drunkenness, ''There's something good in this world. There's something good.
Where is it?'' it is an authentic yelp of despair.  When the mother, played with
wonderful sensitivty by Lorraine Spritzer, pleads, ''Please, God, help me. I
don't want to be a burden on my children,'' it is the cry of a woman torn
between love and pain. There is scarcely a false note anywhere in ''Moma.'' It
is a cliche made real; maybe it is what our lives are about.

Meanwhile, there is Mr. Legere, giving a beautifully controlled performance. His
dispair is evident: his violence is coiled, unloosed in spurts. One moment he
clenches his fist, and we wait for him to strike the telephone. He does not; he
opens his hand and lets it flutter to rest. Then we sigh with relief; the
clenched fist has been like a time bomb, and unwittingly we have listened to the
ticking.

Midway through the same monologue, Mr. Legere stands on his head while he
speaks. In another actor, in another performance, this would be bravado, or
simple acrobatics. In some subtle alchemy, however, Mr. Legere has turned the
headstand into a display of menace. He is not showing off; it is authentic to
his character. It is also harrowing to watch.

''Moma'' goes a little thin early in the second act. There is too much yelling,
and more histrionics than substance. The sister, who is movingly and
intelligently played by Mary Anisi, is made to carry more of the play then than
she should. Forgive Mr. Coble and Joe Nikola, the director, for this; they more
than prove themselves elsewhere.

The mother, incidentally, is called Moma, which is only an eccentric spelling of
Momma, or Mama. On the night ''Moma'' opened, there were perhaps 10 people in
the audience at the 3 Muses. At the final preview, there were five. This play
deserves better than that.

3 Against Life
MOMA, by Tom Coble; directed by Joe Nikola; lighting and set designer, Steve M.
Curt; stage manager, Don Buschmann; costumes, Joan Harris. Presented by M.W.A.J.
At the Three Muses Theater, 73d Street and Broadway Moma
................................Lorraine Spritzer Johnny Gamble
..............................Pat Legere Jean Duckworth
.............................Mary Anisi

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Revie

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 29, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PERSIAN GULF WAR: NO RESOLUTION IS IN SIGHT;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 934 words


As the war between Iraq and Iran lapses into a struggle broken by spasms of
activity on the ground and sporadic air raids, analysts in Washington and other
Western capitals are attempting to chart the conflict's future.

Agreement is general that although the level of fighting may be slowly reduced
in the next month, no early end to the war can be expected as long as the
Iraqis, who hold the edge, follow their present tactics.

With these tactics of prudence, there are no sudden thrusts across country or
pincer movements around enemy forces. The Iraqi high command is content to
hammer at Abadan and Ahwaz with shellfire, to harass Dizful with missiles and to
send two or three MIG's on raids against targets outside the battle zone that
are known to be short on antiaircraft defenses.

These ''safe and sure'' tactics irritate many Iraqi troop commanders, according
to senior analysts. These officers, reporting the dissolution of Iranian forces,
believe that a more ambitious strategy could end the war soon.

2 Reasons for Iraqi Tactics

Their arguments have not moved the high command for two related reasons. The
first is that such tactics would increase the loss of life among Iraqi soldiers,
on whose loyalty the regime rests. The second is that a high percentage of the
Iraqi rank and file are Shiites, the sect of Islam that dominates Iran.

Under present battle conditions the loyalty of the Shiite soldiers is not in
question, although there is evidence that the command has weeded out some from
front-line units. But the Government would expect a serious situation to arise,
a NATO intelligence officer said, if many Shiites were killed fighting their
religious brothers from Iran.

The effect, the source said, would be bad both for the army and for public
opinion represented by the families of the fallen soldiers.

Earlier in the war, which began on Sept. 22, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq
announced that the economic strangulation of Iran was not his object. Instead,
he said, he wanted a negotiated peace that would deal primarily with Iraqi
rights in the Shatt al Arab, the waterway that separates the two countries at
the head of the Persian Gulf.

Iran's Economy Deteriorating

At this stage of the war, analysts said, the Iraqis are much closer to the
economic strangulation of Iran than they are to negotiation.  The divided
Government in Teheran, in which the clericalparty appears to have the upper
hand, has refused all proposals for negotiation e ven though the country's
economy is deteriorating rapidly.

The one source of crude oil left to Iran, either because of an Iraqi oversight
or because the generals do not think it worth the effort, is the pipeline that
runs east and north from Ahwaz to the refineries in Isfahan and Teheran.
According to British sources, the production at those refineries keeps Iran's
war effort going.

That effort, such as it is, suffers increasingly from divisions in the
Government and antagonism between regular troops and revolutionary guards, who,
though ardent, lack training.

There are reliable reports that in many cases the guards have taken over tanks,
missile batteries and heavy artillery from regular formations but have been
unable to use them because of their lack of training. This apparently was
especially true in Abadan, according to a United States source. The
revolutionary guard units are still holding out in the ruins of the refinery,
but they are armed with no more than automatic rifles and machine guns and their
numbers are being steadily reduced by Iraqi shelling.

What remains of the regular army in Khuzistan is concentrated around Dizful and
strung out in posts along the foothills of the Zagros Mountains guarding the
road to Teheran. Except for some longrange shelling and a few air attacks, these
forcees have been left alone by the Iraqis, who are concentrating on oil
installations to the south.
Alternatives for Iran

American analysts who know Iran and its people are puzzled that Teheran has not
taken the only course open now that conventional forces have failed to drive
back the Iraqis. That course they see as guerrilla war.

Possibly because of the American experience in Vietnam, many veterans of that
conflict appear to exaggerate the effectiveness of guerrilla operations in much
different situations.

NATO officers who know the region said that although a guerrilla war could make
things uncomfortable for the Iraqis, it would not drive them out of Khuzistan.
That can be done, they said, only by regular divisions.

This they regard as unlikely because of the shortage of transport, which pins
most of the regular army in the north and northeast of Iran. If the Iranian
Government offers only a minor military threat to the Iraqi occupation of
Khuzistan, analysts are increasingly worried over the prospect that it may widen
the war deliberately.

British sources are convinced that the two attacks by Iranian Air Force jets on
a Kuwaiti frontier post were deliberate. The post, they reported, is in the open
desert miles from any military objective.  The reasons for the attack, the
sources suggested, was to warn Kuwait not to allow its ports to be used for the
transshipment of military supplies for Iraq.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 29, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Sports of The Times;
Army-Navy and Other Battlefields

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 981 words


IT was in the Central Highlands of Vietnam that Rollie Stichweh realized just
how much the Army-Navy football game meant to people from the two academies.

Three years earlier, he had been the quarterback of the Army team that defeated
Roger Staubach, after five straight losses to Navy. But in 1967, he was an
officer in Vietnam, near the borders of Laos and Cambodia, in a war getting
worse all the time.

''Vietnam was so realistic,'' he recalled yesterday from his home in New Canaan,
Conn. ''You were in a whole different world. Most of the time you were fighting
off boredom. Then all of a sudden you saw a fair amount of activity.

''When the Army-Navy game came around in November, you became very cognizant of
it. The game gave you an anchor; it focused your thinking; you felt l ike a
participant.''

On one hand, Stichweh could see the game as merely a diversion compared with the
life-and-death reality around him. On the other hand, he could better appreciate
the intensity of that diversion, judging from his interest in that distant game.

Not that he had ever failed to be impressed by it.  ''When I was playing, I
sensed I was experiencing an important moment in my life. People were quite
overt about it. I was the quarterback, and the game naturally focuses on the
quarterback.  People expect the quarterback to execute, and also provide
something known as leadership.''

At West Point, they take leadership seriously. People would come up to Rollie
Stichweh and say: ''We're counting on you; it's up to you; this is our last
chance.''

After serving five years in the service (early in 1968 his unit was pinned down
on Hill 875 during the Tet offensive), Stichweh is now a partner in Towers,
Perrin, Forster & Crosby, a management consulting firm. He is still ''held in
reserve'' by West Point to help recruit somebody who may be thinking of serving
the minimum hitch and then going into another profession. Certainly Stichweh and
his longtime friend Roger Staubach are good examples of men who took up second
careers.

Stichweh thinks the intensity is felt at the academies today, as Army battles
Navy in Philadelphia.  ''I hesitate to use the word 'hatred,' '' he said, ''but
Navy dominates your thinking all year round. In the week prior to the game, it
is a minute-by-minute event. Professors make references to it. Physically, you
are aware of banners hanging everywhere. Every night there is a rally, and they
ask you to say a few words.

''The feeling for Navy is very strong. It is a long 11-plus months if you lose.
On a number of occasions, you'd mix company with friends from Navy, and you'd be
aware if you had lost.''

This year's circumstances - Navy has a 7-3 record, Army is 3-6 with a tie -
reminds Stichweh of his football career. In his junior year Navy was ranked
second in the nation but was leading by only 21-15 as Stichweh moved Army to the
1-yard line in the closing seconds. The game ended as he tried to ask an
official to call time because the players could not hear his signals. ''I'll
never forget our captain, Dick Nowak, coming up to me,'' Stichweh said, '' tears
in his eyes, the whole melodrama, saying, 'We never beat t hem the whole time I
washere. You've got to do it next year.' ''

And 16 years later, Stichweh recalls how, because of injuries to other players,
he had to play 55 minutes of quarterback and safety in his senior game against
Staubach, and how Army beat Navy, 11-8.

''I'll never forget the feeling of vindication,'' he said. ''I remember walking
around the empty stadium with my folks, long after it was dark, just a few
people sweeping up. That was the most important celebration. Then we went back
to the Ben Franklin Hotel for other parties.''

Back at West Point the following Monday, Stichweh learned what a victory over
Navy could mean for cadets: Christmas leave was moved up a couple of days, and
all punishment duties were canceled.

He thinks the elation will be the same today, and he knows what a victory over
Navy might mean to the players later in life.

A thoughtful man, who chose West Point after careful consideration of Ivy League
and other top schools, Stichweh has always thrived under demanding conditions -
an aggressive high school coach at Mineola, L.I., (the late Bruce Gehrke); a
charismatic college coach (Paul Dietzel) and a war on foreign soil, where the
rules were less clear and the penalties more severe than they had been in the
final seconds of a football game.

''I feel very happy with my life, with my wife and daughters and my career,''
Stichweh said, ''but I've often wondered if I would have come that far if I
hadn't played in that game, in front of a hundred thousand fans, plus millions
on national television, and all that pressure from the Academy.''

He says he never fully understood the hold of the Army-Navy game until the fall
of 1967 in Vietnam, where he found himself caught up in that distant game.

''I remember some of the telegrams I received in 1964,'' Stichweh said
yesterday. ''Former Coach Red Blaik; Biff Jones, another former coach; Gen.
Lawton Collins; Gen. Bruce Clarke; Gen. Anthony C.  McAuliffe. They all cared
enough to send telegrams, and that reinforced us.

''At the time, I just thought how nice it was for them to do it. I didn't
realize how important the game was to them. So even though we were way up in the
Central Highlands, I found a way of sending a message to the coaches and the
players in 1967. I had been on the receiving end. Now I wanted them to know how
much it mattered.''

And still matters to him. Although he has not attended a game in several years,
Stichweh said he would arrange to be home this afternoon - no big party, just he
and his wife, Carole, and perhaps their three daughters - in front of the
television set, rooting for Army to beat Navy, just as he rooted in 1967 from a
very different vantage point.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Rollie Stichweh

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

$40 BILLION IS URGED TO MODERNIZE ARMY

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1274 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 29


Gen. Edward C. Meyer, the Army Chief of Staff, says it would cost more than $40
billion above planned expenditures over the next five years to build the Army
into a modern and flexible force capable of meeting a Soviet threat in Europe
and other dangers in the Persian Gulf, Korea or Latin America.

In a wide-ranging interview about his vision for the Army, General Meyer said:
''I think the biggest challenge that I face and the Army faces, and one on which
I think we're beginning to make some headway, is insuring that the Army is
flexible enough to respond to challenges around the world without losing its
focus on the Central European demands.''

The cost of weapons, equipment and transport to achieve that flexibility would
be about $33 billion, General Meyer said, with $8 billion to $10 billion more to
man the force. That would total about 18 percent more than currently planned.

Defense of the Estimates

The general asserted that his figures were realistic and ''doable,'' adding,
''That's within the state of current facilities; for instance, increasing XM-1
tank production, bringing in air defense systems at an increased rate,
maximizing our antitank capabilities.''

The most immediate problem is manning. General Meyer urged that the G.I. Bill of
educational benefits be resumed to attract enlistments, that career sergeants be
better paid to keep them in the service, and that 20,000 civilians be hired to
free soldie rs for military training.

In an effort to increase pride, the general announced yesterday that
paratroopers would be permitted to don the red berets that paratroopers around
the world cherish. Distinctive accoutrements may be ordered for other combat
forces later.

General Meyer did not recommend resuming the draft but said that a short-term
draft to fill the reserves might have to be considered.  A transition team for
President-elect Ronald Reagan has asked each of the military services to
describe what its leaders think they need to fulfill their missions. In the
campaign, Mr. Reagan advocated substantial increases in military spending but
never gave any figures. Senior members of the transition team declined this week
to set a precise figure for increases until they had completed their budget
review.

General Meyer, who became Chief of Staff 18 months ago, has said that his forces
within the United States constitute a ''hollow army.'' It has not been able to
attract enough high school graduates and suffers from a shortage of 7,100 senior
sergeants. Much of its weaponry is old.

One potential difference with the new administration emerged in General Meyer's
call for hiring civilians to replace soldiers. Mr.  Reagan has said he will
impose a Government hiring freeze and seek to cut Federal employment.

General Meyer said, however, that the Defense Department's civilian manpower was
down relative to that in other Government agencies. ''So there's a strong case
to be made for that,'' he said.  The civilians would be used for clerical,
administrative, supply and other functions largely in garrison life.

End of Musclebound Force

When General Meyer became Chief of Staff, the Army was becoming a heavy,
musclebound armored force designed almost exclusively to fight on the plain s of
Central Europe. But he said, ''We've stopped that now.''

The new emphasis, he said, is on flexibility. ''Flexibility for the future is
written into the design of forces that are able to respond to the Soviet mobile
threat in Central Europe and equally able to respond to threats outside that
area,'' he said.

To have a division that can do both, he continued, ''means that it has to be
light and strategically mobile.'' Testing of concepts, organization, and
equipment for such a division is currently under way at Fort Lewis, Wash.

Over the next five years, General Meyer said, the Army should end up with 10 of
its 16 divisions as heavy divisions relying mainly on armor. Five others will be
light and will rely on speed, mobility and precision firepower, all of which
requires a high degree of technology. The Second Division, in South Korea, will
fall someplace between the two.

Need for Light Divisions

The light divisions, including three Marine divisions, would also be useful in
Europe, the General said. ''Today you can't use the mobility of your mechanized
force. You fit them in place and make pillboxes out of them because you don't
have light forces to fill in those placeswhere you really need to sit and
hold.''

General Meyer disagreed with Congressional rumblings that the new rapid
deployment force, which includes three Army divisions, should be turned over to
the Marine Corps. ''When I look around the world at the areas where we are going
to need land forces, there is so much to do that I just don't see any need for
conflict between the Army and the Marine Corps,'' he said.

''The way the defense establishment is today, there's no one service that can
take any one mission completely,'' he contended.  ''Wherever the Marines go,
we're charged with providing them with sustaining capability.''

''Those are arguments of those who are overly parochial and don't understand
that there's a role for every one of the services,'' he said. ''If you didn't
have that integration, you'd have to duplicate capabilities and that would be
wasting dollars.''

Changes After Vietnam

When General Meyer took command, the Army was still suffering from the trauma of
Vietnam and from the difficulties of shifting to a volunteer service from a
conscripted Army. To overcome that, General Meyer said he set out ''to create a
climate in the Army in which each individual has the opportunity to develop his
full potential.''

He propounded four values: cohesion within small units, loyalty to the Army,
personal responsibility and selfless service. To achieve that, he has moved on
several fronts at once, but with varying success.

General Meyer said he was ''upset'' when he heard soldiers say ''that they have
not been challenged when they've gone through their individual training, basic
trainin g.'' Theref ore, he said, ''we're going to make it tougher and that
means physi cally, mentally, and we're going to make it tougher in discipline.
''

A longer and more demanding basic training schedule has already started and
should be fully working next year.  General Meyer said the Army was trying to
lay out clearly the responsibilities of sergeants and junior officers.  A
critical move, which General Meyer ordered early this year, was to have
battalion commanders serve in that job, perhaps the most demanding in the Army,
for about 30 months instead of the 12 months they served before.

But the move has caused problems, which General Meyer acknowledged, because
fewer lieutenant colonels have the chance to command. He said he had to find
ways to make ''people see alternate opportunities for them to get ahead aside
from command.''

Perhaps the biggest change, which is just beginning, is to try to keep units
together for several years instead of constantly shuttling soldiers, sergeants
and officers in and out of them. That will take several years to accomplish.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BREZEZINSKI CALLS DEMOCRATS SOFT TOWARD MOSCOW

BYLINE: By RICHARD BURT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1290 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 29


Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Carter's national security adviser, says the
Presidential election demonstrated that the Democratic Party must abandon what
he called its escapist approach to dealing with the expansion of Soviet power
and influence.

''I think the Democratic Party damages itself when it moves excessively to the
left and if it becomes excessively preoccupied with what might be called the
do-gooders agenda in international affairs,'' Mr. Brzezinski said yesterda y in
an interview that touchedon his experi ence in the White House and his thoughts
about the future.

Saying that President-elect Ronald Reagan's victory showed that the country was
ready to support ''a policy of assertive competition'' with the Soviet Union,
Mr. Brzezinski said that in the last four years many Democrats were traumatized
by the experience of the Vietnam War because their party ''was responsible for
the policies that produced the debacle.''

But he expressed concern over what he described as the nostalgic desire of some
Republicans for military superiority. He said it would be a mistake for a Reagan
administration to try to replace Mr.  Carter's measured effort to expand the
American presence in the Persian Gulf with a drive to build military bases and
station troops there.

Discussing the Carter Administration's approach to foreign policy, Mr.
Brzezinski said that he and the President had tried to combine a new concern for
human rights with an effort to revive American power.

But he asserted that his attempts to expand military strength had encountered
''a great deal of opposition within the Administration'' and within ''a party
which was automatically fearful that any emphasis on competition meant you were
wanting to revive the cold war.''

Mr. Brzezinski said that after leaving the White House he would be active in
academic work and in public affairs. He said he would probably resume teaching
at Columbia Univesity but would also establish what he called a ''base'' for
himself in Washington.

A longtime Democrat, Mr. Brzezinski said, ''I'm going to remain active in the
mainstream of American political life,'' adding, ''That's where I believe the
Democratic Party ought to be.''

When he entered the White House as national security adviser in 1977, he said he
wanted to serve as a low-profile policy coordinator. But he emerged as one of
the visible figures in the Administration, usually advocating a firmer approach
to dealing with the Soviet Union than that favored by other foreign policy
aides.
Ogaden Is Linked to Arms Pact

As an example of the United States' failure to ''compete assertively'' with the
Soviet Union, Mr. Brzezinski cited what he termed the lack of an American
response to Moscow's military involvement on the side of Ethiopia in the war
against Somalia in Ogaden in 1978. He said the lack of response may have doomed
the strategic arms limitation treaty when it reached the Senate last year.

''One of the shorthand formulas that I've used is 'SALT lies buried in the sands
of Ogaden,' '' he said. ''The argument that this phrase is meant to capsulate is
that, unless we stand up to the Soviet drive by proxy soon enough, we'll not do
well in the competition and we will lose chances for effective cooperation.''

Mr. Brzezinski attributed the lack of response to the fact that ''the country,
as a whole, fatigued by the Vietnamese War,'' was not ready to confront the
Soviet Union.

''I think it would be greatly unfair to bla me the Administration,'' he said,
''although there w ere people in the Administration who were inclined to label
any emphasis on competition as a manifestation of a cold war mentality.''

He said his most ''genuine regret'' was that he had not been given an
opportunity to ''engage the Soviet leadership in a wide-ranging, broad strategic
discussion.'' Instead, he said, Soviet-American discussions tended to be narrow
and technical, focusing ''much more on the litigation of issues,'' an apparent
allusion to the negotiating style of Cyrus R. Vance, the former Secretary of
State.

While reiterating his support for the strategic arms treaty now in the Senate,
Mr. Brzezinski seemed to endorse Mr. Reagan's recent support for the concept
called ''linkage''. Arms agreements must be viewed in the context of Soviet
attempts to exploit regional tensions in such areas as the Persian Gulf, Mr.
Brzezinski said.

''If we had SALT in that context,'' he said, ''I would have considered that a
positive step, but I would have worried about exaggerating the political
significance to the point that we would become insensitive to the strategic
challenge.''

Mr. Brzezinski called the treaty ''a valuable accomplishment,'' but said the
Carter Administration had made more important gains in other areas, particularly
in relations with China.

''The opening of the relationship with China ushered in a new historical era in
the Far East,'' he said. ''The normalization of relations and the beginning of a
dialogue with them on geopolitical and strategic issues greatly improves
America's security position in the world.''

Other areas where he said he had played a useful role were Mr.  Carter's deci
sions to develop new weapons, such as the proposed MX mobile missil e, and to
approve a new targeting strategy against the Soviet Union, giving greater
emphasis to military targets.

''The third area in which I feel I made a contribution is an ongoing area,
namely, the shaping of a regional security framework for the Persian Gulf-Indian
Ocean area,'' he said.

He called the Administration's drive to build up American power in the area a
legacy for Mr. Reagan to build on.  Describing his own emergence as a central
figure in foreign policy, Mr. Brzezinski said it was ''very largely a byproduct
of the dominant role played by the President himself,'' and added:

''A President that is dominant and active in foreign affairs is bound to have
someone next to him who helps him exercise that dominance.

Asked why he had become an unpopular figure, particularly in Democratic Party
circles, Mr. Brzezinski replied: ''Because I think that many of the things that
I stood for are unpopular among what is, I think, very much a minority of the
American public, and now a minority of the Democratic Party. It is not a popular
thing to remind people that power is important, that it has to be applied, that
sometimes decisions which are not fully compatible with our concepts of what the
world ideally ought to be like need to be taken.''

Reflecting on future foreign policy choices, he said the United States should
avoid both nostalgia and escapism.  ''It is nostalgia to speak of American
superiority,'' he said, alluding to statements made by Mr. Reagan and other
Republicans during the campaign. ''It is, at the same time, escapism to feel the
United States can avoid the responsibilities of power.''

Power, he continued, ''has to be sustained, cultivated and, when need be,
applied so that others find it to be credible. There is a segment of the
American body politic which wishes to escape from that reality.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Zbigniew Brzezinski

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POLICY SHIFT URGED BY REFUGEE OFFICIAL

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 981 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 29


The admission of refugees from the Caribbean and Central America to the United
States should be substantially increased as the reset tlement of refugees fr om
Southeast Asia slows, says Victor H. Palmieri, United States coordinator for
refugeeaffairs.

''There is a crisis right on our doorstep of persons fleeing for their lives
from neighboring countries,'' said Mr. Palmieri, who coordinates nearly $1
billion in Federal spending on refugees at homeand abroad.

In an interview yesterday at his State Department office, Mr.  Palmieri said the
refugee crisis in the Caribbean and Central America was most evident in the
growing flight of refugees from Haiti.  Fleeing their island homeland in small
boats, they have flooded into other Caribbean nations and South Florida, where
10,000 have arrived in the last year.

Prime Minister Lynden O. Pindling of the Bahamas has ordered an estimated 40,000
Haitians without legal residence to leave the island by Jan. 18 or face arrest
and deportation. The recent eviction of 100 Haitians from a small Bahamian
island by club-wielding policemen drew attention to the problem when the
incident was televised by American networks.

Reasons for Haitian Exodus

United States diplomats in Nassau and Port-au-Prince, the Haitian capital, have
been instructed to try to establish an orderly process, with international help,
for the return of deported Haitians.  Officials here are afraid that mass
evictions would lead many Haitians in the Bahamas to seek asylum in Florida.

Mr. Palmieri said that the Haitian exodus of recent years was caused by a
combination of rapid population growth, economic decline and political
repression. And with such Central American countries as El Salvador and
Guatemala torn by conflict between left-wing guerrillas and government security
forces, the number of political refugees from this region could be expected to
rise, he added.

''Many of these people are entering the United States through Mexico as
undocumented migrants, or are among the millions who come here with tourist
visas and remain illegally,'' Mr. Palmieri said.

The Immigration and Naturalization Service has so little effective control over
visa entrants that, of eight million people who entered the United States on
temporary visas in 1978, only 1.5 million can be certified to have left.

The treatment of refugees is only one aspect of United States immigration
policy, which is undergoing a major review now from a select committee that is
expected to submit a report to Congress early next year for legislative changes.


Reagan Policies Awaited

President-elect Ronald Reagan's transition team has not yet released
recommendations on dealing with refugees or illegal immigrants. In his
successful campaign for the Presidency, Mr. Reagan generally advocated the
issuance of temporary, renewable visas to allow Mexican laborers to legally work
in the United States. The Republican nominee also criticized President Carter
for halting the ''freedom flotilla'' of refugees from Cuba.

Refugee resettlement in the United States in the last few years has been
strongly influenced by the resettlement of refugees from Southeast Asia who fled
after 1975, when the United States withdrew from Vietnam and Cambodia.

Last September the President asked Congress to approve the spending of $555
million for the resettlement of 217,000 refugees in the coming year. Of this
total 168,000, or 77 percent, are people who have fled Communist regimes in
Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia to camps in Thailand. Only 4,000 refugees from Latin
America are included among those likely to be admitted here next year.

Mr. Palmieri said that the flow of refugees from Indochina was ''winding down''
because the number of new refugees entering the camps was declining, and added
that the focus of resettlement plans should now shift to the Caribbean and
Central America.
Deportation Action Postponed

''I am convinced that it would serve us well to include Haitians in our refugee
programs,'' he said. ''I would also recommend that we offer Central Americans
temporary asylum and be prepared to offer resettlement opportunities.''

The Administration has postponed any deportation action on the Haitians, who are
arriving at a rate of 700 a week, while awaiting action by Congress on a bill
that would grant those already here the right to apply for permanent residence.

The Immigration and Naturalization Service was enjoined from deportation
proceedings by Federal District Judge James L. King of Miami in a ruling on July
2 that recognized a claim by 4,000 Haitian immigrants that they had improperly
been denied the right of asylum.

Judge King said that the Haitians, all of them black, were fleeing ''the most
repressive government in the Ameri cas,'' and added that the central issue was
whether the immigration service had exercised ''unlawful discrimination'' in
ruling against ''the first substantialflight of black refugees from a repressive
re gime to this country.''

Mr. Palmieri, a management consultant from Los Angeles, said that mot e than $1
billion should be spent to improve control over the admission of migrant workers
into the United States, particularly from Mexico.

He also maintained that the refugee problem reflected situations that
''challenge our most fundamental humanitarian and political values,'' and said
the regulation of immigration would be strengthened by an orderly refugee
resettlement program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MORE HEALTH FUNDS FOR CHILDREN URGED

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 35, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 884 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 29


Despite an expected tightening of Federal spending for social programs next
year, an 18-month study recently completed by a select panel mandated by
Congress urges that $4.6 billion additional be spent annually on three programs
dealing with children's health.

The programs that the 17-member Select Panel for the Promotion of Child Health
will recommend Tuesday to Congress are Federal aid to assure universal access to
family planning services, prenatal and maternity care, and health care for the
first five years of a child's life, said Lizbeth Bamberger Schorr, chairman of
the panel.

The $800,000 study will make those recommendations on the eve of a new
administration and new Congress that are pledged to increase military spending
while cutting the costs of social programs.

''It soon became evident that our very mandate was bucking widespread feelings
of alienation from Government, and a rising tide of cynicism and hostility
toward all social programs,'' the committee said in its report, to be delivered
to health subcommittees of both the House and Senate, which are expected to hold
hearings on the recommendations.

'Investment in Future'

The panel argued that spending money on children's health was compatible with
fiscal conservativism. ''What we offer is a prospectus for a sound investment in
America's future, in economic as well as social terms,'' the panel said in its
three-volume, 1,500-page report. ''Healthy children represent a major economic
asset.''

The panel does not expect speedy implementation of its recommendations. ''I
don't think any of us are kidding ourselves,'' Mrs. Schorr said. Other panel
members included Surgeon General Julius B. Richmond, Mitchell I. Ginsberg, who
is the dean of the Columbia University School of Social Work, and physicians,
health administrators, psychologists and social workers.

''Even if Jimmy Carter had been re-elected in a landslide,'' Mrs.  Schorr said,
''we wouldn't be seeing this implemented in the next two years. A lot of the
usefulness of this report will bear fruit in a decade.''

Mrs. Schorr, a former consultant to the Children's Defense Fund, said that the
panelists agreed that the three programs ''were so essential to good health''
that there was no reason for anyone who needed them to be denied access.

She listed the projected annual costs for the programs as $2 billon for
universal prenatal care, $2.4 billion for comprehensive care of children through
the age of five and $200 million for family planning.

Alabama Progress as Example

In Alabama, Mrs. Schorr said, the infant mortality rate among blacks has been
sharply reduced by providing universal prenatal care. She noted that 19 states
denied Medicaid funds for prenatal care. In 29 states, she said, Medicaid could
not be used to pay for health care of children in nuclear families. In other
states, poor families were ineligible for Medicaid because their incomes,
although low, were considered above the poverty level, which in Tennessee, for
example, was $2,400.

Mrs. Schorr said that the panel had found that health professionals tended to
emphasize the use of new technology at the expense of psychiatric and social
work. Technological devices were usually more costly and less time-consuming
than talking to children and their families to diagnose problems, she added.

The panel also noted that accidents, especially in motor vehicles, were the
leading cause of death and disability among children and adolescents, and urged
initiation of ''a major new national accidentprevention strategy.''

Another section of the report said, ''The critical role that nutrition plays in
health has not been adequately recognized by the health community generally,
including those whose principal focus is maternal and child health.''
Case Examples Cited

Much of the report dealt with improvin g the delivery and financing of health
care. Hospital-based group practices, publicly f inanced comprehensive care
facilities and closer ties to communiti es were among the recommendations.

''When we say that a large percentage of families will face financial barriers
to needed care, think about Roger Glover, Vietnam veteran from Beaufort, South
Carolina,'' Mrs. Schorr wrote in a letter that she said would accompany the
report. ''His 3-year-old son was seriously ill and needed hospitalization. He
told a hearing just three weeks ago about having to carry the boy, who by then
had a high fever, with him as he canvassed his relatives for money to cover the
pre-admission deposit of $60.

''Think about the woman with chronic hypertension in Alabama who, because she
could not afford hospital care, delivered her first three babies at home,'' she
continued in the letter. ''Two of them were born dead. In her fourth pregnancy,
she was refused admission to the hospital because she could not pay, and was not
eligible for Medicaid. The baby, born at home, survived but suffered
castastrophic brain damage.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DOROTHY DAY, OUTSPOKEN CATHOLIC ACTIVIST, DIES AT 83

BYLINE: By ALDEN WHITMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 45, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1783 words


Dorothy Day, a social activist in the United States for more than 50 years, died
yesterday at Maryhouse, the Catholic settlement house in Manhattan's Lower East
Side where she lived.  She was 83 years old.

Miss Day, who founded numerous homes for the poor and homeless, including
Maryhouse, at 55 East Third Street, and who was a cofounder of The Catholic
Worker, died after a long illness that had confined her to her room in recent
years, acccording to a spokesman for the home.

Because she was a nonviolent social radical of luminous personality as well as a
pious Roman Catholic, Dorothy Day played a seminal role in developing the social
and economic thinking of a generation of American priests and laymen.

The Catholic Worker Movement, which she helped found in 1933, was a precursor of
the activist movement that began to flower 35 years later.

Theologically Traditional

''When it comes to labor and politics,'' she once said, ''I am inclined to be
sympathetic to the left, but when it comes to the Catholic Church, then I am far
to the right.''

What she meant was that she was theologically and even liturgically traditional,
but radical in matters of social justice, race relations, pacifism and
conscientious objection to military service.

Attempting to sum up her movement some years ago, Miss Day remarked that she had
sought ''to work so as to bring about the kind of society where it is easier for
people to be good.''

''I think we're primarily trying to live our faith and we think in terms of man
showing his faith, his love of God, by his love of brother,'' she went on. ''We
are trying to live the Second Commandment and to fulfill the counsels of the
Gospel, not just the precepts.''

'A Christian Revolution'

Miss Day's anarchopacifism, spread by the monthly Catholic Worker and by her
tireless personal explanation, appealed to many middleclass intellectuals in the
church whose social liberalism emerged from the 1930's onward as a counterforce
to a largely conservative hierarchy.

''It was a Christian revolution she was starting,'' the Rev. Dennis Geaney
recalled, adding: ''She was opening the minds of bishops, priests, seminarians
and lay people to the fact that Christianity was not a stuffy sacristy affair.
She was a trumpet calling for all of us to find Christ in the bread lines, the
jails, a tenant farmer, migratory worker or Negro.''

Describing Miss Day as ''the inspiration behind the creative force of the
American Catholic left,'' the Rev. Raymond A. Schroth of George Washington
University counted among her ''children'' the Association of Catholic Trade
Unionists; John Cogley, the liberal intellectual; Michael Harrington, the
sociologist and writer; Thomas Merton, the Trappist author; David Miller, the
Vietnam War resister; the Rev. Daniel Berrigan and his brother, the Rev. Philip
Berrigan, foes of the Vietnam conflict; and Cesar Chavez, the union organizer.
In addition, her influence produced the so-called ''labor priests'' and affected
the thought of Msgr. Ivan Illich, the controversial educator.

Miss Day's secular radicalism, which looked to the person rather than to mass
action to transform society, had little in common with reform and did not seek
the overthrow of capitalism and its network of property relationships.

Opposed Class Politics

Although she defended individual Communists, some of whom remained close friends
after her conversion to Catholicism, Miss Day opposed class politics and class
struggle and Communist ideology.

This, along with her respect for ecclesiastical authority, explained her ability
to challenge the social conservatism of such hierarchs as the late Cardinal
Spellman and his chief of chancery, Bishop James Francis McIntyre, a Cardinal.
Both, it was said were often sorely tempted to rebuke Miss Day - her ardent
support of Catholic cemetery strikers a number of years ago especially irked
Cardinal Spellman - but they never could catch her in any breach of church
regulations. ''What would you do,'' she was asked, ''if the Cardinal ordered you
to stop publishing?''

''I would gladly obey,'' Mis s Day replied, adding after a moment and with a sm
ile, ''are many ways, you know, to handle a Cardinal.'' ''Besides, McIntyre was
afraid he just might be dealing with a saint,'' Jame s O'Gara, The Commonweal
editor, said recently. He was alluding to w hat has been called the gentle Miss
Day's ''indiscrimateand uncomprom osing love of the Mystical Body'' as well as
to her courage and h er care for the faceless poor in the hospices she
established i n New York and other cities.

Moreover, in sensitizing the conscience of the church to poverty and social
inequities, Miss Day could - and did - quote tellingly from such saints as
fRancis of Assisi. And she, of course, was not anticlerical. Indeed, an official
of the New York Archdiocese told one of her c ritics a couple of years ago, ''
Dorothy Day is first a Catholic and second a radical.''

'Tolerant of All'

She seemed to live without illusions about either people or human possibilities,
a close friend said recently.  ''This explained her indifference to ideology and
politics and her calm acceptance of clerical stupidity, venality and pettiness.
She was tolerant of all kinds of 'sin' - except pietism, unctiousness,
self-righteousness and, of course, injustice,'' the friend of many years
remarked.

Illustrative of Miss Day's reliance on spiritual weapons to achieve her goals
was her trip to Rome in 1966 when the bishops were debating the schema, ''The
Church and the Modern World.'' Miss Day let it be known that she was in Rome,
but she retired to a retreat house with some other women for 10 days of fasting
and prayer. She was convinced that the bishops' subsequent recognition of the
principle of conscientious objection owed something to the prayers. Although
Miss Day discerned virtues in mortification, she was also conscious of the power
of plain speaking. And her utterances, usuaslly soft in tone, sometimes shook up
church conservatives.  ''Why worry about empty schools, seminaries and even
rectories?'' she asked rhetorically in 1969, when many bishops were indeed
worried about such matters.  ''Maybe the Lord is giving us a little reminder
that there has been too much building going on, and that it is time to use some
of these buildings for the poor.''

Born in Brooklyn Nov. 8, 1897, she was the third of five children of John I. and
Grace Satterlee Day. Her father was a sports writer, and the family lived in
California and Chicago before migrating back to New York, where Mr. Day worked
for The Morning Telegraph. The family atmosphere was largely agnostic, affection
was restrained, and financial security teneded to be erratic.

She entered the University of Illinois in 1914 and joined the Socialist Party in
Urbana.  In college, she had an itch to write, and when the Days moved to New
York in 1916, Dorothy quit school to work for The Call, a New York Socialist
daily.

On The Call, Miss Day was caught up in the left-wing ideological debates of that
time, and she found herself much in sympathy with the free-wheeling syndicalism
of the Industrial Workers of the World (Wobblies) and with the nonviolent
anarchism of Leo Tolstoy.

In her work and ramblings around the Village she met Leon Trotsky; Robert Minor,
who was to become a Communist official; Hippolyte Havel, the anarchist who
boasted he had been in every jail in Europe; Frank Harris, the writer and
editor; Max Eastman, John Reed, Floyd Dell, and Merrill Rogers, all of The
Masses, the libertarian antiwar magazine.

Miss Day also met Mike Gold about 1917. Mr. Gold, who was to write ''Jews
Without Money'' and who was to be a leading Communist, and Miss Day became
lovers for several years.

When the Masses were supressed for opposing the war, Miss Day worked for The
Liberator, its successor, and as a freelance writer.  She lived casually,
staying once, for example, in an I.W.W. flophouse in Chicago and being arrested
when it was raided as a disorderly house.

After the affair with Mr. Gold, Miss Day had a number of other liaisons,
culminating in the midf-twenmties in a common-law marriage with Forster
Betterham. The couple lived on Staten Island and had one child, Tamar Teresa,
born in 1927. A desire to have the baby baptised as a Catholic precipitated her
mother's decision to join the church.

The origins of her conversion went back to her childhood, which was more
withdrawn than most youngsters.  ''I knew I was not going to have her
floundering through many years as I had done, '' said Miss Day, ''doubting and
hesitating, undisciplined and amoral.''

Her baby was baptised and shortly afterward she wa received into the church,
bringing with her the passion to right social wrongs that she acquired from her
associations with the poor and the dispossessed.

These feelings she began to express in articles for The Commonweal, through
whose editor she met Mr. Maurin, a man of French peasant background and fu ll of
enthusiasm for building what he envisioned asagood world. H e and Miss Day
started the Catholic Worker in May, 1933.

They also opened a hospice on the Lower East Side for the unemployed. At Mr.
Maurin's death in 1949, the Catholic Worker Movement had spread across the
country.

Along with Miss Day's promotion of a decentralized, cooperative social order
went an increasing agitation for personal resistance to war and to force. Thus
she came side to side with the Vietnam war protestors. Much of her last years
were taken up with opposing violence.

In March 1972, Miss Day was named recipent of Notre Dame's Lastare Medal,
considered the university's highest honor. The citation praised her for
''comforting the afflicted an d afflicting the comfortable virtually all of her
life.''

Miss Day is survived by a daughter, Tamar Teresa, and a brother, John. Plans for
funeral and memorial services have not yet been completed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GAME SATIRIZING LIFE ON WELFARE DRAWS CRITICISM, BUT SELLS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times WELL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 60, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 405 words

DATELINE: ARNOLD, Md., Nov. 21


''This is going to be a fun Christmas for the Republicans,'' chortled Ronald W.
Pramschufer. ''Republicans love this game.''

He was moving a plastic piece across the game board that he invented with a
neighbor here and acquiring his fifth ''illegitimate child,'' which, according
to the rules, was worth $100 a month in play-money ''welfare payments'' plus a
$50 donation for ''obstetrical costs'' from each player unlucky enough to have
''a job.''

Illegitimate birth is the most likely way to win in playing ''Public
Assistance,'' the bitterly satirical board game conceived by Mr. Pramschufer, a
29-year-old printing salesman, and Robert B.  Johnson, 37, a West Pointer and
retired Army captain who became a critic of American ''war crimes'' after
serving in Vietnam.

The 'Working Person's Burden'

A player of this game, which has been denounced as racist and callous, is also
likely to draw a ''working person's burden'' card that says, ''Your son is beat
up by ethnic gang while being bused across town to school. Pay hospital bill,
$200.''

Controversy over the barely concealed ''black welfare'' image of most of the
game's chance situations -''pitch pennies all day,'' ''Lincoln needs a new paint
job'' - has brought high-powered notoriety to it. The first order of 10,000
games is gone, at $15.95 a copy, and a reprint will include 50,000. There is an
order of 5,000 just from a California distributor. Games industry ana lysts say
the figures repre sent good but not great sales.

Denunciations of the game reached national proportions last month when Patricia
Roberts Harris, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, criticized the game
in a speech as ''a vicious brand of stereotyping,'' ''callous,'' ''racist'' and
''sexist.''

Mr. Pramschufer and Mr. Johnson, political and social iconoclasts of the Archie
Bunker persuasion who say they voted this year for Ed Clark, the Libertarian
candidate for President, deny emphatically that their game is racist.

''We're all from somewhere, we're all ethnic,'' Mr. Pramschufer said.  ''We
didn't invent this game,'' Mr. Johnson said. ''Government liberals did. We just
put it in a box.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WANT A FIGHT? IN TEXAS, JUST SAY NO TO ROSS PEROT

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME

SECTION: Section 3; Page 8, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1944 words


DALLAS W HEN the decision came down, the results seemed clear enough, and H.
Ross Perot's Electronic Data Systems had lost one of its most lucrative
businesses - the administration of Texas's four-year, $2 billion Medicaid
program. The three members of Texas' State Board of Human Resources voted
unanimously on July 15 to award it instead to a relative newcomer in the
business, the Bradford National Corporation of New York.

Ross Perot, the politically conservative Dallasite and computer services magnate
is one businessman who does not readily accept such rejection. Four months after
losing the contract, Mr. Perot is waging a fierce fight to get it back. It is
one of the nation's three largest state Medicaid contracts and one that accounts
for 12 percent of his company's earnings. And there is no shortage of people who
think he will succeed.

''Texas is Texas, and Perot is their kind of man.'' said a spokesman for a major
computer company that did not bid on the business because it decided no one
could win a Texas contract from E.D.S. ''He's kind of a hero there. I think it
would be such a source of embarrassment to Perot to lose that contract in his
home state, he'll pull all th e strings he can to g et it. And he will.  He'll
get it yet.''

At stake is not just the contract that would give E.D.S. more than $3.8 million
a year in after-tax profits. Health care is a $250 billion-a-year industry, and
competition to process health care claims is intensifying. The national Medicaid
bill for 1979 was $19.5 billion, and with eight state Medicaid contracts coming
up for bid in the next two years,
E.D.S. does not want to lose the one in its own backyard.  Though Bradford
National has been deemed the low bidder by the state resources board and though
the board's decision was endorsed by a group of five outside consultants brought
in after the vote, Mr.  Perot has been able to get t he case reopened. A new
consultant's report is in the works and litigation will undoubtedly keep the
issuealive well in to next year.

When the Human Resources Board voted in July to drop E.D.S. in favor of Bradford
National, Mr. Perot cut short a vacation in London and brought his case to his
friend, Texas Governor William P.  Clements, as well as other state officials,
and began a fierce lobbying effort that has been carried out with as much punch
and determination as a commando raid. The Texas Governor says, however, that he
offered Mr. Perot no help.

''We provided the lowest bid and we're the most qualified contractor,'' Mr.
Perot says . ''It embarrasses me to say Bradford and E.D.S. in the same
sentence. It gives them a degree of dignity they've never been able to achieve
in the marketplace.''

Bradford, not unexpectedly, views things somewhat differently.  ''Perot keeps
talking about the principle of the thing,'' says Peter Del Col, Bradford's board
chairman. ''E.D.S. is talking about probably the most profitable contract
they've got. And they're making it off the back of the Medicaid system. That's
their problem, not some abstract principle. Our bid was accepted, and we're
prepared to do it for less.''

Bradford and E.D.S. only recently began to compete with one another. Founded in
1968, Bradford's original activities were primarily in financial record keeping.
In the business of holding securities for clients, it quickly became one of the
dominant companies in the industry with more than $16 billion of stocks, bonds
and other securities in its custody. It has recently branched out into system
and facility services, with its biggest breakthrough coming in 1977 when it won
the New York Medicaid contract - its only state contract - that brings about
$1.1 million in profits.

Bradford has grown from an $8 million company in 1970 to $120 million in sales
last year. And the Texas Medicaid contract, according to Russell Cleveland, a
financial analyst who examined Bradford for the state, could double Bradford's
earnings.

E.D.S., on the other hand, is the nation's largest supplier of computer services
to the insurance industry.
Among its clients is Blue Cross/Blue Shield. In its 18th year, which ended last
June 30, its revenues rose 36.6 percent, to $374 million, and its profits
climbed 21.9 percent, to $29 million.

The contract to process the Medicaid claims of 700,000 Texans is the only one of
its kind in the nation. Most states employ one of two methods to process
Medicaid claims. Either the state collects and processes claims on its own, or
it hires a fiscal agent, which processes claims and is paid a set price for the
service, while the state is responsible for any payments over its budget.

I N Texas, however, the Medicaid contract is completly handled by a private
company, which is obligated to keep the Medicaid payments within a set limit
each year. If costs go above the budget, the company is responsible. The company
makes its profits from its fee for administering the program, from a so-called
''risk retention charge'' it receives for keeping down costs, and by investing
the Medicaid money held in reserves. (But most of the profits from invested
reserves are returned to the state.)

The complexity of the contract has made it possible for both E.D.S. and Bradford
to claim to be the low bidder. The board, following the analysis of the state
staff, compared only the risk retention charges and administration charges of
the two companies and decided the state would save $20 million to $50 million,
or about $10 million a year, by awarding the contract to Bradford National.

The analysis was based on the prem-
ise that both companies, over the life of the contract, would pay out roughly
the same dollar value in claims. But E.D.S., which has Medicaid contracts in 11
states, says the state's method of analysis is wrong. E.D.S.'s bid called for
total first-year Medicaid payments of $390 million, compared with $425.7 million
for Bradford, a $35.7 million difference. Thus, with Bradford's $10 million edge
on administrative costs, E.D.S. still contends it would save Texas about $25
million a year.
''We're saying we can run it more efficiently and more effectively fo r the
state.'' said Ronald L. Sperberg, a vice president of E.D.S. '' We'd do a better
job because we've been doing it so long.''

Bradford prefers to cite the analysis by the state staff and consultants. Not
only did the consultants find Bradford's bid to be the lowest, they found
Bradford superior in all seven technical areas surveyed. The staffs and
consultants also found no problem with Bradford's handling of the New York State
Medicaid accounts.

After the board's July decision, Mr. Perot personally called on all three
commissioners, a move Bradford has publicly condemned. The board agreed to have
independent consultants review the decision, andthe consultan ts backed up the
decision to go with Bradford. In addition, Tex as Attorney General Mark White
ruled on Oct. 10 that Bradford had a valid contract with the state.

But Mr. Perot, not to be put off, then sued to block the award of the contract,
brought in a friendly New York State Republican senator, Richard E.
Schermerhorn, who derided Bradford's performance in New York, and began a public
rela-tions offensive that culminated on Oct. 29, when the Human Resources Board
voted to spend up to $100,000 for another review of the case by Touche Ross &
Company.

E.D.S. also says that the Human Resources Board intentionally picked the highest
bidder as part of a long-term strategy to give administration of the program to
an inept company and thus later be able to take over the processing of Medicaid
claims.

'They've been watching too many James Bond movies.'' Mr. Del Col said. ''I mean
that's really a ridiculous kind of assertion. They've lost the contract, and now
they're throwing out every kind of red herring they can think of.''

And the dispute has also taken a toll
on the Department of Human Resources. Its commissioner, Jerome Chapman, and
deputy commissioner, Wesley Hjornevik, both resigned, saying they were ''burned
out'' by the many pressures of the job, one of them being the E.D.S.-Bradford
dispute.

In an appropriately bizarre sidelight, E.D.S. quietly sold 192,000 shares of
Bradford stock, roughly 4.9 percent of the total, shortly after the July 15
ruling. Bradford officials say it appears odd that E.D.S. would have invested in
the stock of what it has labeled ''a third-rate company.''

But Mr. Perot said the stock was bought as an investment because of reports
Bradford was up for sale. ''I was never crazy about the idea to start with,''
Mr. Perot said, ''and once we got into this and learned more about what kind of
a company Bradford is, we sold it,''
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Peter Applebome writes on financial topics from Dallas.
ADVENTURES OFROSS PEROT

From the 52 American flags commemorating the hostages in Iran that surround
Electronic Data Systems' corporate headquarters in Dallas, to the brisk military
bearing of its employees, H. Ross Perot's fingerprints are everywhere. Mr. Perot
left a prosperous career as a computer salesman for I.B.M. in 1962 to begin
E.D.S. Six years later he became a billionaire after his company went public.
But a $70 million venture on Wall

Street in 1971 with the purchase of du Pont Glore Forgan, the brokerage house,
proved a disaster. After a merger in 1973 with Walston & Company, the combined
brokerage house went bankrupt the following year. Since, the talkative Texan
with his famous crew cut has gained more attention for his political activities,
such as his one-man attempt in 1968 to send food and medicine to American
prisoners of war in Vietnam, and a 1979 commando raid he sponsored to free two
E.D.S. officials jailed in Iran. The capture of the American Embassy in Teheran
last year sparked a Country and Western song entitled, ''Where are You Now When
We Need You Ross Perot?'' In Texas, Mr. Perot is something of an icon, because
of his patriotic activities and such enterprises as his statewide antidrug
campaign.  In his industry, he is looked on less fondly. Competitors say he
handles contract bidding like a commando raid. And his aggressiveness does not
even subside in neighborly affairs. Last spring, what is called the Great
Helipad War broke out when Mr. Perot asked Dallas' planning commission for
permission to build a helicopter landing pad at his home so he could fly three
miles to work without worrying about terrorist attacks. That brought heated
opposition from nextdoor neighbor J. Fred Bucy, president of Texas Instruments.
The squabble between the two titans of electronics ended with the commission
rejecting the request.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of H. Ross Perot Photo of Peter Del Col

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'LIBERALS CANNOT BE BLAMED FOR OUR TROUBLES'

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 561 words


To the Editor:

It has become widely accepted that the election of 1980 was a rejection of
''1960's liberalism'' as espoused by the likes of Senators Kennedy, McGovern and
Bayh. It has become almost as widely accepted that liberalism deserved this fate
because liberals so badly mismanaged this country during their heyday.v.hatever
the validity of the former dictum, the latter is, as a matter of record, wholly
incorrect. Liberals simply cannot be blamed for our nation's troubles. The fact
is that liberals, including the ones who lost their seats on Nov. 4, have spent
the great bulk of the past 20 years opposing those moderate and conservative
policies emanating from the White House which are in reality responsible for our
present woes.

Ever since 1966, when Lyndon Johnson turned his attention from achieving social
justice in America to winning the Vietnam War, liberals have been virtually shut
out of the upper levels of the executive branch. Surely no one would argue that
Messrs. Nixon and Ford advanced the cause of liberalism in America. As for Jimmy
Carter, his adherence to Republican socioeconomic policies was made plain by
Senator Kennedy last spring.

It is true that liberals had positions of great influence in Congress during the
Nixon-Ford-Carter years. They were, however, far from being in a position to set
the national agenda. For most of those years, a combination of Republicans and
conservative Democrats actually controlled Congress. Even when liberals did have
the upper hand in Congress, they were never able to challenge effectively the
control of the President over basic national priorities.

From their perch in Congress, liberals had no control over one primary cause of
inflation: an overextended money supply. Thus, in 1972, liberals were powerless
to block Nixon's unprecedented expansion of the money supply, which, besides
assuring his reelection by boosting our election-year economy, became a basic
cause of our present inflationary spiral. Liberals were also never able to
overcome White House resistance to effective enforcement of the antitrust laws
and to the closing of tax loopholes. Finally, liberals were never able to prod
the Nixon-Ford-Carter Administrations to work effectively for social justice or
a full-employment economy. Even when liberals were able to enact progressive
social progra ms, active or passive resistance in the White House i nevitably
doomed them to at least partial failure.

The lesson, then, of the past 15 years is not that liberalism is ineffective,
but that Republicn socioeconomic policies are disastrous. Unfortunately, it is
these same policies which the new Administration promises to implement with a
vengeance. If the past is any guide, they will fail again. Perhaps then liberals
will be given a real chance to fulfill their goals. In the meantime, it is
imperative that liberals themselves not succumb to the fallacy that they have
failed.  JOHN ADAMS Somerset, N.J., Nov. 23, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
WHY NOT KISSINGER?

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 912 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 29


Talking about his Cabinet, Ronald Reagan said the other day that he had ''some
firm leanings in certain directions, but I'm still willing to hear cases that
anyone might want to make for others.'' He didn't say how he was leaning or in
what direction, but it was an interesting invitation.

I believe that there is a strong case to be made for Henry Kissinger as
Secretary of State but that the only way to make the case to Reagan's most
conservative advisers is to oppose him.

Kissinger has a formidable array of enemies. Everybody in the Republican Party
who was opposed to his policy of detente with the Soviets, his recognition of
Communist China at the expense of Taiwan, his support of the U.S. treaty with
Panama, or his refusal to accept the demands of Israel is against him.

And that's not all. Kissinger was Nixon's surrogate in the protracted tragedy of
the Vietnam war, in the bombing and destruction of Cambodia. For this, he will
never be forgiven by his former colleagues at Harvard and other universities,
who envy his position but question his judgment and oppose his return to power
under Reagan.

The only thing going for Kissinger is that across the world, from Europe to the
Middle East, the Soviet Union and Japan, he is regarded with more respect than
any other figure in American foreign policy today. But that's not true with the
people who are advising Governor Reagan on Reagan's Cabinet appointments.

They recognize Kissinger's abilities but don't want to take on his enemies, and
they may be right in political terms. Bill Simon, whose modesty is not
excessive, could have been persuaded to be Secretary of State but was not
invited and has pulled out of the Cabinet race.  George Shultz, former Secretary
of Labor and the Treasury, has indicated that he wants to stay home in the
California sunshine - which is a pity, for Shultz is a wise and experienced man
who might have been a quiet and effective Chief of Staff in the White House.

Nevertheless, while Ronald Reagan, like most new Presidents, is taking office at
a difficult time at home and abroad, he is in some ways lucky. Representing a
party that has controlled the White House for only 8 of the last 20 years, he
has a remarkably experienced and talented roster of Republicans to choose from
for his Cabinet and White House staff.

If he has lost Simon at Treasury, he has the options of Walter B.  Wriston,
chairman of Citicorp in New York, or William B. Casey, former head of the
Securities and Exchange Commission and recently chairman of the Reagan election
campaign - and many others, including David Rockefeller, the retiring head of
Chase Manhattan Bank.

At Defense, Reagan has Gen. Al Haig, former assistant to Kissinger at the
National Security Council and former NATO commander, or John Connally, former
Secretary of the Navy and former Secretary of the Treasury.

Reagan's main problem is at the Departmen t of State. If not Kissinger in that
job, then who? If Shultz is out of the running, thenames mention ed most often
are Haig, Casey, Cappy Weinberger or - in a pinch, if R eagan really wants a
nonpartisan foreign policy, as he says - Senato r Henry ''Scoop'' Jackson.

There is perhaps another way in which Mr. Reagan can be faithful to his
conservative followers on domestic policy and still bring the parties together
in the field of foreign policy.

When he takes the oath of office on Jan. 20, there will be five former
Secretaries of State - Muskie, Vance, Kissinger, Rogers and Rusk - and three
former Presidents of the United States - Carter, Ford, and Nixon.

No President in memory has had such a company of potential allies as Reagan has
in these men. He can ignore them, or merely be polite to them, or he can share
his burdens with them and use them effectively to give the people of this
country a sense of national unity.

The guess here is that both the political parties are in trouble, and are
longing for cooperation in the national interest to deal with the problems at
home and abroad. This is the challenge Reagan has to face between now and his
ride down Pennsylvania Avenue to the White House on Jan. 20.

On that day, it is going to be arranged, by his friends in Hollywood, that we
will have the most spectacular theatrical and political television show in
history, complete with Johnny Carson and thousands of flags.

But when it's all over, the problems will remain and the question will be who
will deal with them - and how. Reagan is now stru ggling with this question. He
is very amiable in say ing that he can't do everything by himself and that he
needs help.  He has promises to keepto the conservatives who stuck with him and
f inally brought him to the White House, but he also has to deal with the world,
and with the question of what to do with Kissinger, wh o is both his adviser and
his dilemma.

Maybe Reagan's compromise lies with the former Secretaries of State and the
unemployed Presidents. They would clearly like to help, having faced Reagan's
agonies. But they need to be asked, and it will be interesting to see whether
Reagan, rejecting Kissinger, uses them or ignores them and organizes his new
Administration on his own.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON PINS ITS HOPES ON ADA; JUST ASK ANY COMPUTER

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1142 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Ada lives. Not Augusta Ada Byron, the only legitimate daughter of the English
poet Lord Byron, Countess of Lovelace and, in the mid-1800's, the world's first
computer programmer, but the lady's namesake. Some 128 years after her death,
she whom Byron poeticized in ''Childe Harold'' as the ''sole daughter of (his)
house and heart'' has ''turned to battle's magnificent stern array,'' coming
alive as a highly sophisticated computer language developed under the auspices
of the Defense Department. Testing is scheduled to end today.

Just as human language conveys information and ideas from one mind to another,
so a computer language communicates between the human mind and a computer's
memory. The language allows a person to put questions to the computer, order it
to perform various functions and extract answers from it. In computer jargon, a
language is part of the software as compared with the machinery, the hardware.

Ada is one language the Defense Department needs, and needs so badly that though
working the bugs out of a computer language usually takes years, Ada's project
managers put it through an intensified testing program in 14 months. The
completed language was delivered in July. The Defense Department has been
refining it ever since, making Ada what department experts consider a remarkable

''high-order language,'' one that closely approximates human language by using
recognizable words and phrases in its programming and printed answers.
Computations using a binary number code are left to languages of a lower level.
In languages like Ada, a single command will initiate a series of operations,
muc h as the general command ''wal k'' will lead a child to perform a series of
muscle movements. Th ese languages are easier to learn and use than their
lower-level c ousins. The New York Times computerized information bank, for ins
tance, has such a high-level language that even the mostobtuse report er can
master it in a few hours.

Computer specialists say designing a language is not a mechanical matter, but
one of imagination and taste. Ada, they explain, is an advance over earlier
languages because its structure - the manner in which questions are put, answers
are returned, programs are designed - incorporates the most modern concepts of
logic. It takes a highly skilled programmer to write a program in Ada. More
important, however, it does not take so highly skilled an individual to use it.
And this language can be used in a variety of computers, with minor adjustments.
Older languages are keyed to specific machines.

Five years ago, the Pentagon decided to standardize the more than 1,000
languages used by the Defense Department. The annual cost of this software
proliferation ran to more than $3 billion last year, not including the cost of
training people to use it all. For tasks ranging from payroll processing to
inventory control, the department had languages. Claiming the largest piece of
the software pricetag, however, were the computers that, built into weapons,
functioned as integral parts of systems that watch for Soviet intercontinental
ballistic missiles, guide patrolling submarines, provide navigation for bombers
or relay practical information to commanders on the battlefield as events are
taking place. And the department's software problem was getting worse. Beginning
with only a handful of computers in the 1950's, the Army is expected to have
13,000 computers in operation sometime during this decade, the Navy 33,000 and
the Air Force 40,000.

In 1976, the Pentagon took a big step toward razing the computer Tower of Babel
by ordering that only eight languages should survive.  A study further
determined that settling on one language could save $24 billion bet ween 1983
and 1999. Meanwhile, the military services felt the need for a better language
that woul d incorporate the latestinnovations. (Progress in computer hardware a
lmost always outruns developments in software for programming.) Th e Pentagon
also wanted alanguage that would be accepted by universiti es, whose faculty
members do much of the thinking about militar y matters, by companies that make
military equipment and by America's allies, to improve military coordination.

Instead of forming a committee, the standard Pentagon procedure, the project
managers, headed by William E. Carlson of the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency, held an international competition. Seventeen companies submitted
proposals; four were selected as semifinalists. Two companies competed in the
final round, the winner being Ada, designed by Jean Ichbiah of Honeywell Bull in
Paris, in cooperation with Honeywell Systems and Research Center in Minneapolis.

The military advantage to be gained from Ada is clear. The Soviet Union has
built a military machine that relies on numbers and mass in weaponry for its
power. To counter that, the United States must rely on speed, mobility and
precision firepower - all of which can be improved by the use of the most
advanced computer hardware and software, like Ada. As Robert R. Fossum, director
of the agency that supervised Ada's development, recently observed, ''Military
systems of the future will incorporate much more flexible and intelligent
control logic.''

New weaponry, he said, will have sophisticated devices to detect and identify
targets. ''Command and control systems will be able to pass target information
to fire units very rapidly,'' he said. ''We will have more capable
precision-guided weapons than we have today.  We also will be upgrading existing
tanks, aircraft and other weapons with intelligent digital control systems to
extend their useful life.''

When the development of the new language began, some dubbed it DoD-1, a name
project managers rejected, believing that in the aftermath of Vietnam, the
Defense Department initials might have inhibited its use by universities and in
the commercial marketplace.  J.D. Cooper of the Navy Materiel Command, a project
adviser, suggested that it be named for computing's own Countess of Lovelace.
Permission was granted by an heir in England.

Lord Byron might have been pleased that his beloved daughter has been
memorialized, and so aptly. Augusta Ada Byron once worked for Charles Babbage, a
mathematician and inventor of a calculating machine, for which she played
computer programmer by preparing operating instructions. Seeing the new Ada, the
lady herself may be smiling.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOOTBALL VIOLENCE

BYLINE: By William Barry Furlong; William Barry Furlong is a management consul
tant in Washington, and also writes frequently on nonbusiness subjects.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 38, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6182 words


The late Vince Lombardi, coach of the great Green Bay Packer teams of the
1960's, used to claim that he could take a quick look at a group of pro-football
players dressed in street clothes and distinguish between the offensive and
defensive linemen. The offensive linemen tended to have neatly combed hair and
freshly laundered clothes, and they were likely to respond to a coach's question
with a ''Yessir'' or ''No, sir.'' But if the individual wore a torn T-shirt, had
unkempt hair and a three-day growth of beard, didn't bother to answer coaches
except with a curse, and wanted to talk about only one thing (''How much you
gonna pay me?''), them there - as Lombardi used to say - were your defensive
linemen.

But take these same linemen and put them inside the anonymity of a football
helmet, padding and uniform, and suddenly the differences that separate them off
the field disappear. When they line up against each other in a game, they are
possessed by one dominant, unifying theme: the desire to physically and
psychically intimidate the enemy. ''It is a very, very violent life,'' says
George Perles, assistant head coach of the Pittsburgh Steelers. ''Mean, tough,
brutal, masculine.''

Life in the Pit, as the center of the line is called, has always been violent,
as violent at times as a knife fight in a dark room.  As spectators follow the
retreat of a quarterback while he hands off to a running back or fades back to
pass, the linemen in the Pit are deciding the success of the play in a test of
strength and execution that often includes punching, cursing, gouging, kicking.
As the play has grown even rougher under the glare of commercial television and
the slow-motion collisions of instant replay, the concern with violence in
football, as well as in other professional sports, shows signs of being on the
rise, encouraging lawsuits, revised rules of play and even Congressional
hearings this fall.

During the 1960's, when professional football challenged baseball as the
American pastime, its popularity was interpreted in some quarters as yet another
example of a violent streak in the American character that was also seen in
social and political turbulence at home and fighting in Southeast Asia. During
the past decade, with Vietnam a fading memory, football violence came to be seen
by social critics as an emotional outlet for this nation's many frustrations and
economic reverses. Movies explored the injury-riddled world of the professional
players, and the drugs taken to mask pain, and when a wide receiver's neck was
broken by a defending player's crushing tackle, leaving him a paraplegic, the
other player lent his name to a best-selling book (''They Call Me Assassin,'' by
Jack Tatum - then of the Oakland Raiders, now, the Houston Oilers - with Bill
Kushner); in recent weeks, pro-football players have been fined $1,000 - after
the games were over - for roughness that had gone unpenalized but was later
observed by league officials studying films.

Though public awareness of football violence is growing, there are dimensions to
it that are not completely understood by either the spectators or the
perpetrators themselves. Violent physical contact remains at the heart of the
game; the ability to take punishment is as important as the ability of a player,
particularly a lineman, to dish it out. The rule changes made in recent years to
protect vulnerable players, such as the quarterback, have been enforced in an
attempt to reduce crippling injuries, not to reduce violence perse.  In fact,
some rule changes apparently have been adopted to legitimize violent tactics
once considered illegal.

To learn about football violence one must descend into the Pit, those several
yards in the interior of the line where giant offensive and defensive players
collide in hundreds of physical battles rarely seen by spectators, or even
officials on the field monitoring infractio ns of the rules. It is a world that
does not offer great appeal to seekers of glory: Jerry Kramer, a guard on the
late great Green Bay Packer teams of the 1960's, once said that if he were
fleeing from the law, he'd find a total refuge and perfect anonymity by becoming
a lineman. But those who do find appeal in it seem almostpossessed by the
inherent nature of their wor k. Harvey Martin, a superb - and outgoing -
defensive end for the Dallas Cowboys, keeps apiranha as a pet and feeds goldfish
to it. (' 'That fish is beautiful,once you come to understand it,'' he says.)
Dwight White, one of the defensive linemen for the Pittsburgh Steelers , was
once described in a Cleveland newspaper as an individual who ac cepted the Three
Stoogeson TV with such credulity that, when he final ly learned the
slapstickcomics weren't really hitting to hurt each ot her, he got so mad, so
bad, that, to express himself, he went out an d set a cat on fire. On reading
this, a magazine writer who was visit ing the Steelers shook his head at the
inclinatio n of some sports writersto indulge in such apocrypha. At least until
he dropped into the Steeler locker room just as White was express ing his side
of the story. ''The cat,'' said White, raising his v oice to a feline screech,
''went, 'Wh-a-a-a!'''

This is not to say that all linemen have a fascination with violence off the
field. In fact, the differences among them are quitemarked. Bruce Davis, a
6-foot-6, 280-pound tackle for the Oakland Raiders, stud ied ballet in the last
off-season. (''If you don't have balance,'' he said, ''you'll get thrown all
over the place.'') DennisSwilley, a ce nter for the Minnesota Vikings, studied
interior design in the last o ff-season and is not the least self-conscious
about the world of the esthete. (''You don't have to be a brute to play
professional football. There is a lot of understanding of yourself to be found
in art,'' he says.) Tackle Jon Borchardt of the Buffalo Bills helped perform
autopsies at the Erie County Medical Center lastoffseason.

Marvin Powell, the offensive right tackle for the New York Jets, has the most
unusual off-season preoccupation: He says he is preparing to become the first
black President of the United States, not only because of the celebrity he
derives from football but also because he is intent on developing his own
intellectual capabilities. He spends four hours a day - in season and out - in
intensive reading. (''I'm almost a closet Taoist,'' he says. ''I go for the
philosophy of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel. Mr. Bertrand Russell castigated
Hegel but Mr. Russell is, in my opinion, far off the mark... I can believe in
Teilhard de Chardin's

God - a state of perfection that we never reach but are always seeking.'')
Still, to some extent, as Vince Lombardi pointed out, they can be categorized.
Defensive linemen are, traditionally, reckless, instinctive, unpredictable in
many of their responses, totally indifferent to many societal strictures (''He
can play 'mad' all through the game,'' says one coach about the standard defense
man).  And offensive linemen are more likely to be precise, disciplined,
orthodox in their habits, and susceptible to a certain amount of direction.

Nor do all linemen come naturally to the tradition of extreme violence on the
field. Harvey Martin says he was once ''a momma's boy. I was bigger than the
other kids so the coaches made me play football even though I didn't want to.
Because I was too timid to go out and hit people. I kept getting knocked down by
100-pound guards.  When people hit me, I cried.'' His personality became
something else in eight years of pro football, something his momma wouldn't
recognize. Once, as Cornell Green, a former Dallas defensive back has recalled,
Martin happened to run after a play in which the opposing saftey had been decked
and was lying flat. ''He looked down and hauled off and kicked this guy in the
ribs. Viciously. Then he just walked on like it was the ordinary thing to do.''
Players in in pro football go through a conditioning that enables them
eventually to accept extreme roughness as reflexively as blinking. The classic
example of total conditioning involves Bronko Nagurski, the old pro who played
both lineman and fullback a generation or so ago for the Chicago Bears. Once,
while on a road trip, he was thrown out of a hotel-room window by a particularly
playful band of teammates. The Bronk, as he was known, landed several floors
down, on shoulder and back, hands splayed out flat, not only alive but
conscious. A crowd gathered and somebody leaned over and asked, ''What's going
on?'' The Bronk rubbed the battered hands and replied, ''I dunno. I just got
here.''

Violence can and does occur anywhere on the field but it is most directed and
concentrated on the line. The lineman must, first and foremost, conquer one man
and do it time after time after time. No other player in the game has so
directed an effort: neither the quarterback nor the running backs have one
traditional opponent; everybody is out to get them. Even the receivers tend to
be covered by two and sometimes three different defenders. But every lineman has
one man he must defeat - the man across the line of scrimmage from him. He can
do it through sheer strength or he can do it with some degree of agility. The
basic rules of combat -which are somewhat in flux these days - are that the
defensive lineman can use his hands (up to a certain extent), and the offense
cannot. As with a good many other rules, theory is not always in tune with
reality. On the defense, it is a question of how a lineman uses his hands. He
can reach out, grab his opponent's jersey, yank him toward himself to get him
off balance, and then try to throw him away, like a used Kleenex. Alternatively,
he could (until last season) grab the offensive lineman, jerk him toward
himself, butt him sharply in the head, and then throw him away, like a bruised
Kleenex. (The head buttis now prohibited.) Mean Joe Greene of the Pittsburgh
Steelers, regarded in the trade as one of the greatest defensive linemen in
history, often uses a technique called ''the swim.'' He reaches out with one
huge hand - about the size of a shovel blade - and grabs theoffensive lineman by
one shoulder and tries to turn or twist him.  Then he brings his other hand over
(''in a swimming motion,'' says his coach George Perles) and grabs him by the
other shoulder and tries to continue the twist. If he succeeds, he can spin the
offensive lineman out of the play. If he doesn't, at least he has thelineman by
the shoulders so he can shake him until his eyes rattle.  (''Have you ever seen
a dog get hold of a snake?'' is the only way one opponent described Greene's
technique.) Yet another historic style was for the defensive lineman to deliver
a ''head slap'' on the side of the helmet to swat the enemy away from in front
of him. It is called a ''slap'' because it is in theory, to be delivered only as
a quick, brief gesture with the open palm. In fact, coming from a man who
weighed upward of 300 pounds, it was more like being hit in the ear with a tree
trunk. And even if the hand was open, it was likely to be wrapped in wads of
tape fortified by plaster, with the ''cast''reaching up the forearm to the
elbow. (You needn't have shed any tears for linemen whose arms were in plaster
casts; some of them preferred it that way -because of the weaponry it provided -
even when they weren't hurt.) But the ''head slap'' was ruled out in 1977,
because some of the offensive linemen were complaining to the referees (''Hey!
That guy across from me is winding up before he 'slaps' me! Is that legal -
winding up for the head slap?'' It wasn't. Which made it all the more attractive
for some players.)

For his part, an offensive lineman may, on pass blocking, absorb the initial
charge of the defensive pass-rusher, retreat, recoil.  Take another jolt,
retreat, recoil, and do it all over again. He does not have to do it for long:
''It's only for four seconds,'' says Bob Fry, offensive line coach of the New
York Jets. If the quarterback can't get the pass off in four seconds, then - in
the reigning football philosophy - he deserves to die. As for blocking for a
running play, an offensive lineman may charge straight at ''his'' man, thrust
his head face-up and face-forward into his chest and battle until the two of
them are standing there like two great stags struggling over a doe. Or the
offensive lineman may simply hold his own ground, letting the enemy come
careering across the line of scrimmage, and then hook or shove him so that the
defense man's own momentum carries him out of the play. Like their antagonists
across the line of scrimmage, the offensive linemen have some ''creative''
thoughts about what is permissible, if not legal. Some have been known to smear
grease on their jerseys so the defensive linemen cannot easily grab them. Others
hold, grab, knee and even tackle - whatever they can get away with.

One recently developed tactic stemmed from the National Football League's
attempt to control the carnage - or at least disguise it - by changing the
standards for calling ''holding'' on offensive linemen. In the past, an
offensive lineman had to keep his elbows flexed - in a faint imitation of the
''gooney-bird wings'' stance, with elbows out and hands clutched to one's own
jersey - as proof that the hands weren't being used naughtily. If the arms were
straight out and the elbows locked stiffly open, the presumption of guilt on
''holding'' was heavy. And automatic. Not so today. Under the ''redefinition,''
an offensive lineman can hold his arms out and stiffen his elbows for as long
and as often as he wants, as long as his hand is open - i.e., so that his fist
isn't clenched. The trick is to extend the arms and lock the elbows in precisely
the right style and sequence. One such style and sequence that is widely
practiced - if not totally approved - is to extend and straighten the right arm
and to lock the elbow in a rather muscular way so that the heel of the open hand
delivers a nerve-numbing jolt to, say, the solar plexis; the next step in the
sequence is to do precisely the same thing with the left arm for a follow-up to
the sternum. ''If you do it in the right way,'' one offensive guard told me,
''you can look perfectly legal while delivering the old one-two to your
opponent's body. And you can keep on doing it as long as the heels of your hands
last.''

Despite the occasional fines, football officials have until now remained for the
most part superbly indifferent to these unfriendly tactics of offensive linemen.
As a result, defensive linemen are a trifle paranoid. At least they are always
complaining about the gross misdeeds of the offense and trying to compensate for
them with the oldest strategy in football: MAD - mutual assured destruction. One
lineman told me, ''If you kick me in my testicles'' -his word, quite
astonishingly, not mine - ''there's one thing you can be sure of: that somehow,
somewhere along the line, I'm going to make you sorry that you were ever born.''
The skill is not just in the violence but in the subtlety of the act. Anybody
can take a meat ax to a miscreantbut only a few genuinely remarkable linemen can
stand in front of 60,000 witnesses who are chanting, ''Kill, Bubba, kill!'' and
do it. Without anybody quite noticing.

In one game between the St. Louis Cardinals and the Dallas Cowboys, Harvey
Martin of Dallas became upset at the tactics of Conrad Dobler, a guard for St.
Louis (and now for Buffalo) who was suspected of playing the game without that
infectious spirit of good clean fun.  Martin did not launch an instant attack.
Instead, he waited patiently for an opportunity in which the officials could not
possibly suspect instant-retaliation. Finally, Martin encountered Dobler in a
pileup on the right side of the St. Louis line. Dobler emerged from that pileup
with a smashed, bleeding and broken hand -the one he liked most to use in
holding - and Martin emerged with a beatific smile.  So much for the control of
carnage.

Offensive linemen seem to adjust more readily to the ''enterprising'' tactics of
their opponents, seem on the whole more resigned to the manners of the defense.
Merlin Olsen, for many years a top defensive lineman for the Los Angeles Rams
(and more recently a television actor), liked to keep banging his hands over the
ear holes of his opponent's helmet, both hands at the same time. (''It hurt like
hell, from the pressure change or something. And the noise scared you,'' said
John Wilbur, one-time guard of the Washington Redskins. ''He knocked me flat out
twice before I learned to dodge it.'') Ed Neal of the old, old Green Bay
Packers, a 290-pound sylph with a fore-arm that, naked of tape and plaster,
measured 19 inches around, used to discourage opposing centers by caressing them
with answinging uppercut to chin and mouth. (''You didn't have face masks then,
so Ed Neal broke my nose seven times,'' said Clyde (Bulldog) Turner, long the
center for the Chicago Bears.)

The astonishing thing is that so many linemen accept all this as part of the
price of regular work. Jim Otto, who was a wonderfully effective center for the
Oakland Raiders for 15 years, suffered a broken jaw, a broken nose on 10
different occasions, bone chips in an elbow, concussions so numerous that he
didn't keep count, a dislocated knee, many dislocated fingers, a severely
pinched nerve in his neck, three operations on his left knee, six other
operations on his right knee. He recently made the National Football League Hall
of Fame, and he never lost his faith in - or need for - medical science. Others
did.

There are some players both in, or now out of, the N.F.L. who feel that the
health care in pro football is a sometime thing. The doubts might be inspired by
''the traditions of the game,'' most conspicuously the inclination of old-time
owners to select medical help on the basis of low cost and high loyalty - i.e.,
the owners liked to hire team doctors who were personal friends of the owners
(with all that might imply) or who were fans of the team. On one occasion years
ago in the old Polo Grounds, a lineman of the visiting Chicago Bears suffered a
gash and split along the side of his mouth into his cheek and the local doctor,
who was also a local fan, was called into emergency service - in the absence of
a team physician traveling with the Bears. When he'd finished his work and the
player was removed to more hospitable hands, it was discovered just what kind of
service the doctor had provided: He'd stitched the Chicago player's tongue to
his cheek. ''The s.o.b. talked too much anyway,'' he said.

Nowadays, sports medicine is improved, and all teams have their own physicians
on the sidelines. But even under the best of circumstances, the health care is
usually as probative as the coach will tolerate and not always as thorough as
the doctor might prefer.  Even if the doctor protests - and some do - that a
player should not play, some coaches insist on practicing their own brand of
medicine: The Green Bay Packers, under Vince Lombardi, were known as belonging
to the Church of Lombardi Scientist - the ''pick-up-your-bed-andwalk-g
odamn-it'' school of medicine. Not only do most of the coaches expect the
players to perform when ''in pain'' but so also do the players. ''Bruises, cuts,
muscle pulls, twists, sprains and so forth we call 'hangnails,''' Olsen said.
''The only 'injuries' are broken bones or things which destroy your movement.''

Pride sometimes forces the player into action when good sense will not. ''In San
Francisco once, I was kicked in the groin early in the game and again before
halftime,'' said Olsen. ''It hurt terribly but I kept telling myself I was a
coward looking for an easy way out. So I brainwashed myself into carrying on. I
finished the game. In the locker room afterward, I couldn't bend over far enough
to tie my shoes. I was in the hospital four days.''

There are linemen who will play with an injury that might send other humans into
shock. Jack Rudnay, center for the Kansas City Chiefs, broke the little finger
in his right hand in a game against the Chicago Bears a couple of years ago.
''The bone was sticking out so they pushed it back into place, taped it next to
his next finger, and he missed just two plays,'' remembers assistant coach Joe
Spencer. ''It took 18 stitches to close the split alone, so it wasn 't no
hangnail.'' Last year, Jack Youngblood, a defensive end for th e Los Angeles
Rams, appeared in two N.F.L. playoff games with one leg - in which he'd suffered
a hairline fracture of a nonsupporti ng bone - wrapped in a partial cast. (''Why
shouldn't I play? There's no blood and the bone isn't sticking out,'' he said.)
But there is a limitation to the business of playing in pain. A few years ago
Doug Atkins, a seismic wonder of a defensive end, mentioned that ''my leg feels
funny'' after a game that he played - superbly, of course - for the New Orleans
Saints. It should have felt funny: He'd broken the tibia and continued playing
on it. Without pain-killers . Without a cast.  Without medical care.  The impact
of violence on the human body is obvious enough but what about the effect on the
personality of the players? In pursuit of the answer, I recently ventured into
the lair of Mean Joe Greene, who for more than a decade has been the apotheosis
of pro football's defensive lineman-rough, brutal, violent, the enshrinement of
everything successful in the Pit.

There was no gore. There was no blood. The incisors were not bulging from puffed
lips and jaws. The tapered fawn-colored slacks were neatly pressed, there was a
fragrance of cologne about his person, and there was a questing, questioning
look about the wide brown eyes. Mean Joe fit himself carefully into the chair -
he was much too large for it - and he carefully, almost fastidiously, plucked at
the crease in his pants while he sought a suitable metaphor for the way he
works. And lives.

His success has always been entangled with a reputation for meanness. But he
has, quite suddenly, acquired a gentler, more sympathetic image, which came
astonishingly from a one-minute television commercial - the celebrated Coke
commercial of last autumn. Until then, though, the perception of Joe Greene was
clear: He was mean; he was violent; he was the kind of Christian you'd send out
to play with the lions, knowing he'd win. And he contributed more than a little
to that image. In high school, he was kicked out of several games because of his
roughness. (''For running over the officials. Intentionally.'') In his senior
year in high school, one of his classmates drew a picture of Mean Joe on the
blackboard; it was of a beast with long teeth and blazing eyes and the gore of
his ''victims'' dripping from his mouth.

That was half a lifetime ago, but he still feels bruised by the experience.
''Actually, I was a bit timid. Shy. Still am, a bit.'' He hates the cliche of
football player as beast. ''I'm not an animal.  I'm a human being.'' Which is to
say that he is sensitive, warm, concerned, involved, ambitious (''I knew I
wanted to succeed at something; I didn't know it was football''), aware, caring,
sensitive, sometimes forgiving, sometimes not (''I'm nice 25 percent of the
time, maybe 50, 75 percent - nobody's nice all the time''), searching,
straightforward, sincere (once he spat on Dick Butkus, the Chicago Bear
linebacker fabled for his brutality: ''You could almost see Butkus restrain
himself,'' says a teammate of Greene's, ''carefully avoiding a fight with Joe,
deliberately thinking, 'That would not be the intelligent thing to do''' ).

Joe Greene wants you to understand that he is not mean -at least until provoked
- that he is sensitive and compassionate - if not altogether long-suffering. And
yet he remains triumphantly unaware of the psychic and physical ravages of life
in the Pit: ''Violence?'' he says. ''I don't think of it as violence. I think of
it as contact.  And contact is a part of life.'' Coach George Perles adds, ''Of
course he doesn't feel the violence. Because he dishes it out - he doesn't
absorb it, suffer it. He's the deliverer.''

The manifestations of violence that are so much a part of Greene's football self
are not, in truth, fully compatible with his total personality: He really is a
man of introspective bent who seems - when he is removed from the turbulence of
the playing field - laced with wistfulness, with a mixture of perplexity and
pain, with a vague sense of conflict between what he knows and his wish not to
know it. He is not happy to be known for physical things - for being big (''I
get a little paranoid about the hang-ups of little-bitty people'') -or for being
known at all: He once dropped out of a school play because he was ''scared'' of
being so conspicuous (''I don't even like to be stared at in public''). He
resents the ''Mean Joe'' bit not only because he does not see himself as being
''mean'' - ''I never really intentionally planned to hurt somebody.'' For a long
while, Joe Greene was perhaps the only person who did not feel the nickname
justified. In his first year or two in the N.F.L. he was thrown out of a number
of games for various unseemly tactics. Once he grabbed -without malice
aforethought, you understand - an errant offensive lineman who'd been
''holding'' and doing other ''unethical'' things; he spun him around, grabbed
him by the shoulders and kicked him between the legs. On another occasion he was
penalized for twisting the head of an opponent, on yet another for popping his
opponent with his closed hands instead of giving him an open-handed ''slap.'' As
a young man who regarded himself as an idealist, he was continually upset by the
display of human frailties by the game officials. He once be came upset d uring
a game because theofficials were not calling the various crimes and misdemeanors
- as Joe Greene saw it - being performed by Paul H oward, an offensive lineman
for the Denver Broncos. So he undertook to apply justice in his own inimitable
fashion: He punched Howard in the stomach. As it happens he was being closely
watched - by the television cameras. Not only that, but the instant replay
caught him doing it. So what the officials may have missed the network replayed
for tens of millions of viewers time after time after time. By the end of the
game, there were many outraged cries not only for a heavy fine - allegedly
$5,000 - but also for something like the amputation of Joe's left ventricle.

At the time, Joe Greene's image was enhanced because he played a wide-ranging,
wild-eyed game in which he charged, without much discipline, a round the enemy
backfield like a live shell on a rollingship's deck.  He was always seeking the
big play - the spectacular sack of the quarterback, the stunning tackle of the
ball carrier for a huge loss - and he often found it and made it. Once, he
crashed in on quarterback Steve Spurrier of the San Francisco 49ers, stole the
ball from him, rumbled into the end zone, flipped the ball upward in his
exuberance, caught it behind his back as it came down, and walked tippy-toe over
to the end line to hand it gently to a cheerleader. Hemade every all-pro team in
every year but one during the 1970's and, without reaching for ''leadership
quality,'' he became a natural leader of his team.

His very presence was the focal point of feeling, either in a postloss
situation, when many of his teammates did not want to talk much (''You have to
restrain yourself from heading to Joe immediately, after any kind of game,
because he gives you the feeling he's so much with it,'' says one Pittsburgh
newsman), or in those moments when the players were relaxed and alone together.
One Pittsburgh player has remembered that whenever quarterback Terry Bradshaw -
by far the most celebrated Steeler and a tough man in his own right - told a
joke, he glanced reflexively toward Greene to see if it was all right: ''To see
if it was acceptable.''

Greene is not likely to concede the point, but his presence - his sense of
command and respect - even influenced the officials. Lynn Swann has recalled the
time when ''somebody clipped Joe and he turned around and stomped on the guy's
head. The referee ran up to him and said, 'Mr. Greene!' Not '75,' like he'd say
to anybody else. 'Mr.  Greene! I saw what he did. I saw it! And he won't get
away with it.  He won't do it again!'''

Joe asserts that he didn't think any of this through ahead of time, that it was
all natural. Where the choice is a rational matter, he tends to avoid the
occasion of sin altogether. He does not hang around bars, for example, because a
man of his size and physical reputation tends to attract challenges, and fights,
in a bar. ''I stay out of those situations,'' he says. ''They can literally get
to be life-and-death situations.'' But he does spill over emotionally during a
game. At first, teammate Andy Russell had some doubts about the Genuine Joe
Greene and that all that emotionalism could be real.  ''It looked like
showboating. But I realized later that he's that way. With Joe, it's in his
psyche. It's like war, and the other side is winning because they're more
violent. He's the only guy I know who can be playing a great game himself but if
the team's losing, he gets into a terrible depression.''

Greene will not be intimidated by other individuals' using ''unethical tactics''
or by game officials who let them try to do it. In one game against the
Pheladelphia Eagles early in his career, when the Steelers had a weak team, he
thought the officials were not calling it ''straight'' on some of the Eagles'
tactics and he felt that some of his teammates were getting intimidated by the
Eagles. So on one play, he reached out and grabbed the ball before the Eagle
center could snap it, and he angrily heaved it into the second tier of the
grandstand. Then he stomped off the field. Nobody else in the N.F.L. would ever
think of doing such a thing. But what would they do to Joe Greene? Nothing, as a
matter of fact. He didn't even get fined for it. In fact, he got a reward of a
kind. For after a long, awed silence, the fans in the stands recovered from
their shock -and broke out in explosive cheering.

But that supportive spirit was rare. As he turned into his 30's, Greene was
aware that he'd become a villainous figure in American life, that people said
they'd sic Joe Greene on their children if they didn't go right to bed, that
newspapermen indulged a certain hyperbole in discussing his talents. Jim Murray
of The Los Angeles Times inquired: ''True or false? The other team always takes
roll call after playing Pittsburgh. If anyone is missing, they go immediately to
Mean Joe Greene and say, 'All right, Mean Joe, cough him up!''' It seemed that
Mean Joe had everything in football terms.  But in human terms, he had nothing.
Or at least nothing that he wanted - i.e., respect as a human being.

To change this image would probably have been impossible but for three events.
The first was that Mean Joe was injured and was sidelined for a lengthy period
in the mid-70's; his reputation for meanness could not escalate during this
period. The second was that the Steelers made an important change in their
defensive strategy against running plays. That change drastically altered Mean
Joe's function. No longer is he free to range all over the enemy backfield,
picking off enemy backs. Instead, he must perform a highly selective task: He
must hit the opposing center first and hard and often, thus making it impossible
for the center to forge through a gap in the defensive line to block the middle
linebacker. ''Joe could always make five or six big plays a game under the old
system,'' says George Perles, ''but we'd be left a lot more vulnerable on
certain other plays.'' It is an insight into Greene's character and a signal of
itscomplexity that he continued to play superbly and enthusiastically in a
system many thought antagonistic to his style. An d to hi s image. He looks at
it pragmatically: The system has worked.

The third reason for the change in the public perception of Joe Greene was what
is normally regarded as a total irrelevancy in pro football - a television
commercial. Only this was one of the great commercials of the ages. In it, a
worn-and-battered Joe Greene, presumably injured, limps down the tunnel of a
football stadium, wearing his shoulder pads, his game-worn jersey slung over his
shoulder. A small boy follows, partly in awe, partly in sympathy.  Greene is too
tired, perhaps too depressed, to exchange civilties with him. The boy offers him
the most precious thing he possesses: his bottle of Coke. At first reluctant,
Joe finally accepts it, then drinks it down without pausing. The boy turns to
go, a faint suggestion of disappointment - over failing to make a human
connection - in his slumped shoulders. Joe calls to him. ''Hey, kid ... here!''
He throws his jersey to him and endows him with a wonderfully warm, grateful
smile. ''Wow!'' says the boy. ''Thanks a million, Joe!''

The commercial was released to the networks on Oct. 1, 1979, and it had an
immediate, enormous impact. It was rated first in popularity among consumers
interviewed by an independent testing firm, and it won eight national and
international awards, including a Clio for Joe Greene as the best male performer
in a television commercial.

It also had an immense influence in changing his image. For when he turned
around to face the young boy, he was no longer Mean Joe Greene, observed William
Van Loan, who was then director of marketing operations for Coca-Cola U.S.A.
''He was Othello.'' People noticed things about him that they'd never quite
noticed before. ''He looks like he smiles from the middle of his soul,'' said
the wife of a Pittsburgh sports writer. Her husband had already sought to define
that quality in Joe Greene: ''The smile makes people glad to see him. Like that
first clear, crisp day of autumn, or the sun filtering through blond hair, or
strawberry shortcake, or your discharge papers. ...''

Joe Greene is 34 now, old by the standards of a pro-football lineman. He has
spent well over half those 34 years performing as a lineman in some sort of
organized football, and what it got him was something he didn't like: a
definition in other people's minds as something of an inhuman beast. He spent a
few hours before a television camera making a one-minute commercial and ''all
the barriers came down,'' he says. ''A side of me was opened to the public that
was never seen before.'' There is confusion in his own mind. His oneminute
avocation was all right, but there is something wrong with the vocation in which
he invested so much of himself, so much of his mind and muscle and emotion,
which made him so successful and at the same time so unsuccessful.  Given these
consequences, given the serious injuries, psychic as well as physical, the
deliberate harming of one human being by another all in the name of good fun,
team spirit and, in a strange sense, idealism, why is this violence tolerated -
indeed, celebrated - in pro football?

Well, for one thing there are people who believe that it has a socially
redeeming quality. Yes, verily, they do. One explanation is the ''catharsis''
theory - i.e., that such violence allows the spectators, even on television, to
work off their aggressions in a way that is not destructive, at least to
themselves. Some say such aggression is inherent in human nature; it builds up
in each individual and must somehow be appeased - like the sex urge or hunger.
The violence of pro football, however vicarious, is, the theory goes, such an
appeasement. Others contend, however, that the only value of violence in pro
football, as with ice hockey, is the commercial value; that keeping football
bloody and warlike and thus dramatic keeps it enormously profitable for
telelvision producers and club owners. These critics say, too, that the urge to
violence is, to a large extent, learned behavior and that the violence of pro
football, transmitted as widely and effectively as it is, plays a very important
role in persuading young Americans, and some not-soyoung Americans, of the
virtues of violence.

Reflecting such concerns, Representative Ronald Mottl, a Democrat of Ohio, has
introduced a bill in Congress to ban excessive violence in sports. It would
impose a $5,000 fine and possible one-year prison sentence for violence that has
''no reasonable relationship to the competive goals of the sport.'' The bill has
not set off any lightning bolts . But Mottl says he will reintroduce the measure
in the next Congress. Most solutions have been either generally dismissed as
ineffective or ignored. But one idea that might well work would be to
substantially increase the insurance premiums that are paid by team owners for
the injuries or the liabilities incurred by their players, or to protect the
owners themselves from lawsuits. There is a point at which such insurance would
be too costly for the owners to continue to permit violence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Joe Greene Photo of Abdul Salaam Photo of
Conrad Dogler Photo of Carl Hairstrom

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE AMERICAN SHORT STORY: AN UNTOLD TALE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 136, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4773 words


Anita Shreve, who won an O. Henry Award in 1976, is fiction editor of Quest/80
Magazine. By Anita Shreve o begin with a very short story: In 1976, I sat down
with a copy of ''Prize Stories 1976: The O. Henry Awards,'' an annual selection
of the year's ''best stories.'' I was about to read the last story in the
volume, ''Separating,'' by John Updike. It had previously been published in The
New Yorker, but I had missed it there. It is a story abo ut a man's confusion
and sorrow as he prep ares to separate from his wife and leave his family. I
began it, en thusiastic about the prospect of reading an Updike story, but I ha
d other things on my mind as well. After the first paragraph, I kn ew I would
like it. Fivepages into it, I was having difficulty breath ing. Seven pages into
it, I was barely able to make out the words, carried along in an unexpected rush
of emotion, painful and sweet . I put the book down.  Several days later,
dry-eyed and cool, I deci ded to give the story another whirl. This time, I
hoped to analyze why it was so well made,what the source of its power over me
was. I h adn't reached page five before I was again overcome. I cannot to this
day read ''Separating''without quivers of feeling, a quickening of m y pulse, an
ache in the back of my throat.

Like a poem, a great short story is often nothing more than an epiphany, a
struck moment, a vision or an insight. But unlike many poems, the language of
most short stories is immediately accessible; the relentless journey to the end
allows the reader to experience a short, sharp shock of recognition.

''Our lives are not novels,'' says Andre Dubus. ''They're a series of stories.
That's how we talk to each other. I say, 'How're you doing?' and you tell me a
story. Next time you tell me a different one. A life is a huge collection of
short stories.'' Andre Dubus is typical of a new generation of short-story
writers in America today: celebrities among their peers yet virtually unheard of
in their own land; dedicated to the form even though they cannot make a living
at it. Writers at work in their cubicles, studios and offices are producing an
increasing number of short stories, which go unnoticed by the vast majority of
their countrymen. Despite the growing tendency of the short story to forsake the
experimentalism of the 1960's for a more accessible realism, the audience for
the short story has almost dried up. Television, which seduces potential readers
away from a half-hour curled up with a short story, is a prime culprit. ''To
read a short-story collection means making 20 commitments,'' says John Sterling,
a former literary agent . ''People would rather watch 'Laverne and Shirley.'''
Commercial magazines, too, convinced that short stories no longer sell
advertisements or increase circulation, begrudge their pages to short fiction.
And book publishers have found that short-story collections almost never sell.

Yet short stories endure. Every year, hundreds of good stories find their way
into print - either into one of the few general-interest magazines, such as The
New Yorker, Redbook, The Atlantic and Esquire, or into one of about 750 literary
(or ''little'') magazines.  Creative-writing workshops and degree programs have
mushroomed during the last several years, and classes are sold out. Three years
ago, the Columbia University Writing Program of Fiction and Poetry, where
tuition is $6,000 a year, received 80 applications. This year, it received 300.
One of the most perplexing paradoxes in American fiction is that while fewer
people than ever before are reading short stories, more people than ever before
are writing them. And writing them well. ''The short story today may be more
vigorous and various than ever before,'' says William Abrahams, editor of
''Prize Stories 1980: The O. Henry Awards,'' ''and its vitality today is
unflagging.'' Like many short-story writers, Andre Dubus has been telling
himself short stories for as long as he can remember. As he paces the cramped,
third-floor walk-up that he shares with his wife, Peggy Rambach, in Bradford,
Mass., he recounts some of the stories from the huge collection that is his
life, as well as from the more modest collection that is his life's work. A
handsome, bearded, barrelchested man whose difficult emotional career spans
three marriages, four children, daily devotions to his Roman Catholic faith and
past addiction to Quaaludes for insomnia, Dubus chain-smokes and laughs as he
mischievously reveals, much to his wife's chagrin, that they have vacuumed the
apartment this morning for the first time in six months. ''I've been writing
stories since my high-
Page 1 38
school days in Louisiana. When my father asked how a college English major makes
a livi ng, I answered him by joining the Marines.'' Dubus wrote at nigh t,
pretending he was Joseph Conrad. He fantasized that he would win the National
Book Award, living as a secret writer amongmen who never read.

An officer with four years' service, Dubus was due for promotion when one of his
stories, ''The Intruder,'' was accepted for publication by the Sewanee Review, a
literary quarterly with a circulation of 4,000. On the strength of this success,
Dubus resigned from the Marine Corps and enrolled in the Iowa Writer's Workshop.
It was 1964. The Sewanee Review had paid him $125.

Since then, he has published 35 stories, three of them in The New Yorker. One of
his stories, ''The Pitcher,'' received an O. Henry award this year. Three books
of his stories have been published by David Godine: ''Separate Flights,''
''Adultery and Other Choices'' and ''Finding a Girl in America,'' which came out
last April to mixed reviews.

Andre Dubus is firmly committed to the short story, yet he cannot support hims
elf from his writing. To earn a l iving, he teaches literature and creative
writing at Bradford C ollege. Although at 44 he is widely cited as one of the
bright ''you ng'' talents in the field, Dubus's income from his writing has av
eraged under $1,000 a year since the publication of ''Separate Flig hts'' in
1975. But the meager paydays have not swayed him from his l ove of the short
story.

''It's a great form,'' he says, ''and you can get published. You might not get a
book published, and if you do, you won't make money.  But if a short-story
writer sees himself as a poet, which he should - the forms are much closer
together (than the short story and novel) and certainly the way of life is - he
can have a long and dignified career. That's why I didn't feel too bad when it
looked as though I'd never have a book of stories published. I thought, maybe
I'll leave 50 stories in quarterlies and die with dignity.'' Andre Dubus
continues the American story-telling tendency toward realism that matured in the
writings of F. Scott Fitzgerald and Ernest Hemingway in the 1920's and 30's. Of
the 22 stories in the 1980 O. Henry collection, almost all can be considered
''realistic.'' To be sure, this realism is selective and not the folksy brand,
often associated with writers like Mark Twain, which flowered in the tales and
yarns of the 19th century. Today's realists practice the art of elliptical
selection -eliminating details that get in the way of the ''calamity in the
cablegram,'' as the short story has been described. In fact, most contemporary
writers put a premium on sparse verisimilitude, abhorring contrived endings and
preferring undramatic slices of life.

The short story in America remains surprisingly isolated, for the most part,
from current international trends. The best foreign stories - those of
Argentina's Jorge Luis Borges, Colombia's Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Italy's Italo
Calvino and Austria's Peter Handke - are surrealistic in style, rent with
bizarre visible seams, unsettling and sometimes, to the uninitiated, even
creepy. Time shifts in eerie patterns, people behave in unreal and surprising
ways; the reader witnesses extraordinary events. These stories poke at dreams
and nightmares and are often hard to deal with - as the authors have intended.
Most American stories attempt to draw readers in; many of the best foreign
stories challenge them. They seek to confound readers' expectations, to confuse
their angle of vision in the same way that Op Art does, and, when successful,
their impact derives from their obvious metaphorical quality. It is as if the
reader were driving on a highway and happened to see a sign alongside the road,
a sign with an unexpected and perhaps unnerving message.

The quarterly magazines of the 60's and early 70's published pioneering prose
that often stretched the definitions of the genre beyond coherence. Ted
Solotaroff, editor, writer and critic, says that when he was at the helm of the
now-defunct American Review, he published one story whose narrative line was a
recipe for baking bread and another in which the speaker is a story trying to
find an identity and stay alive. But among many editors today, experimentalism
is almost a dirty word. Daniel Halpern, editor of Antaeus, one of the most
respected quarterlies in the United States, suggests that ''Experimentalism is
only the misuse of the language,'' and Solotaroff reports that the experimental
tendency in this country has run out of gas. ''The love of story is programmed
into our nature,'' he says. So it is that the arcane novels of the 60's and
early 70's - elaborate contrivances such as Thomas Pynchon's ''Gravity's
Rainbow'' - seem to have given way to more straightforward storytelling and the
almost superreal reportage of ''novels'' like Norman Mailer's ''Executioner's
Song.''

The bottom line on the recession in experimental short stories, however, is that
few commercial markets will publish them. The South American and European
writers occasionally do get published, but only when they approach Nobel-prize
caliber. Where are our Borges's and Marquez's? Does the state of the art dictate
to the marketplace, or does the market create the form? Perhaps it is not too
cynical to suggest that readers, uneducated about experimental stories, will not
purchase the magazines that publish them - and publishers, ever mindful of
profit margins, cannot afford to t ake too many risks.

One exception to this conservative trend is the work of Donald Barthelme.
Barthelme's New Yorker stories, ''Great Days,'' recently released in paperback,
are whimsical and profane adventures into satire, fable, parody and colloquy.
The stories tend to unnerve, delight or bore readers, depending on their
penchant for cerebral invention. Ann Beattie, whose collection, ''Secrets and
Surprises'' is now in paperback, and who admits to being influenced by
Barthelme, thinks there is no greater short-story writer alive. Indeed,
Barthelme, often seen as the only American alternative to the naturalistic
story, has spawned an entire school of short-story writing - a school, one must
add, that goes largely unpublished.  Barthelme's case raises an interesting
point, however. Can a writer who has been published regularly in The New Yorker
for 20 years still be experimenting?

But to look for schools of short-story writing in the American literary
landscape is largely a futile enterprise. For unlike the disciplines of painting
and poetry, there are, today, no clear-cut schools in the short story that one
can define o r label. In fact, so diffuse is the form that it is hard these day
s even to find many short stories. ''We don't seem to have today such masters as
Gogol, Chekhov, De Maupassant,'' says the Nobel Priz e-winner Isaac Bashevis
Singer, whose stories, written in Yiddish, an d then translated into English,
are regarded as among the world's be st. ''But I may not know; it's very hard to
know what's going on in literature, especially the short story.''

Yet to talk to writers and editors committed to the genre is to come away
believing that the short story has never been in better shape. The message is
almost universal: A large new generation of American short-story writers, they
say, is writing ''more imaginatively'' and ''more honestly'' than ever before in
our history. Whether this suggests a renaissance for the short story is still
unclear, since this new generation of writers, for the most part, has not found
a national audience; but certain
Page 140
critics are unmistakably encouraged by the quality now being produced.

John Updike, the author most recently of ''Problems and Other Stories,'' says,
''The short story has slowly ceased to be a breadand-butter genre by which the
likes of Faulkner and Fitzgerald supported themselves and has become an ars
gratia artis genre without much of a market, but with much of the expressive
looseness and potential of the poem.''

Joyce Carol Oates, in her introduction to ''The Best American Short Stories
1979,'' is ebullient: ''Doomsayers to the contrary, more people are writing, and
writing well, than ever before in our history.''

Undoubtedly, one reason there are so many short-story writers today is that the
form is attractive to beginners. But, says Singer, ''There are no prodigies in
literature. In music, yes, or science.  But to be able to write something
perfect, you have to have lived.''

In fact, Singer believes that the short story is the greatest challenge in
literature. ''A man who is not a perfect writer can sometimes produce a novel
that is not bad. But he cannot make a short story that is not bad. The short
story demands more experience and talent than anything else. The writer has to
put into a few pages whole life stories with convincing plots and convincing
characters.'' The short story in America is only 140 years old. After Nathaniel
Hawthorne published his second series of ''Twice Told Tales'' in 1842, Edgar
Allan Poe wrote an essay about them, in which he defined the concept of the
short tale for the first time. The short story's ''golden age'' began in 1920
and lasted until the middle of the 1950's. Fitzgerald, writing for The Saturday
Evening Post in the late 20's, could command $4,000 for a single story. And the
Nov. 4, 1939, issue of that magazine devoted 43 very large pages to short
fiction, including a story by William Faulkner and a serial by J.P. Marquand.
In the days of the old Saturday Evening Post, Collier's and Story magazine, a
short story was often the hot item of an issue - a product which sold, a
commodity. Literary agencies made more money selling short stories to magazines
than at anything else - a fact that remained true until the paperback boom 25
years ago. Today, the amount of money an agency makes selling short stories to
magazines is negligible.

''The commodity story is simply dead,'' says O. Henry editor William Abrahams.
''The formula stories have all gone into television.''

John Updike agrees: ''The so-called 'slick' short story, written without
condescension by a generation as young as that of J.D.  Salinger and Kurt
Vonnegut Jr., has now sunk below the horizon of serious writing - and in rather
lonely eminence The New Yorker remains as a serious-paying market for a story
written at the top of an author's bent.''

While it is true that the ''slick'' story Updike refers to is no lon ger consid
ered serious fiction, the appearance on the scene of the''neo-slick'' story
raises uncomfortable obstacles to the hoped-for renaissance o f the American
short story today. The neo-slick story surfaces in t he high-paying markets. It
is written expressly for those markets and takes the nod from what the
publication considers fashionable o r in good taste.

For years, The New Yorker has suffered the criticism that it tends to publish
its own brand of neo-slick stories -well-mannered, trendy vignettes that provide
the reader with a genteel slice of life, an undramatic epiphany, a character
mode - stories, in short, about the sort of lives led by many of the people who
buy The New Yorker and can afford the products it advertises. But Charles
McGrath, one of its six fiction editors, denies the cliched complaint that there
is a highly circumscribed ''New Yorker'' story. Says McGrath, who edits the
stories of Singer and John Cheever for the magazine: ''We have been accused of
possessing a rarefied sensibility. But in the seven years I've been here, the
magazine has grown increasingly eclectic.'' Indeed, it is one of the few
periodicals that publishes writers like Barthelme, Milan Kundera and Max Frisch,
whose diverse, innovative styles are indicative of The New Yorker's varied
tastes.

William Abrahams pays tribute to the magazi ne in the current O.  Henry
collection: ''The New Yorker, appearing weekly, publishes more than 100 stories
each year. .  .  . The stand ards over the years havebeen very high; the
achievements and rewards, commensurate.''

The New Yorker publishes more stories than any other national magazine. (The
Atlantic publishes about 24 a year, Redbook about 45 - and both are monthlies.)
Its stories are selected by a consensus of editors and are often heavily edited.
McGrath explains the magazine's central paradox: ''The New Yorker exists for its
writers in a way no other magazine does. But it does so by editing.'' The New
Yorker checks facts, rewrites sentences and deletes awkward phrases - all in the
service of clarity, the magazine's byword.

Each year, The New Yorker receives a staggering 50,000 unsolicited manuscripts -
and selects between none and five of those stories from what is commonly
referred to as ''the slush pile.'' The quality of the prose is one explanation
for the harsh statistics and the descriptive label. The subject matter is
another. At the moment there are a lot of hostage stories. Cat-killing stories,
stories about children falling out of windows and college-Angst stories are also
abundant. A disproportionately large number of stories end with ''Suddenly I
woke up'' or ''Suddenly I felt tired.''

Both The Atlantic and Harper's publish short fiction. Lately, however, Harper's
has been publishing fewer stories (sometimes none in a given issue), but The
Atlantic, despite new ownership, continues to run two and sometimes three. What
is particularly encouraging about this Boston-based magazine, which pays $750 to
$1,500 for a story, is the pride it takes in discovering new young writers.
James Alan McPherson, for instance, a black writer from Savannah, Ga., walked
into The Atlantic's offices while he was in his third year at Harvard Law School
with three stories that he had written. The magazine bought two and has been
nurturing the gifted writer ever since. In 1978, McPherson won a Pulitzer for
''Elbow Room,'' a collection of his stories - a rare distinction for a
short-story writer.

In recent years, Redbook, under the direction of the former fiction editor and
current managing editor Anne Mollegen Smith, has heartened many serious fiction
writers with its attention to the short story.  Although it aims at reaching a
mass market of women, Redbook has published excellent short stories, ranging
from William Kotzwinkle's ''Swimmer in the Secret Sea'' to Tim O'Brien's ''Where
Have You Gone, Charming Billy?'' - a story about a soldier in Vietnam, which
later became a novel (''Going After Cacciato'') and won the 1979 National Book
Award. Redbook, which paid as much as $15,000 for a single story in the 1940's,
now pays between $1,000 and $2,000 for short fiction - still heady rates by
today's standards. ''Fiction is by far our most distinguishing trait,'' says
Mrs. Smith. ''Most of the women's magazines have abandoned rich and interesting
fiction. We have the field to ourselves.''

With so few commercial markets, the survival of the short story may depend on
the survival of the little magazine. Most quarterlies, like Antaeus, started by
Paul Bowles in 1970, publish a mix of poetry and fiction. Antaeus, with a
circulation of 5,000, receives 3,000 poems and 200 to 300 unsolicited short
stories a month - and publishes perhaps two a
Pages 142 144
year from the slush pile. Says Halpern, Antaeus's editor, ''If we had as many
readers as we have people sending in stuff, we'd be in good shape.''

Many little magazines tend to be regional in character, publishing the writings
of a certain literary community. One, whose quality has transcended any
criticism of regionalism, is Ploughshares, published in Cambridge, Mass. But De
Witt Henry, its managing edit or, complains: '' Dis-tributors can't be bothered
with quar-terlies, because there 's so little money to be made.'' Book publis
hers will tell you straight out that short-story collections d o not sell - and
that it is only because they see themselves as ''gents'' with a high-minded
commitment to a losing literary prop osition, or because they hope that the
author will eventually '' graduate'' to a block-buster novel, that they publish
them at all.

''Publishers give a short-story writer a two-book contract,'' explains John
Sterling, the former agent. ''They think to themselves, 'Wouldn't it be nice if
the second book was a novel. In fact, why don't we put it that way in the
contract?''

''One of the horrors of the modern world is that mass paperback houses are
concentrating on best sellers,'' says Roger Straus of Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
''It used to be that if a short-story collection sold 5,000 to 15,000 copies and
had good reviews, you could sell it to a paperback house for anywhere from
$5,000 to $50,000. But now the books aren't being bought. We expect to lose
money on short-story collections.''

There are some exceptions, however. John Cheever, whose collected stories sold
120,000 in hard cover and are st ill selling well in paperback, was one of the
very few short-stor y writers ever to make the best-seller list. Isaac Singer's
collecti on, ''Old Love,'' sold 40,000 copies. John Updike's ''Problems and O
ther Stories'' sold 28,000. But for most short-story writers, a t otal sale of
6,000 is remarkably good.

One holdout in this world of Grub Street economics is Seymour Lawrence, who has
his own imprint with Delacorte Press. In 1979, Lawrence published Jayne Anne
Phillips's ''Black Tickets,'' a collection of short stories that brought a great
deal of attention to both the writer and her work. ''We created a market for
Jayne Anne Phillips,'' he says, unabashed. ''We took out a full-page ad in
Publisher's Weekly, and sent 100 proof copies to other writers in advance for
quotes.'' The response was enthusiastic. ''The unmistakable work of early
genius,'' the author Tillie Olsen wrote back. ''It's important for a publisher,
if he has an extraordinary work of short stories, to publish it with the same
kind of advertising enthusiasm as he would a novel,'' says Lawrence. ''Black
Tickets'' sold out its first printing and is now in its second paperback
printing.

On a visit to New York, Jayne Anne Phillips, 28, sat and talked about her work.
Her photograph in Publishers Weekly, the sexual steam of her writing and her
sudden fame earned her the tag from one critic of that year's ''literary
pinup.'' Miss Phillips writes raw visceral prose that is sometimes belabored,
but more often is as powerful as good poetry.

Born in West Virginia, she wrote poetry and stories as she traveled across the
country, working as a waitress for several years before joining the Iowa
Writers' Workshop. She published her stories in obscure literary magazines and
has two collections to her credit (only ''Black Tickets'' has been issued by a
commercial press).  ''This country doesn't support writers either financially or
spiritually,'' she says. ''If it wasn't for the success of 'Black Tickets,' I
don't know what I'd be doing now.''

One exception to short-story poverty is the writer Mark Helprin.  The first
story he ever published ran in The New Yorker 11 years ago when he was 21. Since
then, he has taken it upon himself to promote his stories like an aggressive
salesman. Familiarizing himself with publishers' profit margins and advertising
budgets, Helprin interviewed prospective houses for his newest collection,
''Ellis Island and Other Stories.'' He settled on Seymour Lawrence, and has
already made a whopping $85,000 from his advance and sales of individual
stories. The book will not even appear until January.

In contrast to writers like Ann Beattie who has a very recognizable style,
Helprin's work cannot be so easily identified. His subject matter is eclectic,
his writing classical - reminiscent of the 19thcentury masters of the form. One
possible reason for this is that he absolutely refuses to read any living
writer.  Half a dozen commercial magazines and 750 quarterlies - perhaps 2,000
stories get published each year. For those 2,000 stories there are hundreds of
thousands of manuscripts submitted, many from dedicated short-story writers who
pursue their art religiously despite the odds. Fred Waitzkin of New York, for
instance, has been writing short stories for 11 years. Every day he walks to his
studio in SoHo, where he writes for several hours. He is a very careful writer
and completes about four short stories a year. Although his style is stripped to
the bare bones, there is a subliminal and cumulative dreamlike quality to his
stories. He often writes about difficult subjects: death, illness and lost
moments. He has not yet found the audience for his work.

Waitzkin has been published in The Transatlantic Review and The Yale Literary
Magazine. And he has received what might be called ''rave rejections'' from
quarterlies such as The Kenyon Review, Antaeus and Ploughshares. But he has made
virtually nothing for his labors. To ma ke ends meet, he has taught literature,
run a restaurant an d been supported by his wife. ''The writer often feels like
an impos ter,'' says Waitzkin. ''On a given day, he thinks of himself as a
writer, and then not on another. I'm alive for the days I can write.  They give
me a foundation in life, a raison d'etre in the fullest s ense. There's nothing
I prefer to do more.''

Fred Waitzkin is representative of thousands of short-story writers who are
committed to the genre, and who, by their commitment, lend vitality to the form.
When writers talk about a story they love, there is an intensity, an excitement,
a feeling that they are talking about a work of literature that will endure the
indifferent market and the thin audiences - a work that will survive the way
literature always has.

''The short story has its own laws, and it will outlive all fashion and
circumstance,'' says Isaac Singer. ''It will rise above the literary industry.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Andre Dubus with wife Peggy Rambach

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE DECLINE OF QUALITY

SECTION: Section 6; Page 170, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 123 words


Barbara Tuchman blames the student movements of the 1960's for the loss in
quality she detects in goods and services - especially for the spelling errors
in her mail.

The fact is that the student movements of the 60's were a response to a mediocre
society - segregated, conformist, polluted and housed in rows of suburban shoe
boxes. The student movements were a response to mediocre leaders whose mediocre
foreign policy in Vietnam killed many excellent young men.  REX WEINER DEANNE
STILLMAN

New York City

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR THE PRESIDENT ELECT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3127 words


As a Christmas offering to President-elect Ronald Reagan, The New York Times
Book Review asked a select group of Americans interested in important policy
matters to suggest three books that might help him organize his Administration.

ROBERT O. ANDERSON Chairman of Atlantic Richfield Company.

Business and Public Policy edited by John T. Dunlop (Harvard University Press,
1980). The former Secretary of Labor has assembled contributions from leading
scholars and businessmen on the origins and the not always happy effects of the
unique adversary relationship between business and government in America. Total
cooperation in the Japanese style is unlikely, given our contentious political
system, but we do need to figure some way to tone down the expensive and
unproductive clashes. These essays seem a good place to start the search.

Morale by John W. Gardner (W.W. Norton, 1978). A slim volume (154 pages) such as
this can and should work its way into the Presidentelect's crowded reading
schedule. For many people, the question facing the United States is not whether
we can recapture a vigorous national spirit, but why we should even make the
effort.  John Gardner offers an answer. In simple terms, he believes we can have
a future that demands the best we have to give - if we reach for it.

Energy Future edited by Robert Stobaugh and Daniel Yergin (Random House, 1979).
In the mountain of energy literature that has grown since the 1973 A rab oil
embargo, this book stands out as a balanced, realistic ass essment of where we
are on the problem and what we can do about it.  The chief conclusion is worth
the President-elect's attention: No single source of energy, whether oil, gas,
solar, coal, nuclear , will end the engergy crisis. We need them all, and public
policy on the issue should be made to reflect and support this reality.

DANIEL BELL Henry Ford II Professor of Social Sciences at Harvard and a member
of the President's Commission for an Agenda for the 1980's.

The Paranoid Style in American Politics by Richard Hofstadter (Alfred A. Knopf,
1965). For its discussion of the ''uncommonly angry minds'' and the dark side of
American populism and the American temper.

Facing the Future (The OECD Interfutures Report, 1979). For its discussion of
the new international division of labor and the constraints on any single
country's ability to dominate the world economy.  Peace and War: A Theory of
International Relations by Raymond Aron (Doubleday, 1967). A huge book; but part
one for its discussion of the relation between strategy and diplomacy, and part
four for its quiet discussion of the relation between idealism and realism.

HANS BETHE Professor of Physics Emeritus at Cornell and winner of the Nobel
Prize in Physics.

Energy From Heaven and Earth by Edward Teller (W.W. Freeman, 1979). An
easy-to-read general discussion of energy, from physics and astronomy to a
discussion of the present sources of energy for man and possible policies for
the future.

Energy in America's Future, a study prepare d for Resources for the Future,
Inc., by Sam H. Schurr et al. (Johns Hopkins University Press, 1979). A
comprehensive discussion of e nergy sources and demand. It is very balanced, in
contrast to m ost publications in thisfield. The ''overview'' in the first 70
pages gives sufficient information for policy formulation. It is bac ked by
detailed and wellresearched quantitative assessments of th e various resources
and demands, together with numbers on the cost of the alternatives.

Nuclear Power, Issues and Choices sponsored by the Ford Foundation, administered
by the Mitre Corporation (Ballinger, 1977). A detailed assessment of nuclear
energy, being generally favorable but warning against the dangers of nuclear
weapons proliferation. With contributions from a large number of first-rate
scientists and economists who were not involved in the nuclear power
controversy.

NATHAN GLAZER Professor of Education and Sociology at Harvard and author of
''Affirmative Discrimination'' and other books.

If Martin Anderson, Thomas Sowell and George Gilder were not already among the
President-elect's advisers, some of their books would be strong candidates for
this list. But since they are, I suggest the following:

Counting Our Blessings: Reflections on the Future of America by Daniel P.
Moynihan (Atlantic-Little, Brown, 1980). Invaluable analyses of the growth of
government, the role of the courts, the problems of the snowbelt, SALT, and
other major issues of public policy by our leading scholar-politician.

Micromotives and Macrobehavior by Thomas C. Schelling (W.W.  Norton, 1978).
Despite the title, this is an accessible and fascinating explanation of some of
the ways in which individually unexceptionable actions aggregate into social
howlers, and some of the ways in which matters can be set right, with or without
government.

Philosophy and Public Policy by Sidney Hook (Southern Illinois University Press,
1980). Some very good sense on such issues as the limits of free speech, dissent
and disorder in a democracy, the role of human rights in foreign policy, the
rights of criminals and victims, and other matters that will not go away, by an
indefatigable pragmatist.

THEODORE M. HESBURGH President of Notre Dame University.

Abraham Lincoln by Carl Sandburg (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1972). Particularly
the part relating to the Presidency. In America's greatest hour of disunity,
with racial overtones at that, it took a President with wisdom, courage,
tolerance and patience to pull the nation together after a disastrous war. With
so many special interests tearing the nation apart today, the new President may
well need all of these virtues to a superlative degree, and Lincoln's example is
su perlative.

The Uprooted by Oscar Handlin (Atlantic-Little, Brown, 1973). There is no
society as pluralistic as America, and no story so epic as the great migrations
that constituted what the American people are today. To understand these people,
their origins and their search for a great vision in this country is basic to
any effort the new President must make to rally them behind a great cause, a
better future.

Only One Earth: The Care and Maintenance of a Small Planet by Barbara Ward and
Rene Dubos (W.W. Norton, 1972). It is not only America that the new President
must lead, but in fact the world, which is torn between East-West and
North-South conflicts. Miss Ward and Mr. Dubos give a world vision that is both
challenging and possible and that speaks most fundamentally to human survival.
In the first age of man in which it is literally possible to obliterate mankind
and the world we have created, it is important that the President of the most
potent country on earth have a positive vision of the world in which America is
increasingly an interdependent part, not an isolated whole.

VERNON JORDAN President of the National Urban League.

The State of Black Americans -1980 (National Urban League). This year's edition
of this annual publication includes eight comprehensive papers by outstanding
black intellectuals on such key issues as employment, education, housing, family
life and crime. They would provide Mr. Reagan and his advisers with a clear and
realistic view of what life is like in America for many of its black citizens,
and why any national government must address their needs.

Meanness Mania: The Changed Mood by Gerald R. Gill (Howard University Press,
1980.) All of us are aware of the rightward tilt inthe country, but what needs
to be understood are the adverse implications this has for minorities and the
poor. Mr. Gill's wellreasoned examination of many of the socia l programs now
under attack by the right would be instructive read ing for the new
Administration as it assesses its budgetary p riorities.

HERMA HILL KAY Professor of Law, University of California, Berkeley.

Philosophy and Social Issues: Five Studies by Richard A.  Wasserstrom
(University of Notre Dame Press, 1980). Mr. Wasserstrom examines five current
topics: race and sex discriminatiion, preferential treatment, the obligation to
obey the law, punishment, and conduct and responsibility in war. Mr. Reagan's
approach to these problems may differ from that of Jimmy Carter or Lyndon
Johnson, but he cannot avoid confronting them.

Judicial Review and the National Political Process by Jesse H.  Choper
(University of Chicago Press, 1980). Mr. Reagan may have the opportunity to
appoint several members of the United States Supreme Court. Mr. Choper, a
professor of law, discusses the special role of the Court in exercising the
sensitive function of judicial review. A deeper understanding of the Court's
responsibilities may aid Mr.  Reagan in choosing his nominees.

Presidential Power: The Politics of Leadership, 2d ed., by Richard E. Neustadt
(John Wiley, 1976). This is the classic work on how a President's organization
of his office affects the kind of advice he receives. Its hypotheses, based on
the Roosevelt/Truman/Eisen-hower Presidencies, are currently being re-tested by
a study of the Eisenhower and Johnson Presidencies carried out under a grant
from the Russell Sage Foundation by Fred Greenstein of Princeton University and
Larry Berman of the University of California.

EDWARD I. KOCH Mayor of New York City.

Plain Speaking by Merle Miller (Berkley, 1974). For a clear, shrewd idea of what
a President does.  The Power Broker: Robert Moses and the Fall of New York by
Robert A. Caro (Alfred A. Knopf, 1974). For understanding how New York City and
how power work.

The Eye of the Needle by Ken Follett (Arbor House, 1978). For enjoyment.

RICHARD W. LYMAN President of the Rockefeller Foundation.

American Diplomacy, 1900-1950 by George F. Kennan (University of Chicago Press,
1970). In these brief lectures, the distinguished author of the post-World War
II containment policy ponders the dangers of a moralistic approach to foreign
affairs. First published in 1952, but still relevant to policy making.

Over coming World Hunger: The Challenge Ahead (The Report to the Presidential
Commission on World Hunger, March 1980). It would be tragic if thi s important
work done for President Carter last year were to get l ost in the transition
between two Presidencies, for the problems it d eals with are as important as
any in the world today.

The Subtle Revolution: Women at Work edited by Ralph E. Smith (The Urban
Institute, 1980). Six authors address various aspects of the dramatic movement
of women into the labor force, and its social and economic consequences. Beyond
all of the rhetoric, both for and against the changing role of women, this book
forces the reader to confront the facts -which is not a bad way of closing out
the old year and ushering in the new.

FRANCES FOX PIVEN Co-author with Richard Cloward of ''Regulating the Poor'' and
''Poor People's Movements'' and Professor of Political Science at Boston
University.

Peasant Wars of the Twentieth Century by Eric R. Wolf (Harper & Row, 1969). Mr.
Reagan has promised to restore our prestige and power in the world. He will
therefore need to know something about the events through which American
prestige eroded, and what the reassertion of power will cost us and other
peoples. This book will help him learn what he is up against, morally and
militarily. It provides a good, short course in the major popular revolutions of
our century - in Russia, Mexico, China, Algeria, Cuba and Vietnam - not from the
perspective of governments or parties or leaders, but from the perspective of
the peasant peoples whose lives and ways of living were destroyed by the
depredations of the imperial powers, including American imperial power.

Injury to Insult: Unemployment, Class and Political Response by Kay Lehman
Schlozman and Sidney Verba (Harvard University Press, 1979). Mr. Reagan's
economic policy suggests that the new Administration will try to cut the soci al
pro grams that provide support for the unemployed and underemployed.  Perhaps
Mr. Reagan willbe encouraged in such a move because he belie ves what
conservatives have usually argued - that there are so many unemployed in the
UnitedStates because life is too easy and people do not take work seriously.
This book will help him correct th is misconception. It will tell him something
about the experience of unemployment and the hardship, self-doubt, and anxiety
of those wh o are without work in the United States today.

Injustice: The Social Bases of Obedience and Revolt by Barrington Moore (M.E.
Sharpe, 1978). Why do people at the bottom of a society sometimes acquiesce in
their own victimization and at other times rise in anger to do something about
their circumstances? Mr. Moore explores the startling possibility that, while
people certainly endure abuse, they also demonstrate certain universal
capacities to sense injustice and act against it, perhaps particularly so when
the authorities fail to meet their socially recognized obligations. This book
should give Mr. Reagan cause to worry.

NORMAN PODHORETZ Editor of Commentary and author, mostly recently, of ''The
Present Danger.''

The Gulag Archipelago, 3 vols., by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn (Harper & Row, 1978).
Because it is the most profound portrait of the main enemy with which he will
have to deal.

Arabia, the Gulf and the West: A Critical View of the Arabs and Their Oil Policy
by J.B. Kelly (Basic Books, 1980). Because it is indispensable to an
understanding of the most critical region with which he will have to deal.

White House Years by Henry Kissinger (Little, Brown, 1979). Because it provides
so rich a sense of the immediate historical situation with which he will have to
deal.

DONNA SHALALA President of Hunter College.

Systematic Thinking for Social Action by Alice Rivlin (Brookings Institution,
1971). This is still the best book on how to organize research to improve the
quality of public decision making. I consider it a classic.

The Girl I Left Behind by Jane O'Reilly (Macmillan, 1980). This personal account
of the experience and attitudes of a generation of women who will dominate the
work force during his Presidency may help to reduce Mr. Reagan's anxiety about
the women's movement.

Garden of the Brave in War by Terence O'Donnell (Ticknor & Fields, 1980). I
lived in Iran for two years and believe that, in his memoir of his years there,
Mr. O'Donnell explains more about the cultural context in which we must
understand Iran than any other modern writer about the Middle East.

WILLIAM SIMON Former Secret ary of the Treasury and author, most recently, of
''A Time for Action.''

The Real War by Richard Nixon (Warner Books, 1980). ''The Real War'' is
essential reading for a new President in coming to an accurate understanding of
the broad spectrum of defense and foreignpolicy issues that will confront him in
office.

Free to Choose: A Personal Statement by Milton and Rose Friedman (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1980). While the philosophy espoused in this book will not be news
to Mr. Reagan, ''Free to Choose'' is bound to provide more crucial insights into
what may well prove to be the most critical issue of our day: the connection
between political and economic freedom.

The Spike by Arnaud de Borchgrave and Robert Moss (Crown, 1980).  The President
ought to have some relaxation, and this riveting adventure will provide some
lighter reading while at the same time drawing the President's attention to a
frightening scenario that may prove to be more fact than fiction.

R. EMMETT TYRRELL Jr.  Editor in Chief of The American Spectator and syndicated
columnist.

Bearing in mind that our present leader has not yet had the month or so of free
time that will be necessary for him -speed reader and prodigy that he is - to
draft his own memoirs, I suggest that Mr.  Reagan's friends send him a copy of
Richard Nixon's Memoirs (Grosset & Dunlap, 1978), the most informative of recent
Presidential memoirs. Theodore White once noted Mr. Nixon's fascination with how
things work, and in this book the 37th President not only dilates on how things
work in the White House but also on how things fail to work, a matter every
incoming President must understand. Frugal Reaganites will rejoice in hearing
that the book is now in paperback.

Economizing here is crucial, for my next suggestion is that they give the
President-elect a copy of Selected Writings by Francesco Guicciardini (Oxford
University Press, 1965), the late Florentine historian, diplomat and bon vivant.
The book is out of print and will be somewhat difficult to obtain, but I am sure
that the Republicans can find a bohemian friend to scud on down to the Strand
bookstore for them. Guicciardini is a timeless and audacious source of wisdom on
political problems and their shameless resolution.

Finally it will be necessary for the incoming Administration to understand the
modern media. I still find the best text on this to be Scoop by Evelyn Waugh
(Little, Brown, 1977). Critics insist that this novel is a satire on English
journalism, but a careful reading convinces me that it is a prescient textbook
for the study of journalism in whatever country, democratic or authoritarian,
the art is still practiced.

CHARLES YOST Permanent Representative of the United States to the United Nations
and author of ''History and Memory.''

The Living Presidency by Emmet J. Hughes (Penguin, 1974). This book, by a
journalist who served in the Eisenhower White House, surveys the experience and
performance of Presidents from Theodore Roosevelt to Richard Nixon. It is the
best account I have seen of the political, administrative and personal problems
that any President will confront, and some very sensible suggestions on how to
deal with them and how not to.

The Cloud of Danger: Current Realities of American Foreign Policy by George F.
Kennan (Little, Brown, 1977). This account of the international scene, written
three years ago by the American with longest experience in dealing with the
Soviets, by no means underestimates the challenges with which the Kremlin
confronts us, but it does emphasize the insufficiency and the extreme danger of
excessive military responses by both sides in the nuclear age. Mr.  Kennan
doubts that nuclear war with its appalling consequences can be avoided unless we
and the Soviets, acting together, find much more effective means of controlling
our military competition.

Walter Lippmann and the American Century by Ronald Steel (Atlantic-Little,
Brown, 1980). This excellent biography of Lippmann is much more than that. It is
also a perceptive and instructive account of American involvement in world
affairs from the outbreak of World War I until Lippmann's retirement at the end
of the 1960's.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND JOURNAL

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 3, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1724 words


STARTING tomorrow, the Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. of Suffolk, which used to be the West
Suffolk Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. in Smithtown, will have a new home base - at 74 Hauppauge
Road in Commack. The ribbon-cutting and open house will take place on Dec. 14,
but in the meantime, the Y will officially oc cupy the Green Meadow Junior High
School, part of a five-building , 47-acre complex that it obtained from the
Commack Public School District last spring in a $4.5 million lease-purchase
agreement.

The Metropolitan Jewish Geriatric Center will eventually take over the former
Green Fields Elementary School in the complex, and other communal Jewish
organizations such as the United Jewish Appeal-Federation of Jewish
Philanthropies joint campaign and B'nai B'rith Youth Organization will also be
tenants, making the complex the one of the few such Jewish service centers in
the nation.

Meanwhile, the Y itself, which is nonsectarian and offers family memberships for
$95 a year, will expand its current educational and cultural efforts -a total of
60 programs for residents from toddlers to the elderly. The future, according to
Helaine Strauss, executive director, includes plans for an all-day nursery
school for the children of working mothers and an Olympic-size indoor-outdoor
pool for use by the entire community.

When Eugene Weisbein, a Hempstead Town Councilman, recently proposed to the
Federal Aviation Administration that it require registration numbers two feet
high to be displayed on the wings or fuselage of commercial aircraft, it was in
response to complaints about jet noise made by town residents living in areas
surrounding Kennedy International Airport.

''Many of the aircraft coming into Kennedy Airport are scant hundreds of feet
above our homes,'' said Mr. Weisbein, who is vice chairman of the Hempstead
Town/Village Aircraft Safety and Noise Abatement Committee. ''If residents could
identify the offending aircraft by noting larger registration numbers on the
craft, we could provide proof of jet noise violations to the Port Authority of
New York and the Federal Aviation Administration.''

Coincidentally, the Councilman's efforts have dovetailed with those of
air-traffic controllers nationwide, who have been complaining about problems
associated with unidentified small aircraft violating terminal control areas
near airports.

Fred Farrar, a spokesman for the F.A.A. in Washington, reported that the agency
has proposed that the registration numbers on new and repainted aircraft be
returned to the 12-inch-high size they were before a reduction to approximately
four inches a few years ago.

According to Mr. Farrar, the reduction in the size of the registration numbers
came about in res ponse t o petitions circulated by a group of private pilots
who contended th at the numbers were too large for some aircraft and were not
esthetic in appearance.

The proposal, Mr. Farrar said, is now at the stage where comments from people
associated with aviation and the public are evaluated by the agency. A decision
is expected within the next two weeks.

Mayor Koch may have decided to eliminate bicycle lanes in New York City, but
starting next month, Long Island Rail Road commuters are going to get secure
bicycle racks at a large number of stations in Nassau and Suffolk Counties.

The State Transportation Department will be responsible for constructing the
racks. State Senator Carol Berman of Lawrence, a member of the Senate
Transportation Committee who has been pressing for the racks, said that the
Federal Highway Administration would provide 75 percent of the funds for the
project, with the Nassau County government providing the 25 percent local share.

''It's important from the point of view of energy conservation that those who
commute to New York City make more use of bicycles to get to their stations
instead of cars,'' Senator Berman said. ''And it's important that their bikes be
kept safe from bike-nappers.''

Even before the Reagan Administration takes office, transition teams are making
recommendations on policy and personnel in various departments, commissions and
other units of the Federal Government.  Representative John W. Wydler of Garden
City, the Island's senior House member, who is retiring next month, was
appointed last week to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
transition team.

Mr. Wydler has accumulated some expertise in the subject as ranking minority
member of the House Science and Technology Committee. Mr. Wydler had been close
to former President Ford as a result of their House service together, but he has
not been identified with Mr. Reagan until now.

Transition team members often wind up in the administration in which they serve
as trailblazers. Mr. Wydler said he was not interested in any major, full-time
post but would be interested in serving on a part-time basis, such as a member
of a Federal commission.

Anthony Prudenti, the Suffolk Republican leader, isn't wasting any time looking
for political plums from the Reagan Administration. He has already been to
Washington, pressi ng his recommendations of Assemblyman J ohn Behan of Montauk
for the Veterans Administration administrator post and James Catterson of Port
Jefferson for chairmanship of the Federal Aviation Administration.

Mr. Prudenti submitted both men's resumes to William J. Casey, the Roslyn Harbor
lawyer who was President-elect Ronald Reagan's campaign manager and is
considered likely to receive a major Cabinet post himself.

Mr. Behan, a former East Hampton Town tax assessor, is a Marine Corps Vietnam
veteran. Mr. Catterson, a former assistant district attorney in Suffolk County
and former county attorney in Nassau, has aviation experience as a regional
counsel to the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Association.

Mr. Prudenti's bid for the Federal jobs also explains his public call for George
L. Clark Jr., the Brooklyn Republican leader, to replace Dr. Bernard Kilbourn as
G.O.P. state chairman. Mr. Clark, a Reagan fan long before it was fashionable,
is expected to have a considerable say in the dispensing of Federal patronage to
this state.

Despite what its managing director, Stephen Albert, calls a ''heartening''
response from the public during its three-week fund drive, the Performing Arts
Foundation is not out of the financial woods yet. Its coffers enriched by
$30,000 in contributions from 1,400 donors, by $8,000 that came in in the form
of 200 new subscribers, and by record-breaking single-ticket sales to the
production of ''The Happy Hunter,'' PAF still has raised only enough money to
get it through this week.

''We feel that there are at least another 1,400 donors out there who want us to
survive, but hesitate to contribute because they are unsure of whether we'll be
open, and, ironically, unless they do contribute we may not be,'' Mr. Albert
said.

Meanwhile, as PAF continues to live from week to week, its executives are still
hoping, according to Mr. Albert, that ''some substantial individual or
foundation will see the support we've received from people who appreciate our
services and don't want us to close - why, we've even gotten food stamps and
half of weekly allowances in the mail - and step in with large gifts.''

PAF says it needs $20,000 a week through Dec. 31 to meet operating expenses.
After Jan. 1, corporate contributions will start coming in to cover these
expenses, but an additional $200,000 has to be raised, PAF says, to eliminate
the deficit.

Speaking of culture - both county arts budgets are on the upswing this year, in
a minimal sort of way. After ha ving cuts the last three years, Nassau's Office
of Cultural Deve lopment is due for a raise - if the county budget goes through
as planned next month. The office, which is run by Marcia O'Brien, would receive
an additional $245,984, expanding its annual stipend to $95 2,591.

Most of the increase, however, would not be seen by those who attend cultural
events. The bulk of it would go to pay for security at the Museum of Fine Art in
Roslyn Harbor, which the office operates, for fringe benefits for the staff of
21 and for raises.  Contractural services that bring programming to the public
would increase by some $35,000, to $482,000.

In Suffolk, where the County Office of Cultural Affairs does no programming of
its own but awards grants to local arts groups, the regranting budget would be
increased by $1,000 although the total budget was cut by $344, which will
decrease the amount spent for office expenses. Judith Sneddon, who runs the
office with the assistance of a secretary, had requested $275,000 but would
instead have $212,000 to distribute.

''Considering the major cutbacks elsewhere,'' Miss Sneddon said, ''I guess I
have to be grateful. But more money would have been helpful, especially since
we've been so successful in our outreach efforts and more and more applicants
are coming in to ask for aid.''

When 1981 rolls in, the North Bellmore part of the District Court of Nassau
County will be a thing of the past. Nassau Administrative Judge Paul J. Widlitz
announced that that part of the court had the least volume of civil cases in the
county and therefore the determination was made to shut its doors.

He added that the closing of the North Bellmore part was also due to the success
of mandatory arbitration of civil cases in the district court, which began last
July and has resulted in a significant reduction of civil case loads.

All of the North Bellmore cases will now be transferred to the Hempstead
District Court, and in every case pending, all the parties involved will be
notified by mail of the change.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of bicycle racks

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

R.O.T.C. STILL FIGHTS LEGACY OF THE VIETNAM WAR

BYLINE: By Carol Ann Siciliano

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 12, Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1077 words


PRINCETON THE Reserve Officers Training Corps - the R.O.T.C. - was formed more
than 60 years ago to provide an incentive for college students to enlist in the
armed forces. But according to students now in the program, as well as their
Army commanders, a lot more can be done.

In New Jersey, five institutions -Rider and St. Peter's College and Seton Hall,
Rutgers and Princeton Universities - offer training to a total of 800 Army
R.O.T.C. cadets. There are about 60,000 cadets training in 500 Army, Navy and
Air Force R.O.T.C. programs throughout the country, and most will graduate with
military commissions.

But the program is troubled by the legacy o f the Vietnam War, coupled with
indifference to its aims and a r eluctance to pursue a low-paying career.

Kim Thompson, Princeton University's cadet commander, believes the college
R.O.T.C. program is one of the Army's greatest hidden strengths. However, she
also feels much more could be accomplished.

In 1964, funds were set aside for 5,500 Army R.O.T.C. scholarships a year, and
1,000 more were authorized in 1971. The scholarships cover tuition, textbooks
and a $1,000-a-year living allowance for four years.

Following graduation, each cadet must serve in the Army, National Guard or
reserves for four years. Nonscholarship R.O.T.C. students receive the living
allowance for two years and also are committed to four years of active duty upon
graduation.

Miss Thompson considers the scholarship an effective instrument, but she argues
that the Army, by failing to pay salaries that would make the military
attractive, virtually undoes most of what the R.O.T.C. accomplishes.

''My biggest bone of contention with the Army,'' she said, ''is that they're
spending billions of dollars in weapons systems that will be obsolete before
they are manufactured, while at the same time letting personnel dwindle to the
point where there'd be no Army left to use them.

''What the Army needs to do is spend those billions on the people - by raising
the pay scales and offering more scholarships. People enlist for four years and
then jump out to earn more money somewhere else. And that's what hurts.''

Miss Thompson, the first wom an to command a Princeton R.O.T.C.  unit, says sh e
is looking forward to a full-time career with the Army, but she is skeptical of
the motives of her R.O.T.C. classmates.Of the 100 ca dets enlisted at Princeton,
she said, 68 are on R.O.T.C.scholarships.

''I don't know if student involvement here is encouraged as much by ideological
factors as it is by financial ones,'' she said.  ''R.O.T.C. pays for your
tuition and all your books, and gives you $100 a month to survive. A lot of
people we have are there because it's a good way to pay for a Princeton
education.''

Army officers who direct the state's R.O.T.C. units say the program appeals not
only to those who choose the armed forces out of patriotism, but also to those
who wish to use, later on in some nonmilitary profession, the leadership and
managerial experience that the military provides.

''We provide our cadets with an alternative occupation, and that becomes
especially important with the economy being the way it is,'' said Lieut. Col.
Samuel Wilson, commander of the Seton Hall program, which involves 105 cadets.
''Most of the students do not plan a career in the Army, but we can guarantee
them a decent-paying job and also let them see a part of the world they might
not see otherwise.''

According to Lieut. Col. James P. Drago, the St. Peter's commander, women might
also be attracted to the program because the Army guarantees equal-opportunity
employment.

''There are a lot of fields for women to look into, and they know they are
insured equal pay for equal work,'' he said. ''There's also equal opportunity
for advancement. You don't find that in too many other professions.''

There are 200 cadets at St. Peter's, 243 at Rider and 150 at Rutgers. The number
of women enrolled in the New Jersey R.O.T.C.  hovers between 15 and 30 percent
of the overall corps, depending upon the campus.

''Society has become more accepting of the military lately,'' said Lieut. Col.
John Pope, the Princeton R.O.T.C. commander. ''People are realizing that, unless
you live in an ideal state, a military presence is necessary.''

In the turbulent 1960's and into the last decade, it was impossible for R.O.T.C.
students to wear their uniforms in public without being derided. Many campus
programs shut down.

For the most part, hostility has abated. Even during the campus malaise over
draft registration last spring, the R.O.T.C. programs experienced no harassment.

''I don't believe that the animosity toward the Army that was present in the
early 1970's is evident among the students now,'' Colonel Drago, the St. Peter's
commander, said. ''It's not that they're apathetic; rather, I think it's because
they're more responsible.

''They realize that America is a good country, but that you don't get anything
for nothing. The people now participating in the R.O.T.C. feel a responsibility
toward the country, but at the same time they realize they can get something out
of it for themselves as well.''

The Rutgers commander, Lieut. Col. Richard J. Morgan Jr., offered the
observation that the Northeast was not '' a very positive or supportive
environment for anything military, '' and that the R.O.T.C.program suffered as a
consequence.

''There seems to be an interest in addressing the question of military
readiness,'' he said, ''but there doesn't seem to be any commitment to achieving
it.''

Capt. Dora Hall, who teaches in the Rutgers program and is one of the few women
assigned by the Army to an R.O.T.C. command position, pinpointed another problem
facing recruiters.

''It's hard for college students to think three years in advance,'' she said.
''They don't know what they'll be doing for the four years immediately after
graduation, but most are sure that they don't want to be in the Army.'' Carol
Ann Siciliano

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

POL POT AIDE CAL LS FOR WORLD SUPPORT

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 623 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Nov. 29


Ieng Sary, the Deputy Prime Minister of the ousted Peking-backed regime in
Cambodia, says that Pol Pot was replaced as the group's nominal leader in an
effort to improve its image in the world. He also said that the movement had
abandoned ''the socialist revolution.''

''I believe his name is badly accepted by world opinion,'' Mr. Ieng Sary said of
Mr. Pol Pot in an interview in his hotel room here, ''and we are trying to
mobilize world opinion to support our struggle.''

''We participate in power together now,'' added the Deputy Prime Minister, who
has handled Cambodia's foreign affairs since the Pol Pot forces seized power in
1975. ''Mr. Pol Pot does not want to hang onto power with hooks. If someone else
has the will and capacity to unify the Cambodian people against the Vietmanese
occupiers, we are ready to recognize him.''

Mr. Ieng Sary went on to describe the leadership of the movement as collegial,
with Khieu Samphan as Prime Minister and Mr. Pol Pot handling military matters.

Details of New Program Listed

The Deputy Prime Minister, who stopped here on his way back from the General
Assembly of the United Nations to the Pol Pot forces' enclave on the
Thai-Cambodian border, spelled out details of the new program espoused by his
colleagues.

Mr. Ieng Sary said that all political parties would now be allowed. ''We want a
country governed by a parliamentary regime,'' he said.  ''We accept free
elections under the supervision of the United Nations. If we are elected, we
will carry out our program. If not, we will go into loyal opposition.''

Mr. Ieng Sary continued: ''We will allow freedom for all religions and
education. Marriages will be free and families live together.'' Economically,
the Deputy Prime Minister said, ''we will introduce the protection of private
property for our citizens and foreigners who want to invest in Cambodia.''

He added: ''There will be voluntary, not enforced cooperatives, not like before,
and cooperation with foreign companies. After all, we are an undeveloped
country.''

Good Things and Errors

Asked why the Pol Pot Government enforced the opposite of all these measures
while in power - a four-year period in which countless thousands of Cambodians
perished by murder, starvation and untreated illnesses - the Deputy Prime
Minister replied:

''We made a revolution. The revolution in Vietnam and in France made many
errors, too; many good things and many errors. We tried.'' Invited to list the
good things accomplished by the revolution, Mr. Ieng Sary hesitated and called
on an associate, Thiounn Thioum, Ministe r for Economy and Finance, to reply.

Mr. Thiounn Thioum, a former Phnom Phen businessman and law instructor, himself
a victim of the regime's uprooting of the city population and confinement in
forced labor collectives, said great progress had been made in agriculture.

''As an intellectual, working under those conditions was not a pleasure,'' he
added. As the brother of Mr. Pol Pot's leading diplomat, Thiounn Prasith, the
regime's permanent representative at the United Nations, Mr. Thiounn Thioum is
believed to have been confined in a privileged cooperative.

The Minister for Economy said that private cultivation was prohibited, workers
were not consulted on matters regarding their work, days of rest were extremely
rare and discontent was widespread.

But as he fled from the Vietnamese last year, after the invasion broke up the
labor communes, Mr. Thiounn Thioum said he saw that agriculture had prospered
throughout the country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
ANOTHER NOBLE CAUSE?;
by Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 882 words


The document says American policy toward Country X has ''identified our
interests with a relatively weak, unpopular and isolated regime.'' It argues
that ''our actions and our words have narrowed down our policy to a single path
of gradual escalation of direct military involvement ... in a political context
that gives the use of force few chances to achieve a satisfactory outcome.''

It might be a dissenting document from the early days of American involvement in
Vietnam - something written by a C.I.A. analyst in, say, 1964. If such an
analysis had appeared in the Pentagon Papers when that history was published in
1971, its gloomy forecast would have been regarded as extraordinarily prescient.

In fact, it is a document dissenting from U.S. policy toward El Salvador today.
Now circulating in Washington, it bears no names but is attributed to ''current
and former officials'' of the C.I.A., the State and Defense Departments and the
National Security Council. It was first disclosed by a Boston Globe specialist
on Latin America, Stephen Kinzer.

El Salvador is a small Central American country, population 4.5 million, of
which most North Americans know little - about like Vietnam in the early 1960's.
Unlike Vietnam, it is in our back yard; history and geography demand United
States concern when El Salvador is in turmoil. And for the last year it has been
in bloody turmoil.

On Oct. 15, 1979, reformist army colonels overthrew El Salvador's rightist
government. A mixed regime of military men and moderate-left civilians has
governed since. It has redistributed land to peasants and nationalized banks.
But it has been preoccupied by violence from right and left.

More than 8,000 people have been murdered in El Salvador so far in 1980 -
compared with 2,000 in the last 11 years of sectarian violence in Northern
Ireland. Most of the vic tims were shot or bludgeoned to death by right-wing
''death squ ads.'' Last week gunmen kidnapped left-wing political leaders from a
press conference; the next day bodies of six were found, shot after torture. The
right has attempted two coups.

On the left, guerrillas have killed not only soldiers and businessmen but
members of the centrist Christian Democratic Party, which is in the government.
The guerrillas are believed to be getting help from Nicaragua, and a victory for
them would be seen as extending the influence of Fidel Castro's Cuba in Central
America.

The Carter Administration, opposed to the guerrillas but concerned about the
effects of rightist terror, has followed a middle policy.  It strongly supports
the El Salvador junta and has condemned the right-wing coup attempts. It has a
small military advisory group in the country. But because of human rights
violations by the security forces and death squads, Washington has embargoed
sales of ''lethal'' military equipment.

The dissent ing document now circulating in Washington argues that the Carter po
licy will not meet its objectives, which are to limit Cuban and Sov iet
influence in Central America and promote stable, pluralistic g overnments. The
authors say there is a drift toward U.S. military involvement that will tend to
expand the conflict in ElSalvador, off end moderate governments in the region
and actually serve Soviet and Cuban interests.

''Various U.S. Government agencies,'' the document says, ''have taken
preparatory steps to intervene militarily in El Salvador.'' It says that Mexico,
Panama, Venezuela, Ecuador and Costa Rica, concerned at the trend, are moving
away from support of U.S. policy.

The oncoming Reagan Administration has to regard the situation in El Salvador as
one of the most threatening it faces. In the last few days members of the
leading El Salvador business group, the Productive Alliance, have been in
Washington talking to Reagan advisers. They told reporters that the advisers
said combat military and financial aid would come quickly from a Reagan
Administration, but warned against a rightist military coup.

One of the Reagan advisers, Jean Kirkpatrick of the American Enterprise
Institute, said afterward that no policies had been worked out but that the new
Administration would try to see that ''Castroite guerrillas'' do not ''take
power by force of arms.'' The existing El Salvador Government, she said, was
already of a social democratic type, ''profoundly reformist.''

The trouble is that the reformist character of the government installed a year
ago has faded with the violence. Many now believe it has slipped to the right
and protected rightist violence. During last week's kidnapping, 200 men in
police and military unforms surrounded the area. The Government's political
appeal, in the country and outside, has declined.

That is what the dissenters see in their critical document. But their solution -
that the U.S. work for a ''Zimbabwe solution'' with the guerrillas -is also
highly risky. Hence the danger that Washington, in the early Reagan months, will
slip into military escalation in El Salvador.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DORTHY DAY, CATHOLIC ACTIVIST, 83, DIES

BYLINE: By ALDEN WHITMAN

SECTION: Section D; Page 12, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2617 words


Dorothy Day, a founder of the Catholic Worker Movement and a leader for more
than 50 years in numerous battles for social justice, died Saturday evening at
Maryhouse, the Catholic settlement house on Manhattan's Lower East Side where
she lived. She was 83 years old.

Miss Day, who founded many homes for the poor and homeless, including Maryhouse,
at 55 East Third Street, died after a long illness, which had confined her to
her room in recent years.

Because she was a nonviolent social radical of luminous personalityas well as a
pious Roman Catholic, Dorothy Da y played a seminal role in developing the
social and economic thinkin g of a generation of American priests and laymen.

The Catholic Worker Movement, which she helped found in 1933, was a precursor of
the activist movement that began to flower 35 years later.

Theologically Traditional

''When it comes to labor and politics,'' she once said, ''I am inclined to be
sympathetic to the left, but when it comes to the Catholic Church, then I am far
to the right.''

What she meant was that she was theologically and even liturgically traditional,
but radical in matters of social justice, race relations, pacifism and
conscientious objection to military service.

Attempting to sum up her movement some years ago, Miss Day remarked that she had
sought ''to work so as to bring about the kind of society where it is easier for
people to be good.''

''I think we're primarily trying to live our faith and we think in terms of man
showing his faith, his love of God, by his love of brother,'' she went on. ''We
are trying to live the Second Commandment and to fulfill the counsels of the
Gospel, not just the precepts.''

'A Christian Revolution'

Miss Day's anarchopacifism, spread by the monthly Catholic Worker, of which she
was a co-founder, and by her tireless personal explanation, appealed to many
middle-class intellectuals in the church, whose social liberalism emerged from
the 1930's onward as a counterforce to a largely conservative hierarchy.

''It was a Christian revolution she was starting,'' the Rev.  Dennis Geaney
recalled, adding: ''She was opening the minds of bishops, priests, seminarians
and lay people to the fact that Christianity was not a stuffy sacristy affair.
She was a trumpet calling for all of us to find Christ in the bread lines, the
jails, a tenant farmer, migratory worker or Negro.''

Describing Miss Day as ''the inspiration behind the creative force of the
American Catholic left,'' the Rev. Raymond A. Schroth of George Washington
University counted among her ''children'' the Association of Catholic Trade
Unionists; John Cogley, the liberal intellectual; Michael Harrington, the
sociologist and writer; Thomas Merton, the Trappist author; David Miller, the
Vietnam War resister; the Rev. Daniel Berrigan and his brother, the Rev. Philip
Berrigan, foes of the Vietnam conflict; and Cesar Chavez, the union organizer.
In addition, her influence produced the so-called ''labor priests'' and affected
the thought of Msgr. Ivan Illich, the controversial educator.

Miss Day's secular radicalism, which looked to the person rather than to mass
action to transform society, had little in common with reform and did not seek
the overthrow of capitalism and its network of property relationships.

Opposed Class Politics

Although she defended individual Communists, some of whom remained close friends
after her conversion to Catholicism, Miss Day opposed class politics and class
struggle and Communist ideology.

This, along with her respect for ecclesiastical authority, explained her ability
to challenge the social conservatism of such hierarchs as the late Francis
Cardinal Spellman and his chief of chancery, Bishop James Francis McIntyre,
later a Cardinal.

Both, it was said were often sorely tempted to rebuke Miss Day - her ardent
support of Catholic cemetery strikers a number of years ago especially irked
Cardinal Spellman - but they never could catch her in any breach of church
regulations.

''What would you do,'' she was asked, ''if the Cardinal ordered you to stop
publishing?'' ''I would gladly obey,'' Miss Day replied, adding after a moment
and with a smile, ''There are many ways, you know, to handle a Cardinal.''

Emphasis Changed Over the Years

''Besides, McIntyre was afraid he just might be dealing with a saint,'' James
O'Gara, the editor of Commonweal, said. He was alluding to what has been called
Miss Day's ''indiscriminate and uncompromising love of the Mystical Body'' as
well as to her courage and her care for the poor in hospices she established in
New York and elsewhere.

Miss Day's movement underwent several changes of emphasis over the years. It
started out in 1933 as Green Revolution, heavily influenced by the ideas of
Peter Maurin, who styled himself ''an Apostle on the bum.'' At the time - the
Great Depression was searing America - the program was to open ''houses of
hospitality'' t o shelter and feed thepoor, as had the monks after the fall of
the Roman Empire. Once bodily necessitites were cared for, the poor were to be
induced to return to the land in farm communes.

Several of these farms were eventually established across the country, including
one on Staten Island and another in Tivoli, N.Y.  The Catholic Worker, a penny
monthly, was set up to promote the program. It once reached a circulation of
150,000 and now is about 85,000. Its early articles dealt with poverty and
unemployment, and matters of social justice have never been absent from it. But,
starting with World War II, the periodical began to develop opposition to
conscription and in the 1960's it was a full-fledged opponent of the Vietnam
War.

Nonviolence Stressed

Intermingled with an enunciation of pacifism, the paper agitated for Negro
rights, day care centers and farm unions and other liberal causes. In all these
concerns Miss Day's stress was on nonviolent solutions, even when she was jailed
or shot at for her personal participation in events.

Part of the effectiveness of Miss Day's movement was Miss Day herself. An
indefatigable traveler and speaker, she talked in simple language and with
unassuming earnestness. Once a tall (5 feet 9 inches) and robust (185 pounds)
beauty, she retained her handsomeness into advanced age. She had lively,
slightly slanting blue eyes and high cheekbones.

When she was not traveling, Miss Day's daily life was spent in a large
''community'' picked up from here, there and everywhere. She coexisted with
uncongenial people, ate bad food and wore cast-off clothing, according to Mr.
Cogley, who added:

''At the same time she was extraordinarily aware of unpleasant smells and
raucous sounds. She had a sophisticate's love of bright conversation, classical
music, good books and the theater. This part of her - the artistic side - was
frequently indulged. When it was, she seemed quite aloof from the people around
her. And for all the talk about community, she was a very private person, with
seemingly endless reservoirs of self-reliance.''

'The First Hippie'

Even when she was stooped with age and hobbled by arthritis, and silent in
contemplation amid the babble around her, she seemed undefinably young and
liberated. Abbie Hoffman once called her ''the first hippie,'' and the
description pleased her immensely.

Save in strength of conviction, the Dorothy Day of voluntary poverty and other
worldly humility was at some remove from an earlier pre-C atholic Dorothy Day,
who was a figure in the Greenwich Village of Eu gene O'Neill and Mike Gold and
Elizabeth Gurley Flynn.

Born in Brooklyn, Nov. 8, 1897, she was the third of five children of John I.
and Grace Satterlee Day. Her father was a sports writer, and the family lived in
California and Chicago before migrating back to New York, where Mr. Day worked
for The Morning Telegraph. The family atmosphere was largely agnostic; affection
was restrained and financial security tended to be erratic.

When she was 15 and living in Chicago, she was introduced to social protest. ''I
read Jack London's books, 'Martin Eden,' and his essays on the class struggle
(and also) 'The Jungle' by Upton Sinclair,'' Miss Day recalled in ''The Long
Loneliness,'' her autobiography.

Found Appeal in Slogan

Entering the University of Illinois on a scholarship in 1914, she read
Dostoevsky, Tolstoy and Gorky and joined the Socialist Party.  ''The Marxist
slogan, 'Workers of the world unite! You have nothing to lose but your chains,'
seemed to me a most stirring battle cry,'' Miss Day said in retrospect, noting
that she was turned off from religion by the smugness of many of its
practitioners. ''For me Christ no longer walked the streets of this world,'' was
how she put it.

When the Days moved to New York in 1916, Dorothy quit college and went to work
for The Call, a New York Socialist daily. It was a time of great loneliness for
her as well as indignation over the sights and smells of poverty on the Lower
East Side, where she lived for a time.

On The Call, Miss Day was caught up in the left-wing ideological debates of that
time, and she found herself much in sympathy with the free-wheeling syndicalism
of the Industrial Workers of the World (the Wobblies) and with the nonviolent
anarchism of Leo Tolstoy and with the British distributists. However, she signed
up with the I.W.W.

Met Leon Trotsky

In her work and ramblings around the Village she met Leon Trotsky, Robert Minor,
who was to become a Communist official; Hippolyte Havel, the anarchist who
boasted that he had been in every jail in Europe; Frank Harris, the writer and
editor; Max Eastman, John Reed, Floyd Dell and Merrill Rogers, all of The
Masses, the libertarian magazine.

Miss Day also met Mike Gold about the time in 1917 that she went to work at The
Masses. Mr. Gold, who was to write ''Jews Without Money'' and who was to be a
leading Communist, and Miss Day became lovers for several years. Through Mr.
Gold, Miss Day was introduced to the Playwrights' Theater and to Eugene O'Neill.

She began to play and drink and sing with the literary group whose informal
headquarters was the Hell Hole, a Village saloon. ''We'd sit around and talk,''
she recalled. ''In the back room of the Hell Hole you couldn't talk without
others hearing you. Everyone table-hopped.  We were very happy and very young.
There was such joy in the discovery of people and ideas. Gene recited 'The Hound
of Heaven,' which was my first real link to Catholicism.''

The 183-line poem by the ardently Catholic Francis Thompson contained these
lines, among others, that haunted Miss Day.  I fled Him, down the nights and
down the days; of the years; I fled Him, down the labyrinthine ways Of my own
mind ...

Later, when Miss Day was a Catholic, she prayed for Mr. O'Neill as she also
prayed for Mr. Gold.  When The Masses was suppressed for opposing the war, Miss
Day worked for The Liberator, its successor, and as a freelance writer.  She
lived casually, staying once, for example, in an I.W.W. flophouse in Chicago and
being arrested when it was raided as a disorderly house.

Desired Baby's Baptism

After her affair with Mr. Gold, Miss Day had a number of other liaisons,
culminating in the mid-1920's in a common-law marriage with Forster Batterham.
The couple lived on Staten Island and had a child, Tamar Teresa, born in 1927. A
desire to have the baby baptized as a Catholic precipitated her mother's
decision to join the church.

''To become a Catholic meant for me to give up a mate with whom it was the
simple question of whether I chose God or man.'' The origins of her conversion
went back to her childhood, which was more withdrawn than most youngsters. At 15
she was thinking that ''God is love, ever present, ready to enfold us and
comfort us and hold us up.'' Later on she read the Bible, attended mass, admired
the Catholic liturgy, read Pascal's ''Pensees'' and developed ''mystical
feelings.'' When she was pregnant she read ''The Imitation of Ch rist'' a nd
concluded that she was ''going to have my child baptized, cos t what it may.''

''I knew that I was not going to have her floundering through many years as I
had done, doubting and hesitating, undisciplined and amoral,'' she went on.
''For myself, I prayed for the gift of faith.''

This was vouchsafed to her when her baby was baptized, and shortly after she was
received into the church, bringing with her the passion for social justice she
had acquired from her associations with the poor and the dispossessed.

Beginning of The Worker

These feelings she began to express in articles for Commonweal, a liberal
Catholic magazine, through whose editor she met Mr. Maurin, a man of French
peasant background and full of enthusiasm for building what he envisioned as a
good world. As part of his program to change the hearts and minds of Catholics
(and the unchurched) and to direct them to social matters, he and Miss Day
started the Catholic Worker in May, 1933.

They also opened a hospice on the Lower East Side for the unemployed, where food
could be dispensed. At Mr. Maurin's death in 1949, the Catholic Worker Movement
had spread across the country, although not without many misgivings on the part
of the hierarchy. As Miss Day and Mr. Maurin put together a social philosophy,
they opposed the generally accepted Catholic support of Franco in the Spanish
Civil War, and they opposed conscription in World War II.

Along with Miss Day's promotion of a decentralized, cooperative social order
went an increasing agitation for personal resistance to war and to force, which
was expressed in the Catholic Peace fellowship and the American Pax Association.

Thus Miss Day came to side with the draft-card burners in the Vietnam war and
with acts of conscientious disobedience to the state as a war maker. Much of her
time in her last years was taken up in opposing that conflict.

In March 1972, Miss Day was named recipient of Notre Dame's Laetare Medal,
considered the university's highest honor. The citation praised her for
''comforting the afflicted and afflicting the comfortable virtually all of her
life.''

Miss Day is survived by her daughter, Tamar Teresa, and a brother, John.

A wake for Miss Day will be held today at M aryhouse from 1 P.M. to 10 P.M.
followed by a private funeral at the Church of the Nativity, 44 Second Avenue at
11 A.M. tomorrow. A publi c memorial mass is also planned.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Dorthy Day

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

INQUIRY ASKED BY JUDGE WHO HAD SUSPECT AS GUEST

BYLINE: By PETER KIHSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1079 words


A Criminal Court judge who released a murder suspect without bail last week and
let her stay overnig ht in his home has asked the New York State Co mmission on
Judicial Conduct to look into the matter, according to the administrative judge
of the court in Brooklyn.

The administrative judge, Acting Justice Nicholas Coffinas of State Supreme
Court, said yesterday that the court proceedings had been ''judicially
correct,'' and he praised the Criminal Court judge, Alan I. Friess, as being
''most competent'' with ''extraordinary concern'' for victims and defendants.

However, Mayor Koch said that Judge Friess had been ''dumb and injudicious.''
The Mayor told reporters it was ''inappropriate for a judge to take a defendant
home with him, no matter what the sex.'' He said the judge could have told the
police to put her in a hotel or could have given her $25 to get her own hotel
room.

The administrator of the judicial commission, Gerald Stern, said late yesterday
that the commission had not yet received a request by Judge Friess for an
inquiry, and that a decision on whether to start an investigation would probably
not be made until the 11 members meet Dec. 17 and 18.

Justice Coffinas released transcripts of last week's two court hearings that
showed that prosecutors had charged that the woman, Elisia Fominas, 24 years
old, had participated last September in the murder and dismemberment of her
3-year-old daughter, Cassandra Barrett.

The transcripts showed that an assistant district attorney, Richard Wechter, had
contended that Judge Friess's having Mrs. Fominas go home with him was
''improper'' because ''quite possibly statements might have been made by the
defendant to Judge Friess.''

Mrs. Fominas, auburn-haired and wearing a green jacket with a redlined hood
hanging over her shoulders, and her husband, Anatolis Fominas, were separately
ordered to continue to be held without bail yesterday by Judge Jerome M. Becker
of Criminal Court in Brooklyn following indictments charging them with murder
and hindering prosecution. A State Supreme Court hearing was set for Dec. 9.

Judge Becker said Mr. Fominas, represented by a court-appointed lawyer, Trevor
Headley, had a long history of violence and arrests.  A new court-appointed
counsel for Mrs. Fominas, Stephen Flamhaft, pleaded for reopening the case in
the grand jury to enable Mrs.  Fominas to testify there. Mr. Flamhaft said he
would make a State Supreme Court motion if necessary.

An assistant district attorney, Albert Koch, noted that a previous defense
lawyer, Bernard Udell, had said at last week's hearing that she did not want to
go before the grand jury.

The transcripts showed that a Legal Aid defense lawyer, Mark Wiener, had
initially told Judge Friess that Mrs. Fominas had denied beating her child but
had insisted she had been held captive, drugged and abused by her husband, who
''forced her to help hide the body.''

Mrs. Fominas then told Judge Friess that ''I had reason to believe my husband
was going to kill me'' and a second daughter, Chelsea, 2.  As a result, Mrs.
Fominas said, she and her parents had taken that daughter from Brookdale
Hospital last month to Lawton, Okla.

Asked by Judge Friess where she would stay, Mrs. Fominas said, ''I'd just as
soon stay in jail; at least there I know I am safe.'' Judge Friess then said
that ''I am prepared to find you lodging for this evening with a woman friend of
min e - yo u can have Thanksgiving dinner with us tomorrow'' before returning to
court for a new bail motion by the District Attorney.

Gave Her a Spare Room

At the Thursday night hearing, Judge Friess said he had provided her with a
spare room in his home, with the court having adjourned at 12:45 A.M.

To avoid any semblance of impropriety, Judge Friess said he would remove himself
from any role in the proceedings to give Judge Becker a fresh start in the case.

Only when Judge Becker took over was it brought out that there had been a Family
Court order entrusting the hospitalized child, Chelsea, to the city's Bureau of
Child Welfare.

Officials of that agency said yesterday that this had occurred on Nov. 7 and
that a warrant for Mrs. Fominas's arrest had been issued Nov. 19 because of the
child's removal.

'Judicial Temperament' Cited

In his statement, Justice Coffinas said Judge Friess ''is a most competent judge
possessing judicial temperament, integrity, full and complete knowledge of the
law.''

He said Judge Friess ''considers each and every case before him as the most
important issue for his judicial decision.'' Judge Friess, 39, was graduated
from Harvard College in 1963. He received a master's degree in industrial and
labor re lations from Cornell Unive rsity in 1965 and then entered New York
University Law School.

Mayor Koch said he had appointed Judge Friess following a recommendation from
Basil A. Paterson, former Deputy Mayor for labor relations. Judge Friess had
been general counsel in the city's Office of Labor Relations during 1978 wage
negotiations.

Called 'First-Class Lawyer'

Mr. Paterson, now New York's Secretary of State, said Judge Friess had been ''a
first-class lawyer and a sensitive, involved man.'' Judge Friess was convicted
of a misdemeanor - harassment - on Feb.  5, 1971, in a nonjury trial before
Judge Walter J. Bayer in Criminal Court. He was charged with trying to force his
way past the police during an antiwar demonstration on Feb. 16, 1970, in an
attempt to reach arrested demonstrators for whom he was a defense lawyer.

He received a conditional discharge in the case, and the conviction was upheld
by the State Court of Appeals.  Edward N. Costikyan, who was vice chairman of
the judicial screening committee of the City Bar Association when Judge Friess
was appointed to the bench in May 1979, said yesterday: ''Just as a general
principle, harassment arrests were not uncommon in the 1960's during the Vietnam
War. It doesn't follow that anyone involved in such an incident was unfit for
appointment.''

He received a conditional discharge in the case, and the conviction

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PANEL SAYS RESETTLEMENT IN U.S. ENCOURAGES INDOCHINESE EXODUS

BYLINE: By JUAN de ONIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 532 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 1


Resettlement of Indochinese refugees in the United States, at an annual cost of
$1 billion, is attracting Vietnamese and Laotians who would not run serious
risks by staying in their own countries, according to a study released today by
the Joint Economic Committee of Congress.

''Most recent arrivals are 'low-risk' refugees who do not belong to harassed
minority groups, do not have close family ties in the United States and were not
associated with American programs during the war, '' the staff study said.

Senator Lloyd Bentsen, Democrat of Texas, the committee chairman, said that the
resettlement program had encouraged an exodus of refugees ''who are not fleeing
immediate threat to life and property.''

Indochinese refugees are expected to make up nearly 80 percent of all admissions
in the current fiscal year under the refugee level of 217,000 proposed by the
Carter Administration, as provided by law.

400,000 Refugees Admitted

United States has admitted more than 400,000 refugees from Indochina since the
withdrawal of United States military forces from Vietnam in 1975, and 168,000
more Indochinese refugees are scheduled for admission in the fiscal year that
began Oct. 1.

The Congressional study said that the United States decision to accept a high
number of Indochinese refugees for resettlement had been made largely to avoid
creating political unrest in or diplomatic problems with Thailand and Malaysia,
the two countries where most Indochinese refugees had first sought asylum.

In the case of Cambodian refugees entering Thailand, the study said that the
relief operation financed by the United States ''to some extent aids the Khmer
resistance groups that are fighting the Vietnamese-supported Heng Samrin
Government'' in Cambodia. The former Cambodian regime of Pol Pot, backed by the
Khmer guerrillas, has a secret headquarters near the Thailand border and
exercises political control in some of the refugee camps where the Cambodians
are housed and fed by international relief agencies.

Bases for Insurgency

The study said that refugee camps in Thailand had served as bases for Laotian
insurgents who continued to operate across the border against against Communist
Pathet Lao forces.

However, the study said, the great majority of recent refugees were not
combatants but people who had fled Vietnam and Laos because they ''expect fairly
rapid resettlement'' in the United States.

''There is no case-by-case screening to determine if the person is likely to be
persecuted if returned to his country of origin, which is the definition of
'refugee' according to the 1980 United States Refugee Act,'' the study said.

Representative Clarence J. Brown, Republican of Ohio, the ranking Republican
member of the committee, said that the burden of the Indochina refugee
resettlement program was ''not being shared adequately'' by Japan, which has
provided $60 million, or by Indonesia and the Philippines, which have taken in
few refugees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A Man With a Hammer

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 712 words


In a swift, severe display of discipline several weeks ago, New York's Police
Commissioner McGuire removed the commander of all uniformed forces in northern
Brooklyn because two of his policemen shot an emotionally disturbed man without,
allegedly, following departmental procedures.

Now, a grand jury has indicted the disturbed man for assaulting the two officers
with a hammer. Although the grand jury is still investigating the officers'
actions, the indictment suggests that they acted in self-defense. Does this mean
Commissioner McGuire was too harsh on Assistant Chief Harold Schryver? The
answer is no.

Last year, after a a mentally disturbed man was shot to death by the police in
the same precinct, the Commissioner set new rules for dealing with the deranged.
Officers were required, whenever possible, to call for specially trained units,
to use Mace instead of revolvers in subduing the unruly and to let a sergeant
decide whether other tactics were required. In Mr. McGuire's judgment, those
rules were not followed in the recent case. And, apparently, Commander Schryver
not only failed to see that they were followed, but falsely reported that they
had been.

Much of what police officers do happens under tense and dangerous circumstances,
or out of sight of their superiors. Adequate training and detailed guidelines
form a basis for proper conduct. But the surest way to gain strict adherence to
policies is to hold commanders accountable. The Commissioner did it right.
A Human Kind of Saint

Dorothy Day, who died Sunday at the Lower East Side settlement house she
founded, was one of the last survivors of that extraordinary crucible of
political and literary thought which was Greenwich Village of the 1920's.

Irreligious, involved in several liaisons and a common-law marriage, she
underwent a kind of Saul-to-Paul transformation, converted to Catholicism and
became the mother of the American Catholic left. A pacifist, arrested many times
for civil disobedience, she was a leader in the Vietnam protest. ''There is only
one way to end this insane war,'' she is reported to have said.  ''Pack the
jails with our men!'' Theologically conservative and thus not apt to favor women
entering the priesthood, she nonetheless served her own alternative parish,
composed of the poor, the displaced, the dispossessed, for whom she opened homes
and hospices.

A very human kind of saint, elegant and sometimes imperious, Dorothy Day was,
above all, a prophetic witness. Her goal, she said once, was ''to bring about
the kind of society where it is easier to be good'' and to that end she herself
pursued goodness. There is no one who can have died with a clearer conscience.

Spring Collections

A gardener we know feels a direct, though not dressy, kinship to haute couture.
She has finally finished her spring planting of Dutch bulbs. The job involves
formidable arithmetic: 350 (daffodils, tulips, irises, crocuses) x 7 inches deep
= dozens of hours with the trowel.

Despite the chap of her hands, our friend finds gardeners to be quite like
high-fashion couturiers. For both, the work on their spring collections must be
finished in the fall. Each bulb must be tucked in for the winter by the time the
las t Balenciaga moves off the runway.

Soap on the Rocks

The Wall Street Journal brings news of one entrepreneur's imaginative effort to
raise productivity. The Quincy, Mass., city elders take a dim view of public
dancing on the Sabbath. Hence all dance floors have been closed on Sundays. But
Quincy happens to be more permissive about another pastime, namely, the
consumption of alcoholic beverages. And that gave the manager of Quincy's
California Disco an idea.

Now club patrons are invited to while away their Sunday happy hours watching
video tapes of the previous week's episodes of a popular daytime soap opera.
Does no one in Quincy perceive a double standard? Tune in next Sunday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

f PR ELUDE TO A DECISION NOT TO RECOGNIZE VIETNAM

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 412 words


To the Editor:

I was the chairman of the seven-person religious delegation to the White House
described by Anthony Barnett in his Nov. 13 Op-Ed article, ''America, Recognize
Vietnam.'' Barnett quotes accurately the response of National Security Council
member Lincoln Bloomfield to our pleas on the matter of normalization of
relations with Vietnam. However, in order to understand the full impact of Dr.
Bloomfield's comment to us on April 17, it is necessary to understand the
historical context in which the comment was made.

On Dec. 13, 1979, I met at the White House with Dr. Bloomfield to discuss
normalization of relations with Vietnam. At that meeting, Dr. Bloomfield asked
me to prepare a memorandum for the National Security Council on why such a move
by the United States would be in America's interests. I prepared the memorandum
and sent it to Dr.  Bloomfield. That document contained four major points.

First, U.S. diplomatic recognition of Vietnam would increase American leverage
in Hanoi on a wide range of outstanding issues between our two nations,
including allegations concerning the use of poison gas in Laos, reports that
Vietnam continues to hold the remains of some American M.I.A.'s and the
continuing occupation of Cambodia by Vietnam.

Second, recognition of Vietnam would provide an opportunity for the United
States to lessen Soviet influence in Southeast Asia by providing the Vietnamese
with a foreign-policy alternative to exclusive reliance on the U.S.S.R.

Third, normalization of relations would allow U.S. companies to resume trade
with Vietnam, which is rich in oil and other natural resources.

Fourth, normalization of relations with Vietnam would enable the United States
to participate in previously established emigration procedures for Vietnamese
refugees and in the distribution and monitoring of relief supplies in Cambodia.
Significantly, five members of our seven-person delegation to the White House on
April 17 represented religious agencies with active relief programs in Cambodia.
We all felt that normalization of relations with Vietnam would aid our work.

It was after Dr. Bloomfield had received this memorandum, and had reportedly
circulated it among the members of the National Security Council, that he said,
''There is no reason to normalize relations with Vietnam other than liberal,
neurotic guilt.''
JERRY ELMER, Field Secretary, American Friends Service Committee Providence,
R.I., Nov. 18, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 2, 1980

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 948 words


Persian Gulf Crisis
Continuing Syrian troop movements were reported near the Jordanian frontier,
prompting King Hussein to describe the threat of an attack as ''grave.'' In an
interview, the King said that he had asked the United States and other Western
countries to speed the delivery of arms already ordered by Jordan. (Page A1,
Column 6.)

Another U.S. reply on the hostages held by Ir an is being taken to Algiers by
Deputy Secretary of State Warren M . Christopher. State Department officials
said that Mr. Christophe r and his aides would remain in Algeria as long as
necessary to bri ef the Algerian intermediaries thoroughly on the ''clarificat
ions'' sought by Iran toWashington's original response to the conditi ons for
freeing the captives. (A15:1.)
International
Moscow has granted aid to Poland equivalent to $1.3 billion to help ease the
country's economic problems, Stanislaw Kania, the Communist leader, said.
Addressing the Central Committee in Warsaw, he emphasized that Poland's
leadership had maintained clos e links with the Soviet Un ion. (A1:5.)
A Soviet economic slowdown was confirmed in Moscow's disclosure of its first
goals for a new five-year plan ending in 1985. The plan calls for an increase in
industrial growth, but only a slight rise in the production of oil or of such
stapes as grain and meat. (A1:6.)
A scandal in Israel's Government culminated in the indictment of the Minister of
Religious Affairs, Aharon Abuhazira, on charges of taking bribes from yeshivas
in exchange for Government grants, loans and other assistance. (A12:3-4.)
Italy's Army is now in charge of efforts to help the survivors of the Nov. 23
earthquake that killed more than 3,000 people in southern Italy. Officers
acknowledged that many lives could have been saved if expert military teams had
been landed immediately by helicopters in every stricken town and had reported
by radio to a central command on what was needed. (A3:1-3.)
National
Caspar W. Weinberger is a prospect for a major Cabinet post, possibly Secretary
of Defense, well-placed Republican sources said.  They also reported that
Alexander M. Haig Jr., the former NATO commander, was likely to be appointed
Secretary of State. (A1:4.)
The withdrawal of William E. Simon as a candidate for Treasury Secretary was
apparently due as much to strong opposition by a number of Republican leaders,
particulary moderates, as to the personal considerations cited Friday by Mr.
Simon, according to key Republican sources. (B17:1.)
The Reagan team at the Pentagon has begun work on a substantial innovation in
military planning by extending long-range projections for military spending from
five years to eight years, according to aides of the President-elect. They said
that the extended projection would enable him to present the first draft of his
military strategy. (A1:2-3.)
A major civil rights bill to curb discrimination in housing was brought to the
Senate floor by the Democratic caucus, but the measure immediately faced a
filibuster by the Republicans, who will control the next Senate. The filibuster
occurred as the 96th Congress, facing an uncertain agenda, began what the
leadership hoped would be its final week. (B17:5-6.)
An assassination theory was disavowed by the F.B.I. The bureau said that its
laboratory analysis of acoustical evidence from Dallas lent no support to the
theory that a second gunman was involved in the slaying of President Kennedy in
1963. (A16:1.)
Resettlement of Indochinese refugees in the United States at an annual cost of
$1 billion is attracting people from Vietnam and Laos who should stay at home,
according to a study released by a joint Congressional committee. The staff
report said that most recent arrivals were not members of harassed groups and
did not have close family ties in this country. (A16:5-6.)
Major faults in health care for children are widespread in New York City and
most other American cities, according to pediatric specialists. They say that
the health and lives of many children are being jeopardized by a penny-wise and
pound-foolish system that squanders government funds and significantly
discriminates against the poor and near-poor. (C1:6.)
Metropolitan
Sharply higher consumer loan charges were announced by three major New York
banks as the new state law that eliminated usury ceilings on installment loans,
including those for auto purchases, took effect. The new interest rates range
from 17 to 19 percent, up from the former usury ceilings of 12 to 13 1/2
percent. (A1:1.)
A judge's behavior on the bench was upheld as proper by the administrative judge
of Criminal Court in Brooklyn. He said the court proceedings of Judge Alan I.
Friess had been ''judicially correct'' in releasing without bail a female murder
suspect. She then stayed overnight in his home. The administrative judge said
Judge Friess had asked the State Commission on Judicial Conduct to look into the
matter. (A1:3-5.)
Safety hazards exist in a state facility, according to testimony by parents of
retarded children and other witnesses at a State Senate hearing. They said that
the Bronx Developmental Center, which was completed four y ears ago at a cost of
$40 mil lion to house such children, had no fire alarm system linked wit h New
York City's Fire Department. (B1:3.)

Business Digest, Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 3, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Amnesty Is Granted in Cambodia To Followers of Pol Pot Regime

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 95 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 2


Cambodia has granted an amnesty to repentant people accused of committing crimes
during the rule of the ousted regime of Prime Minister Pol Pot, the Vietnam News
Agency said today.
The order was signed by Vice President Penn Sovan on the second an niversary of
the founding of the ruling National United Front for th e Salvation of Cambodia.

The Vietnamese-backed Government has never revealed the number of arrests for
offenses committed by the Peking-backed Pol Pot regime, from 1975 to 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 3, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'POWER ELITE' WITHOUT POWER

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 265 words


To the Editor:

Hans Koning, in his Nov. 20 letter responding to my Nov. 10 Op-Ed article, ''The
Real Power Elite,'' clings to the notion of a ''corporate/military'' power elite
despite evidence in his own letter that denies it.

He writes, for example, ''New multinationals operate above and beyond the
reach'' of Congressmen and other political activists. That is precisely because
Congress, responding to pressure from ''the real power elite,'' prevents the
multinationals from treating the environment as their own to despoil and allows
the free collective bargaining which drives up the price of American labor.
That multinationa ls are forced to retreat to the autocracies of Asia and Latin
America is striking testament to the existence of a Westernelite of
upper-middle-class political a ctivists.

Mr. Koning writes, power ''concerns itself with global issues'' like the
survival of capitalism and war and peace. If his corporate/military power elite
really existed, however, such issues would be settled quite differently. Student
demonstrations and journalistic exposes would never have driven the
military-industrial complex out of Vietnam, we'd still be drafting
upper-middle-class college graduates and The Times would never have had to
publish its recent articles about a military woefully unprepared to carry out
its task.

The survival of capitalism? What happened when Detroit went begging to
Washington for protection against Japanese exports? Congress did nothing. Was it
because political activists find Japanese autos to be economical and reliable
second cars?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 3, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS'S WAR POWERS-WHAT HAPPENED?;
by David E. Landau

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 974 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


There is a consensus that the ''Vietnam War syndrome'' has substantially
weakened the President's role in the conduct of foreign and military affairs.
Indeed, Ronald Reagan was elected in part for his promise to restore strong
leadership in this area.  However, President Carter's continued commitment of
combat forces in the Persian Gulf sector without specific Congressional
authorization suggests that in fact it is Congress's power that has slipped to a
dangerously low level.

If we are to avoid a complete reversion to imperial Presidential control over
foreign and military policy, all United States combat forces in the Persian Gulf
war zone must be withdrawn immediately.  This is clearly required by the War
Powers Resolution of 1973, enacted to restore the important constitutional
division of power between Congress and the President in national-defense
matters.

The escalation of our military involvement in Vietnam, the secret air war in
Laos, and the May 1970 incursion into Cambodia dramatized the unprecedented
usurpation of power in foreign and military policy by the President during the
post-World War II period. By 1970, the President had virtually unfettered power
to conduct unilateral military actions. Congress attempted to repair that
imbalance by enacti ng procedures to implement the concurre nt authority in the
national-defense area provided for in the Con stitution.

The Foundin g Fathers carefully balanced the war-making powers.  Article I, Se
ction 8, expressly reserves for Congress the power to declare war.  Article II,
Section 2, designates the President as Commander in Chief of the armed forces.
Decisions about war and armedconflicts, th erefore, were not vested solely in
one branch of government.

The War Powers Resolution amplifies in detail the constitutional relationship
between Congress and the President in the conduct of foreign affairs. The
resolution carefully avoids curtailing the President's ability to respond in an
emergency. It does, however, require accountability and provides for
Congressional approval to sustain extended military activities.

The President must make a formal report to Congress within 48 hours whenever,
without a declaration of war or other prior specific Congressional
authorization, he takes action committing armed forces to hostilities abroad or
increases in a significant way combat forces in foreign territory. The report
must set forth the circumstances necessitating the introduction of the military,
the constitutional and legislative authority under which it took place, and the
estimated scope and duration of the involvement. If Congress does not declare
war or authorize the specific use of the military within 60 days after the
report is required to be submitted, all use of the United States military in a
particular situation must be terminated.

The introduction of armed forces into the Persian Gulf sector falls squarely
under the resolution. First, there are ongoing hostilities between Iraq and
Iran, and other nations in the area are supporting each of them. Second, the
President has committed combat forces to the war zone. Our fleet in the area has
been substantially increased: There are now more than 30 American ships in the
area that are designed for combat or combat support. On Oct. 1, President Carter
ordered four Awacs -Airborne Warning and Control System - aircraft into
operation in Saudi Arabia; these planes are designed to monitor hostilities and
assist the military in response to such hostilities.  The presence of the Awacs
means that ground crews, support aircraft, and military personnel have also been
sent.

America's claims that it is neutral and that its troops are not directly engaged
in combat is irrelevant. The resolution mentions only the introduction of
''United States armed forces'' into an area engaged in hostilities or situations
of imminent hostilities.

Given the volatile situation, our forces could be fired upon at any time,
inadvertently or intentionally, especially since President Carter has vowed to
use military force to keep open the Strait of Hormuz to vital oil-tanker
passage.

Mr. Carter's military actions are not in response to an attack on the United
States or any imminent threat to our national security.  Rather, he has made a
determination to mobilize armed forces in a hostile region. The resolution was
intended to operate as a check on this very type of Presidential
decision-making.

Within 48 hours after the Awacs aircraft were ordered to Saudi Arabia, Mr.
Carter should have reported to Congress in compliance with the resolution. Even
though a report was never issued, Congress could have specifically authorized
such action. It did not.  Therefore, last Monday all of our combat forces,
including the Awacs aircraft and Navy ships, should have been withdrawn under
the explicit terms of the resolution.

The purpose of the resolution, in the words of its preamble, is to ''fulfill the
intent of the framers of the Constitution'' and ''to insure that the collective
judgment of both the Congress and the President will apply to the introduction
of the United States armed forces into hostilities.'' The recent past should
warn us that failure to comply with the resolution may draw us into a conflict
before Congress and the public have had an opportunity to evaluate the
situation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
David E. Landau is national staff counsel for the American Civil Liberties
Union.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 3, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ANOTHER JEWELRY CENTER FOR 47TH STREET

BYLINE: By MURRAY SCHUMACH

SECTION: Section D; Page 4, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 488 words


A million-dollar jewelry exchange was opened yesterday, illustrating how
security needs, esthetics and rising rents have affected 47th Street between the
Avenue of the Americas and Fifth Avenue, the capital of the nation's
multibillion-dollar diamond business.

There are no vacancies among the 64 booths of the new center, at 10 West 47th
Street. Rents run as high as $4,000 a month for a cubicle about six feet by six
feet. The lowest rent is $400, and that is well in the rear of the exchange.

These rents are among the highest on the block. At a comparable exchange, rents
per booth range downward from $3,500 to $300 a month. ''The booths get
smaller,'' said one of the tenants, ''and the rents get bigger.''

The new exchange is one of several in recent years. Major crimes in these
street-level jewelry centers are almost nonexistent because of easy visibility
from the street, the large volume of trade and considerable security patrol.

All sorts of jewels gleamed yesterday in the glass counters, and many of these
cases were covered by dollar bills, a tradition of the jewelry business in which
friends and colleagues give auto graphed bills on the first day of business.

Focus on Retail Business

The new jewelry exchange will stress the retail more than the wholesale
business. A customer will be able to buy a stone at one of the booths and take
it upstairs to the mezzanine for cutting and setting. The mezzanine, however, is
not yet in operation.

Most of the tenants in the new center have been in the jewelry business for
years; many are second-and third-generation merchants in this field. Some
specialize in antiques.

The presence of Richard Friedman, president of I. Friedman and Sons, Inc., at a
window booth, emphasized the continued move by diamond merchants from exchanges
in the Bowery to 47th Street.

''It got to the point,'' Mr. Friedman said, ''where some dealers and customers
said they did not want to go to the Bowery because they did not like the area.''

Hundreds Rejected

The renovation of this new exchange was part of extensive alterations to improve
the appearance and security of the 15-story building, which has been purchased
by a group of more than 20 persons.

Arthur Margolin, one of the principal owners of the building, said that hundreds
of applicants for booths in the exchange had been rejected. ''We wanted only
those who had experience and had proven financial responsibility,'' Mr. Margolin
said.

In one respect, this exchange is like all others - college degrees are of little
importance. Martin Erdheim, for instance, a Marine captain during the Vietnam
War, has an M.B.A. degree.

''Here,'' he said, leaning across the jewel-filled counter of his booth, ''an
M.B.A. means nothing. It means nothing in 47th Street.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of New York Jewelry Center

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 4, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET WORKER SPEAKS BLUNTLY (BUT PRIVATELY)

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1028 words

DATELINE: RIGA, U.S.S.R.


He was a burly man, a worker, with a cheap fur hat pulled down over his ears,
and he was surly, aggressive, obviously full of suppressed rage.

As soon as he found out that the foreigner was an American, he announced that
Americans were cowards who lost in Vietnam and trembled at the thought of
''going into Iran and getting the hostages out.'' He and his friends, he said,
thought the United States was afraid of the Soviet Union.

It was the start of a two-hour conversation with a real member of the Soviet
proletariat - a rare experience for foreigners, who read about the workers in
Pravda, hear them praised by party leaders and watch them march through Red
Square, but seldom talk with them bluntly and privately.

The conversation took place in this old Hanseatic city on the Baltic, the
capital of the Latvian Soviet republic. Its candor owed something, no doubt, to
the more relaxed atmosphere here. But the worker -Andrei, which is not his real
name - was not a Latvian or a member of any other ethnic minority; he was, he
said, ''a fullblooded Russian, born in Siberia.''

U.S. Fought 'Geese and Pigs' War

In a halting, self-conscious effort to defend America's military prowess, the
visitor cited the United States record as an ally of the Soviet Union in World
War II. Andrei answered by saying that the United States had fought a ''geese
and pigs'' war. He explained that he had seen a television documentary showing
American tanks rolling through Europe with animals strapped to their fenders and
turrets.

It was not that kind of war in the Soviet Union, he said, with hundreds of
thousands starving or freezing to death.  Andrei's anti-American diatribe ended
as suddenly as it began. He asked his new acquaintance whether he had been in
the military, and if so, in what branch. The Army, he was told. When he heard
that and heard that the American had made some parachute jumps, he nodded his
head in approval.

''I think the United States should split the world in two with us,'' he said
after a moment's thought.  What about the Chinese?  ''They should carry white
people around in rickshaws,'' Andrei replied. ''Look at those dogs. We fed them,
and look at what a pigsty they have made of things for us now.''

Poland a Common Topic in Riga

He then volunteered the information that people in Riga talked constantly about
the situation in Poland, about the efforts of Polish workers to win new rights.
Personally, he said, ''I think there should be free, independent trade unions
there, and here, too.''

''We don't get any use or pleasure out of the unions we have now,'' he added.
''The secretary of my union goes south to the Black Sea for a vacation every
year, and she says we can sit here on our behinds and go nowhere.''

He said he expected the Polish Government ''to put the squeeze on'' the workers.
Already, he said, there had been a provocation, the discovery of a document in
the possession of one of the new trade unions allegedly linking it to
antigovernment elements.

But Andrei said he thought it would be hard to stop the workers now, ''because
there are so many of them.'' After a time, the conversation turned back to the
United States, but the tone was completely different. The blustering disdain was
replaced by a calm curiosity, tinged with respect and a bit of envy.  The
questions came out one after another: How many cars do you own?  What about the
blacks in Ame rica? What's good and what's bad about your country? Are you a
capitalist or a socia list or what?

The Good and the Bad of America

Andrei was impressed by the idea that an American newspaper could attack the
policies of the Government. He was critical of the fact that workers had to pay
for their children's college education and that medical bills were sometimes
enormous.

He had no hesitation in criticizing Soviet life. Someone mentioned, for example,
that Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, collected automobiles from all over
the w orld.

''What's he going to do with them,'' Andrei said, ''take them into the grave
with him?'' At another point, he asked what the United States imported from the
Soviet Union. When told that the most visible products were vodka and caviar, he
asked why Americans did not buy manufactured goods. By and large, his American
acquaintance answered, American products and those of Japan and West Germany
were more reliable and technologically more advanced.

Andrei was not offended. A smile of grim satisfaction spread over his face, as
if he had finally heard confirmation of something that he had suspected for a
long time.

Soviet Profiteers Are Derided

There was much more, including an obscene comment in English when Andrei spotted
a poster with a picture of a ballerina from the Bolshoi Opera, and condemnation
of what he derisively called ''our black millionaires'' - Armenians and
Azerbaijanis from the south, who, he was convinced, made huge profits by selling
fruit, wine and flowers to northerners like himself who lacked such luxuries.

Like many blue-collar Americans, Andrei seemed distrustful, even contemptuous of
bosses, whatever their nationality or their position. Like many Americans of all
kinds, he said he was worried about the risks and the enormous cost of the arms
race, about the possibility that someone in the White House or in the Kremlin
might start a war by mistake, about what it all meant to the future of his young
son.

Like many Russians, waitresses and clerks in bread shops and mechanics, his
first instinct was to put on a mask of hostility in the presence of strangers.
He seemed immensely relieved when he sensed that it was safe to take the mask
off.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 4, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GUIDELINES LAID OUT ON SECURITY BREAKS

BYLINE: By A.O. SULZBERGER Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 947 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 3


The Justice Department has for the first time established the conditions under
which it will prosecute former and current Government employees accused of
violating secrecy agreements.

The guidelines state, as general principles, that both current and former
Government officials will be held to identical standards, regardless of their
rank or influence, and that the political content of the disclosure as well as
the political viewpoint of the individual shall not be considered in deciding
whether to prosecute.

The guidelines, which have been tentatively approved by Benjamin R. Civiletti,
the Attorney General, follow the case of Frank W. Snepp 3d, a former officer of
the Central Intelligence Agency who published a book on the fall of Saigon
without the agency's specific prior approval. Last February the Supreme Court
ruled that Mr. Snepp had ''deliberately and surreptitiously violated his
obligations'' under an agreement he had signed requiring C.I.A. employees not to
publish information about the agency without its approval.

As a penalty the Court ordered Mr. Snepp to turn over to the Government all the
earnings from the book, and last September Mr.  Snepp gave the Treasury a check
for $140,000.

Complete Victory for Government

The Court's decision was a complete victory for the Government, which brought a
civil suit for breach of contract against Mr. Snepp almost three years ago. Mr.
Snepp insisted that his book contained no classified information or any
information not already in the public domain.

The guidelines, which were drafted with the close participation of the Attorney
General, also waive any intention of bringing suit against an employee unless an
express clearance obligation exists.  Many felt that the Supreme Court ruling
was so broad that such a suit could have been brought.

Because of the Attorney General's close inv olvement, it is considered unlikely
that the guidelines would be changed by the next administration. The Attorney
General appointe d by Ronald Reagan couldchange or eliminate the guidelines, but
Justi ce Department officials said that was not expected because public out cry
would be great.

All Governm ent agencies that have such secrecy agreements are affected by t he
guidelines because they need the Justice Department to prosecute any cases.
These agencies include the C.I.A., the Federal Burea u of Investigation, the
Defense Intelligence Agency and the National Security Agency. Currently each
agency has its own agreement wit h different terms and requires employees at
different levels to sig n. However, there is soon to be a uniform
prepublicationagreement for all intelligence-gathering agencies.

Purpose of Guidelines

A copy of the guidelines, which are not expected to be changed substantively,
was given to The New York Times.  The Attorney General was said to have been
uncomfortable with the public perception that the powers handed his Department
by the Snepp decision might be arbitrarily exercised. The guidelines, one
Justice Department official said, showed that the department intended to use its
new powers for ''legitimate purposes and not as a meat ax.''

Under the guidelines, only the Attorney General or someone designated by him may
authorize the filing of a suit. The Snepp suit was filed by the Justice
Department at the request of the C.I.A.

In March the Government brought suit against John R. Stockwell, another former
agency employee, charging breach of contract. Mr.  Stockwell agreed in June to
pay the Government future earnings on his book about agency activities in
Angola, ''In Search of Enemies, a C.I.A. Story,'' published in 1978 without
clearance.

Among the specific considerations established by the guidelines are these:

- Whether the individual willfully or intentionally failed to submit material he
or she knew or should have known must be submitted for review prior to
dissemination.

- Whether the information disclosed was learned in the course of the
individual's association with the Government and not widely available to members
of the public.

- Whether the material disclosed contains information that is properly
classifiable.

- Whether the material was widely disseminated and likely to harm national
security or the foreign policy of the United States.

- Whether the disclosure contains specific information about operations,
structure, personnel and the activities of the governmental agency involved, as
opposed to political criticisms and commentary about the agency and its
activities.

- Whether the material will result in ''substantial harm'' to an agency
operation or endanger individual lives.

- Whether the material is likely to inhibit the flow of intelligence
information.

Serious View of Injunctions

The guidelines also state that any decision to seek an injunction against
publication of information ''is viewed by the department as an extraordinarily
serious matter that should be undertaken after the most searching scrutiny of
the strength of the Government's case.''

The six-page document also establishes penalty guidelines that are also clearly
affected by the Snepp case.  While stating that a financial penalty may be
sought if a suit is authorized, the guideline goes on to state: ''The Government
does not seek to reduce defendants to penury.''

Under the guidelines, the factors that will be taken into account include ''the
degree of care'' exercised to protect some national security interests in making
a disclosure or the degree of recklessness shown; whether it is the first
disclosure or part of a series; and the willingness of the author to submit
further disclosures for review.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 4, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DRAFT-REGISTRATION DATE IN NEED OF CANCELLATION

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 351 words


To the Editor:

As we face the beginning of a new year and a new Administration, the American
Friends Service Committee urges that military draft registration, announced for
Jan. 5 be canceled.  We agree with President-elect Reagan that the Carter
Administration's effort to reinsitute registration has been "ill-considered" and
"should be rejected." As I said in a recent letter to Ronald Reagan, the absence
of registration during the week of Jan. 5 "would make certain that you would not
be taking office just 10 days after a controversial and divisive" operation that
"would contribute heavily to disunity in the country at the very moment when you
are striving for a united citizenry." In a letter sent at the same time to
President Carter, I urged upon him the wisdom of suspending the draft signup.  I
suggested that his cancellation of registration would remind us of the
magnanimous spirit with which he granted amnesty to Vietnam-era draft resisters
as one of his first acts as President.  Canceling the registration would save
more than $5 million - a needless and counter productive expense, which is quite
contrary to Ronald Reagan's announced purpose of cutting down on Government
expenditures.  The announced purpose of signing up for the draft is "to flash a
signal to the Russians." Let us instead at this time, when we prepare to
celebrate the birthday of the Prince of Peace, flash a signal of peace and good
will to all peoples everywhere.  Asia A. Bennett Executive Secretary American
Freinds Service Committee Philadelphia, Nov. 26, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 4, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
SECRETARY ON HORSEBACK;
by Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 895 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Dec. 3


When President Nixon moved to get rid of Archibald Cox as Watergate Special
Prosecutor, in the Saturday Night Massacre of October 1973, his agent was
Alexander Haig. It was General Haig who told Acting Attorney General William
Ruckelshaus to fire Cox, adding the memorable words:

''Your Commander in Chief is giving you an order.'' What few know or remember is
that Haig had used that phrase, or something like it, once before. That was when
Nixon ordered the invasion of Cambodia in April 1970. Haig then worked for Henry
Kissinger on the National Security Council staff.

Another member of the staff, William Watts, decided to resign rather than help
carry out a policy that he foresaw would have terrible consequences. Haig, who
was enthusiastic about the invasion, told Watts he could not quit - ''You've
just had an order from your Commander in Chief.'' Watts, like Ruckelshaus,
disagreed with the notion that he was a soldier in a military system.

Alexander Haig, we are now told, is Ronald Reagan's likely choice for Secretary
of State. Perhaps that decision is final. If it is not, the President-elect and
his advisers should look deeper into the record before making the choice. It is
a scary record.

In the Nixon years, Haig did a lot of the nasty jobs. One example was his role
on Vietnam in the last months of 1972. Kissinger had announced that peace was at
hand, but President Thieu of South Vietnam was resisting the terms worked out by
Kissinger with the Communists in the north.

On Dec. 18, 1972, B-52's began the Christmas bombing of Hanoi - a campaign that
General Haig had urged Nixon to undertake. Haig flew to Saigon that day and
encouraged Thieu by explaining that the United States was ''brutalizing'' North
Vietnam. He also threatened to cut off all aid to Saigon if Thieu would not
accept terms agreed to by the North after the bombing.

Haig played a principal role in the Nixon-Kissinger wiretapping of White House
and other Government officials and journalists. Seventeen persons were tapped in
1969 and Kissinger sent Haig to the F.B.I.  with 14 of th ose names. Among them
were not only members of Kissinger's s taff but the military assistant to
Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird, Col. Robert Pursley, whose overheard comments
might be helpful in bureaucratic warfare with Laird.

(Haig once told colleagues that Laird was ''a traitor.'' That no doubt reflected
Nixon's often-expressed suspicion that Laird was leaking to the press. Haig also
applied the word ''traitor'' to Senator J.W. Fulbright, because of his criticism
of Vietnam policy.)

In 1970 Haig asked the F.B.I. for four more taps, among the targets this time
was Richard Pedersen, counselor to the State Department and a close personal
adviser to Secretary of State William Rogers.

In Watergate, Haig fought zealously for a year to minimize the evidence against
Nixon and keep him in office. On one White House tape he is heard counseling
Nixon to avoid truthful answers: ''You just can't recall ...''

His role comes out with particular clarity in the account by Leon Jaworski, who
succeeded Cox as Special Prosecutor. Jaworski, a conservative from Texas, began
with deep respect for Haig but found that again and again he tried to frustrate
the investigation.

After hearing the incriminating tape of March 21, 1973, Jaworski told Haig that
it showed ''conduct that is not only unethical but unprincipled and wrong, that
I think suggests criminal culpability.'' After a few days Haig telephoned
Jaworski and said: ''We're convinced there's no criminality involved because
there was no overt act ...''

Haig also told Jaworski that ''national security'' justified the break-in at the
office of Daniel Ellsberg's psychiatrist. His reasoning was that Ellsberg had
released the Pentagon Papers, the papers had a bearing on security, and so it
was in the interest of national security to get information on Ellsberg - by
whatever means.

Jaworski concluded that one of Haig's jobs as White House chief of staff was
''to try to placate me while helping Nixon frustrate me ... in the search for
truth.''

Haig was a dedicated Nixon loyalist during Watergate. Afterwards, he was a main
source of the books that portrayed Nixon as a pathetic figure in those final
days, his personality disintegrating. The books painted Alexander Haig,
doubtless correctly, as the man who held the Government together at the end.

General Haig is the exemplar of the careerist: a man who will do anything for
his master - anything likely, that is, to advance his own career. He evidently
has no feeling for American constitutionalism, for restraint in the exercise of
power.

Why would President-elect Reagan want such a man to be his senior Cabinet
member? If that kind of experience is desired, Henry Kissinger, with all his
faults, would be the genuine article. To pick Alexander Haig as Secretary of
State would be to define the philosophy of a new conservative Administration as
ruthless, manipulative opportunism.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 4, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Garwood Judge Admits Officer's Report on Case

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 22, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 179 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Dec. 3


Col. R.E. Switzer, the presiding judge at the court-martial of Marine Pfc.
Robert Garwood, ruled today that an investigative report authorized by the
private's company commander when he disappeared could be admitted as evidence
with some deletions.

A defense attorney for Private Garwood, John Lowe, argued that admitting as
evidence any testimony by Lieut. Col. John A. Studds, the Mr. Garwood's former
company commander, would be ''the rankest kind of speculation'' because he did
not personally carry out any investigation. The attorney argued that because the
report was conducted by then-Lieut. Charles Buchta, Mr. Garwood's platoon
commander, and various other people, the Colonel could not offer personal
investigative knowledge.

Colonel Studds told the judge while the jury was out of the courtroom that he
felt Private Garwood was on an unauthorized absence when he fell into enemy
hands. Mr. Garwood is charged with desertion and collaboration with the North
Vietnamese in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Two Sides of the Misspent Carter Coin

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 671 words


The Carter Administration fades as it fared, with two rival spokesmen offering
two foreign policies for their epitaph. It's unseemly, but only fair: Why spare
history the ambiguities the world has had to suffer these last four years?

Zbigniew Brzezinski thinks the Administration failed sufficiently to resist the
expansion of Soviet power and influence. He blames this timidity on Democratic
guilt about the misuse of power in Vietnam. And he believes that caused his
colleagues, notably Cyrus Vance, to dwell on a ''do-gooder's agenda.'' Mr.
Brzezinski is therefore proudest of his own anti-Soviet maneuvering with the
Chinese. And he thinks arms control died ''in the sands of the Ogaden,'' by
which he means that tolerance of Soviet-Cuban ventures in Africa spoiled the
chances for ''effective cooperation'' with Moscow.

To former Secretary of State Vance, this indictment is mostly ''hogwash.''
Instead of confrontation, he did indeed favor what Mr.  Brzezinski
contemptuously calls ''litigation of the issues,'' but that did not preclude the
use of power to defend vital interests. Mr. Vance thinks Mr. Brzezinski was so
eager to use military power - ''or bluff'' - that he overlooked the
opportunities of competiton by political and economic means. Mr. Vance opposes
''linking'' arms control to Soviet behavior in the Ogaden or anywhere else. He
is proudest of Camp David, the Panama treaties, the Rhodesia settlement and new
ties to China - provided they are not turned into an anti-Soviet alliance.

This now-public debate obviously raged privately throughout Mr.  Carter's term,
causing the President to reel in confusion. One year he pronounced himself
liberated from the inordinate fear of Communism that led to Vietnam; the next he
condemned th e Soviet invasion of Afghanistan as the gravest threat to peace si
nce 1945. Having failed to assert a clear approach to Soviet power, M r. Carter
tried desperately in the recent campaign to prove h imself both tougher and more
reasonable than Ronald Reagan. Mr. Vance thinks the campaign thus drove Mr.
Carter into misadventures, inc luding the raid into Iran. But blaming the
election is only a poli te way of saying the President lacked conviction.

On substance, we side essentially with Mr. Vance. The effort to contain the
Soviet-American arms race -and thus to assure that neither power can effectively
''win'' a nuclear conflict - should be continuous, and never sacrificed to other
purposes. Indeed, the fiercer the rivalry, the more each power needs to
understand it cannot afford war or even the threat of war.

All other relations with Moscow, however, are and should be ''linked.'' T he
superpowers' inevitable competitions will repeatedly tempt one to take actions
that the other finds unpleasant or threatening.  Each is most likely to moderate
these actions when the benefits of p olitical and economic ties in some areas
are jeopardizedby risky cond uct in other areas. It is Kansas wheat, or I.B.M.
computers tha t should be at risk in the Ogaden, not SALT.

But Mr. Brzezinski is surely right on one point. A democracy will not easily
sustain an ill-articulated foreign policy. It will usually be intolerant of what
seems like purposeless pragmatism, where every crisis in some unpronounceable
place is treated as an isolated case.  Mr. Vance gave his best conceptual speech
only after he left office.  Mr. Carter has still not given his.

Even the Vance-Brzezinski feud might have served a President who took from each
but then held high a coherent vision of his own. What this pathetic quarrel now
confirms is not only that Mr. Carter's top aides came to mistrust each other,
but that they were, from the start, poorly led.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PROBLEMS ARISE WITH 2 REAGAN CHOICES

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 4


Edwin Meese 3d, director of President-elect Ronald Reagan's transition team,
said today that Mr. Reagan would be ready to announce some of his Cabinet
selections late this week or next week, but well-placed Republican sources said
that complications had arisen with two major potential appointments.

At a morning news conference, Mr. Meese warned that the Soviet Union would be
making ''a grave miscalculation'' by thinking that the Presidential transition
would place the United States in a weakened military position. He also denied
that the Reagan transition team had problems with conflict of interest because
some of its members worked for private companies.

Mr. Meese said that the Cabinet selection process was ''on schedule'' and that
Mr. Reagan would announce some of his choices ''either at the end of this week
or, it looks now, more probably next week.'' Other transition sources said that
roughly a half dozen Cabinet selections were nearing completion of the normal
clearance and legal procedures.

Problems With Wriston

But these sources said that some problems had developed in a discussion with
Walter B. Wriston, chairman of Citicorp, whom Mr.  Reagan had wanted as
Secretary of the Treasury. Mr. Wriston had served on Mr. Reagan's economic
advisory panel during the campaign but had privately told some associates that
he was hesitant about entering the Government.

Well-placed Republican sources said that the complications apparently centered
on financial disclosure requirements and arrangements for avoiding conflicts of
interest. Citibank, a subsidiary of the holding company that Mr. Wriston heads
and holds stock in, has direct interests in New York City loan guarantees and
claims against Iranian assets as well as loans to the Chrysler Corporation. The
Treasury Department deals with all those issues.

As of last January Mr. Wriston owned 104,499 shares of Citicorp stock, now worth
$2.25 million.  With uncertainty now about Mr. Wriston, well-placed Republican
sources said that the President-elect and his top advisers were reconsidering
the Treasury appointment. Among the new names being mentioned, they said, are
Charls E. Walker, formery Deputy Treasury Secretary, and Donald T. Regan,
chairman of the board of Merrill Lynch Inc.

Problems With Haig

Republican sources also reported problems in the selection of Gen.  Alexander M.
Haig Jr., the former NATO commander who is now president of United Technologies
Corporation. Two days ago, well-placed Republican sources reported that Mr. Haig
was Mr. Reagan's choice for Secretary of State, after George P. Shultz, vice
chairman of the Bechtel Corporation and a leading prospect for the post, told
Mr.  Reagan he did not wish to be considered.

John McCarroll, Mr. Haig's executive assistant, said that as of late this
afternoon, Mr. Haig ''has had no approaches on a Cabinet position from Reagan or
his people.''

In the past several days, several newspaper columns have appeared criticizing
Mr. Haig's role in the Vietnam War, the Nixon White House and in the wiretapping
cases against former Nixon Administration officials and reporters. Well- placed
Republican sources reported that some influential Republ icans had privately
urged Mr. Reagan through intermediaries to re consider approaching Mr.Shultz
once again.

Late today, however, Mr. Shultz said in a telephone interview that he had not
been approached by Mr. Reagan or his aides since he and the President-elect had
talked Nov. 29. At that time, Mr. Shultz said, he had told Mr. Reagan, ''I have
a job that I like and I intend to keep doing it. I have no desire to make a
change.'' Other Selections

Sources said that six other top-level appointments remained on track as
previously reported: Caspar W. Weinberger, vice president of Bechtel
Corporation, for Secretary of Defense; William French Smith, Mr. Reagan's
personal lawyer, for Attorney General; Drew Lewis, a Pennsylvania businessman
and vice chairman of the Republican national committee, for Secretary of
Transportation; Senator Richard S.  Schweiker of Pennsylvania for Secretary of
Health and Human Services; William J. Casey, a former intelligence officer and a
New York tax lawyer, for Director of Central Intelligence, and Representative
Dave Stockman of Michigan, for Director of the Office of Management and Budget.

They also reported that Elizabeth Dole, former member of the Federal Trade
Commission, was under consideration for Secretary of Education, but that
Clifford Hansen, former governor and senator from Wyoming, who had been the
odds-on favorite to become Secretary of the Interior, may have had to withdraw
for conflict of interest reasons. Mr. Hanson, who has a ranch in Wyoming, has a
Government permit for grazing cattle on public land that he might have to give
up to take the Cabinet post.

Reagan aides also said that the Mr. Reagan was trying to find a female press
secretary. Among those reported under consideration are Diane Sawyer, a CBS
correspondent, and Lisa Myers, a White House reporter for The Washington Star.
James S. Brady, Mr. Reagan's current spokesman, is still under consideration,
they said.

Mr. Meese and other top Reagan officials were at pains today to check spreading
reports about Cabinet appointments, contending that the Reagan team was moving
as rapidly as possible given the cumbersome checks needed for financial
disclosure and legal arrangements to prevent conflicts of interests. Mr. Meese
said the Reagan transition effort wanted these checks completed before Cabinet
announcements were made.

Although he mentioned possible announcements late this week, other transition
sources said the middle of next week is more likely. Mr.  Meese contended that
cumbersome legal checks had slowed down the Cabinet selection process.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY;
'Album' playwright plans move uptown with 'Yankee Wives.'

BYLINE: By Carol Lawson

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 1; Weekend Desk u

LENGTH: 1169 words


DAVID RIMMER, who made an auspicious Off Broadway debut as a playwright two
months ago with ''Album,'' currently at the Cherry Lane Theater, is losing no
time moving uptown. He has just made a deal to have Craig Anderson produce
''Yankee Wives,'' his second full-length play, on Broadway. There is no director
or opening date yet, but Mr. Rimmer hopes to see his play on the boards late
this spring. Mr. Anderson, who has a contract to produce three films for
Columbia Pictures, says the play has good potential for a movie, and he expects
Columbia to provide much of the financing.

''Yankee Wives'' is just what the title says - the story of the wives of
baseball players. ''It's about six women, and follows them through an entire
season,'' Mr. Rimmer says. ''I'm a big baseball fan. On television, they're
always cutting away to the wives sitting in the stands. I wondered, 'What is
their story? What are they all about?' They are the last bastion of the
woman-behind-the-man, stuck in the role of being someone's wife.''

Thanks to the success of ''Album,'' the 31-year-old Mr. Rimmer can now afford to
be a full-time writer. He was working as a clerk at the City University when he
met Joan Micklin Silver, the film director, who chose to make her debut as a
stage director with ''Album.'' ''I've been basically starving for 10 years and
writing part time,'' Mr. Rimmer says. Besides his new play, he has contracts for
two screen projects, a horror film and a Walt Disney picture. ''It's amazing how
one thing can start it all off,'' he says.

''Don't worry, they're only testing the lightning,'' Bran Ferren said as an
authentic-looking white bolt shot across a row of orchestra seats at the Palace
Theater the other day. Mr. Ferren, a 27-year-old man with a red beard and a
space-age vocabulary, is a wizard of special effects. He worked on ''Crucifer of
Blood'' on Broadway a few seasons ago, and his latest project is
''Frankenstein,'' which is going to cost $1.5 million - a record for a straight
play on Broadway - because of the technological gadgetry that Mr. Ferren has
designed to produce lightning, thunder, fog, explos ive sou nds and other
effects.

The installation of all this equipment - much of it going under the stage and on
the roof - turned out to be so complicated that previews had to be delayed a
week. They will begin Tuesday. Opening night is Dec. 21.

''There has never been a Broadway show that approaches the magnitude of the
special effects of this one,'' Mr. Ferren said, pointi ng to a dozen or so large
speakers desi gned to make the audience hear as well as feel the storms and
other phenomena.

Is he confident that this equipment - including the computerized ''Air Monster
Controller'' designed for the ''self-destruction'' of the stage at the end of
the show - will work as planned? ''We've done our homework,'' said Mr. Ferren,
sounding like a a Cape Kennedy official ready for a big launching. ''I have
every hope it will live up to our expectations. And if it doesn't, we'll make
it.''

Bob Gunton, last seen on Broadway as Juan Peron in ''Evita,'' opens tonight in
Amlin Gray's ''How I Got That Story'' at the Second Stage Theater, 23 West 73d
Street. The play, which deals with the Vietnam War, has 22 characters. Mr.
Gunton plays 21. Daniel Stern, seen in the film ''Breaking Away,'' plays the
other, a journalist.

Mr. Gunton, who served in Vietnam as an infantry sergeant, portrays everything
from a prostitute and a dictator to a nun and a guerrilla leader. ''The play is
funny, in a 'Catch-22' sense,'' he says.  ''It's cathartic for me.''

Virginia Sandifur opened on Broadway last Sunday night in ''Perfectly Frank,''
the new revue made up of Frank Loesser's music, and wowed the first-night
audience with her versatility as a singer, dancer and actress. That is the good
news. The bad news is that Miss Sandifur has been without heat or hot water in
her Upper West Side apartment since Monday, and has been working since Tuesday
under the strain of knowing that ''Perfectly Frank,'' which received mixed
reviews, might close tomorrow unless business improves.

''Where else but New York!'' exclaims Miss Sandifur, who is 37 but looks at
least 10 years younger because her beautiful skin shows not a trace of a
wrinkle. ''It's hysterical. What can you do but laugh? I have to go to friends'
apartments or the theater to take a shower.''

After the provisional closing notice went up Tuesday afternoon, the cast of
''Perfectly Frank'' got together and volunteered to take pay cuts to help keep
the musical running. ''When you work so hard,'' Miss Sandifur says, ''you have
to hope the show will keep going.  We're fighting for it. It's an emotional
thing for everyone.''

Miss Sandifur joined ''Perfectly Frank'' after the show ended its tryout in Los
Angeles. ''Five of the nine people in the cast are new,'' she says. ''I never
saw the show in Los Angeles, but it's very different here. We had only 12 days
of rehearsal, and then we opened for previews. Usually you rehearse three or
four weeks. This was a first for me - and for everyone else, too.''

It's no secret that there was a great deal of turmoil backstage before
''Perfectly Frank'' opened. Fritz Holt is credited as the director. But it has
been reported that Ron Field, who receives a note of thanks in the program, was
actually brought in by the producers to take over for Mr. Holt. Miss Sandifur,
being a diplomat, refuses to say who did what on the show, but allows that there
was confusion throughout the previews.

''There were major changes during the final week of previews,'' she says.
''Sometimes I felt like letting out a scream to release the frustration.''

Miss Sandifur has been on Broadway before, in ''I Love My Wife'' and
''Follies,'' but her role in ''Perfectly Frank'' is the flashiest of her career.
''This show has undoubtedly helped my career,'' she notes. ''People have already
been talking to me about auditioning for other shows. But I prefer not to think
about what I'll do next. We just want this show to run.''

Then, running a manicured hand through her curly, honey-colored hair, she shakes
her head and adds, ''Isn't this a funny business?  It's so unpredictable.''

Truman Capote will spend the holidays at Lincoln Center. He'll appear at the
Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater from Dec. 16 to 28 in a program of readings from his
novels and short stories. The costume designer for the occasion is Halston. ...
Gregory Hines plans to join Raul Julia, Kevin Kline and Rex Smith next fall in
''The Three Musketeers'' at the Public Theater. The show will be directed by
Wilford Leach. ... Agnes de Mille, the choreographer, and Peter Brook, the
director, are this year's recipients of the Common Wealth Awards for their
''contributions to the dramatic arts.'' They received their awards, checks for
$10,500 each, in a ceremony Wednesday night at The Players club. ... Julie
Garfield has replaced Penelope Allen in ''The Chekhov Sketchbook'' at the Harold
Clurman Theater.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV WEEKEND;
'MIDLAND HEIGHTS' A MIDWEST 'DALLAS'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 30, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 867 words


THE Lorimar Productions folks who bring you ''Dallas'' are now venturing farther
into soap-opera territory with ''Secrets of Midland Heights,'' which makes its
debut on CBS-TV tomorrow night at 10. This new exploitation of sex, money and
shifting levels of power encompasses enough steamy plots to make the old
''Peyton Place'' look like an early morning sermonette.

Midland Heights is a town somewhere in the Middle West (although the series is
filmed in Santa Paula, Calif.). The power base is controlled by a wealthy and
tough old geezer named Margaret Millington (Martha Scott), whose immediate
family includes a bachelor son, Guy (Jordan Christopher), and a granddaughter,
Ann Dulles (Doran Clark).

Mrs. Millington has her way in everything, from overseeing Ann's dates to
deciding who will be the next president of the local college. Ann is worried
that she may end up in a mental institution like her mother. This is
understandable as she has to cope with the viciously scheming Guy, who is
determined that he will be the sole heir to the Millington fortunes.

Around this sometimes hard but usually soft core spin a number of satellite
plots featuring young and middle-aged lovers. There's a little kinky something
for everybody. There is, for instance, John (Jim Youngs, whose poverty is
enhanced by an alcoholic mother).  John, the true object of Ann's affections,
would never be accepted by the girl's grandmother.

Therefore, John's friend Teddy (Daniel Zippi) pretends to be Ann's boyfriend, pi
cking her up for dates and then delivering her to John. At the same t ime, Teddy
is being wooed by Holly (Linda Grovenor). Sheis a virgin a nd is ''tired of
being innocent.'' On a college hayride,Teddy nervous ly gulps, ''You're serious
about this, aren't you?'' Holly, smilin g, retorts, ''Why put off till tomorrow
what you can do tonight?''

Complicating matters even more, Holly's married mother (Bibi Besch) is having an
affair with Teddy's widowed father (Robert Hogan).  Needless to say, the two
couples - the kids and the parents - wind up for their assignation not only at
the same hotel but in adjoining rooms. Overhearing the older couple, Holly loses
her composure, but not her virginity.

Some of the other characters include Burt (Lorenzo Lamas), a jealous football
player, who is having an affair with Lisa (Linda Hamilton), who keeps assuring
him, ''The college crowd doesn't interest me anymore.'' Standing in the wings is
Teddy's kid brother, Danny (Stephen Manley), obviously ready to provide the
equivalent of young teen-age sex as currently being advertised in the jeans
commercials.

Presumably, Guy Millington will be the J.R. Ewing of ''Secrets of Midland
Heights.'' Played with a somewhat decadent feline quality by Mr. Christopher,
Guy could even be a homosexual. Mama, talking about grandchildren, snarls,
meaningfully, ''I've given up on you, sonny.''

This exercise in shameless pandering lists three executive producers: Lee Rich,
Michael Filerman and David Jacobs.  Will the public buy such calculated
manipulations? Onl y the rating services will know for sure.

This weekend's inspirational tome, on ABC-TV on Sunday at 9 P.M., is ''Fighting
Back,'' the story of Rocky Bleier, the football player who didn't let serious
Vietnam War injuries stop his climb to the Super Bowl as a player for the
Pittsburgh Steelers. Mr. Bleier is portrayed with sensitivity and strength by
Robert Urich, star of the ABC series ''Vegas.''

''Fighting Back'' traces the career of a player always considered too small and
too slow for the game, from his tentative professional beginnings and his being
drafted into the Army to the day in 1969 when his right foot was severely
injured by an explosion in Vietnam.  Doctors gave him a 50-50 chance of ever
walking again, let alone playing football.

But the man persisted, restoring his foot to the point where he rejoined the
team's training activities. He didn't make the team at first, but was encouraged
by Art Rooney, the owner, to have another operation that might help his rigid
toes. In 1972, he was moved up to the regular squad, and by 1980, Rocky Bleier
was playing his 12th season with the Steelers, becoming the fourth-leading
career runner in the history of the Pittsburgh franchise.

Based on a book by the athlete and Terry O'Neill, ''Fighting Back'' was produced
by Donald A. Baer and directed by Ron Lieberman. Mr.  Urich, another of the
innumerable Burt Reynolds look-alikes popping up on the entertainment scene, is
impressive. As Mr. Rooney, Art Carney deftly walks away with all of his scenes.
And Bonnie Bedelia brings very effective touches of reality to the project as
the hero's love interest and one of the few people to think that football is not
a substitute for life.

Also prominent in the cast are Steve Tannen as Terry Hanratty and Mean Joe
Greene as himself, the same self that gives the little boy his ratty football
jersey in that commercial for a soft drink.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Doran Clark

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 6, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ROSTENKOWSKI TO LEAD COMMITTEE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 440 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 5


Representative Dan Rostenkowski, Democrat of Illinois, announced today that he
would become chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee rather than be the
majority whip.

Mr. Rostenkowski, the chief deputy House majority whip in the current Congress,
was next in line for the Ways and Means chairmanship and had his choice of that
post or the whip's job after the defeat last month of Representatives John
Brademas of Indiana, the majority whip, and Al Ullman of Oregon, chairman of the
Ways and Means Committee.

''The Ways and Means Committee chairmanship is a tremendous responsibility and a
difficult challenge,'' Mr. Rostenkowski said, ''particularly at a time when
there is a division of responsibility between the two political parties on
Capitol Hill.''

Democrats and Republicans in the House will meet next week to select thei r
leaders for the incoming 97th Congress. Representative Tomas S. Fole y of
Washington, chairman of the House Democratic Caucus, is co nsidered a leading
candidate for the whip post.

----

Judiciary Panel Selected

WASHINGTON, Dec. 5 (AP) - Senator Strom Thurmond, Republican of South Carolina,
today announced appointments that will make the Senate Judiciary Committee a
heavily conservative panel. Also announced was formation of a new Subcommittee
on Security and Terrorism.

There will be 10 Republicans and eight Democrats on the committee in the
Republican-controlled 97th Congress. Mr. Thurmond, the present ranking minority
member, will become chairman.

The security subcommittee is to be headed b y Senator-elect Jeremiah Denton of
Alabama, a former Vietnam prisoner of war.  Other subcommittees will be Criminal
Law, h eaded by Senator CharlesMcC. Mathias Jr. of Maryland; Regulatory Refo rm,
Paul Laxalt of Nevada; the Constitution, Orrin G. Hatch of U tah; the Courts,
Bob Dole of Kansas; Immigration and Refugee Polic y, Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming;
Separation of Powers, Senator-elect John P. East of North Carolina, ; Agency
Administration, Senator-el ect Charles E. Grassley of Iowa; and Juvenile
Justice, Senator-elect Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania.

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts who is the outgoing
chairman of the committee, has said that he will remain on the panel. But
instead of becoming the senior minority member, he will take the No. 1 minority
post on the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee.

Other Democrats will be Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, Robert C.  Byrd of West
Virginia, Howard M. Metzenbaum of Ohio, Dennis DeConcini of Arizona, Patrick J.
Leahy of Vermont, Max Baucus of Montana and Howell Heflin of Alabama.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW'S ARMS BUILDUP A MAJOR ISSUE FOR REAGAN

BYLINE: By RICHARD BURT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2716 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 6


The steady growth of Soviet military power, a matter of prime concern to the
incoming adminstration of Presidentelect Ronald Reagan, has emerged as one of
the most troubling problems facing the United States and its Western allies.

Moscow's military buildup, in the view of some American specialists, could
signify an ideologically inspired drive for political domination. In the view of
others it reflects a sense of insecurity deeply rooted in Russian history.

Also not easily answered is the question which country is the more powerful: the
Soviet Union, with 3,658,000 in the armed services, based on conscription for
two or three years and an obligation in the reserves to the age of 50; or the
United States, with its force of 2,050,000 volunteers.

In the area of nuclear weapons there is agreement that the Soviet Union has
attained ''strategic parity'' with the United States.  In conventional forces,
the Soviet Union is ahead in numbers of weapons and troops. But this superiority
is viewed as offset by American technological supremacy. The Soviet Union is
trying to catch up and in such categories as ground-combat vehicles is said
tohave surpasse d the United States.

As the Presidential election campaign illustrated, the debate over Soviet
military power has become an issue of national concern.  In part the focus on
Moscow's military might reflects concern in the Pentagon and in Congress over
the status of the American military, with some asserting that American forces
have declined in size, quality and readiness.

However, the Soviet Union's buildup has also fostered questions over its
strategic goals. In the last 15 years it is said to have pursued a sustained
program of expanding its nuclear deterrent and its conventional forces.

Four years ago a debate was stirred in American intelligence circles after a
group of academic specialists was asked by George Bush, then Director of Central
Intelligence and now Vice Presidentelect, to appraise Soviet military potential
and intentions. The group, known as Team B, concluded that the C.I.A. and other
agencies had underestimated the Soviet buildup and that Moscow was bent on
achieving strategic superiority.

Debate on Soviet Intentions

On one side of the present debate, specialists such as Richard E.  Pipes, a
Harvard professor who advises Mr. Reagan and who directed the Team B effort,
point to Moscow's buildup to assert that it harbors aggressive designs.

Other specialists, including Arthur Macy Cox, a former State Department and
C.I.A. analyst, contend that there is a danger of exaggerating the Soviet
buildup. They assert that Moscow, from its point of view, faces threats from
nearly every direction and feels it must rely on military power.

As much as a fifth of the Soviet military budget, it is estimated, is directed
not against the West but against China. And Soviet forces in Europe have another
peripheral function: keeping the Eastern European allies in line.

Most of the Soviet units added to the area since 1967 were sent in during the
Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968. Soviet forces in Eastern Europe
would also be likely to participate in any intervention in Poland that the
Soviet Union might decide to make.

Moscow's nuclear potential is constrained, in some respects, by Soviet-American
arms agreements.  The 1972 treaty on antiballistic missiles puts limits these
defensive systems, and both sides appear willing to continue to comply with the
1972 interim accord on long-range offensive missiles, which set existing arms
totals as ceilings: 2,358 for the Soviet Union and 1,710 for the United States.
That accord did not cover long-range bombers.

The Reagan Administration, Republican leaders say, will scrap the 1979 treaty
that was signed by President Carter but has not been ratified. It calls for
limiting each side to a total of 2,250 missiles and bombers. However, Republican
aides have indicated that talks on a new agreement, possibly containing lower
ceilings, could begin soon after Mr. Reagan enters the White House.

The 1962 crisis over the Soviet placement o f missiles in Cuba, which ended when
the Russians, confronted wit h superior American power, agreed to withdraw the
missiles, is th ought to have marked a turn in the Soviet-American arms
competition.

Although the United States was building up at a faster rate in the early 1960's,
the Soviet Union soon began to take the initiative.  Intelligence specialists
believe that, after the 1962 crisis and the ouster of Nikita S. Khrushchev from
power in 1964, Moscow's leaders vowed that never again would the Soviet Union
allow itself to be humiliated by the United States.

Consequently, during Leonid I. Brezhnev's tenure, the Soviet military budget is
estimated to have grown by 3 or 4 percent annually in the late 1960's and in the
1970's.

Noting this growth, William R. Perry, Under Secretary of Defense for Research
and Engineering, said recently that Moscow had outspent Washington on defense by
$240 billion in the 1970's.

Distortion of Manpower Costs

This and other estimates are challenged by Mr. Cox and Franklyn D.  Holzman, an
economist at the Harvard Russian Research Center. They contend that the C.I.A.'s
practice of calculating the size of the Soviet military budget in the equivalent
dollars it would cost the United States exaggerates the cost of manpower, which
is paid less in the Soviet Union.

Mr. Holzman and other experts agree that, with an economy 60 percent that of the
United States, the Soviet Union now spends at least as much for the armed forces
as the United States, or the equivalent of $165 billion a year.

Secretary of Defense Harold Brown said early this year tha t the balance betwe
en the United States and the Soviet Union should not be viewed in iso lation but
rather in the context of the respective allied milita ry efforts.

According to Pentagon experts, the allies in Western Europe spent $76 billion
for defense last year compared with $20 billion by the East Europeans. The
International Institute for Strategic Studies says that the Atlantic alliance's
total spending thus slightly exceeds that of the Warsaw Pact.

At the same time, the institute contends that the Soviet bloc spends its
military funds more efficiently because it uses standardized Soviet equipment.

Interviews with American intelligence aides, defense officials and academic
specialists indicate that Moscow has increased its power in nearly every
military sector.

NUCLEAR ARMS
Whether the Soviet Union will be satisfied with strategic parity is a subject of
debate. In the view of Professor Pipes and of Paul H.  Nitze, who has held
high-level posts at the Pentagon and the State Department, the Soviet Union is
well on its way to superiority.

Last month, however, Soviet officials told visiting Americans, including several
Reagan advisers, that strategic parity was all they wanted. They said the Soviet
Union would not allow the United States to achieve strategic superiority.

While the Soviet Union had fewer than 500 land-based and submarinelaunched
missiles in 1965, it now has 1,398 intercontinental missiles and 1,003
submarine-based weapons. It also has 156 longrange bombers.

Included in its array are 600 SS-18 and SS-19 missiles. These are thought to
have enough warheads and to be accurate enough to pose a threat to American
land-based missiles: the 1,000 Minutemen and the 54 Titans.

The United States' arsenal also includes 656 submarine-based missiles and 338
long-range bombers.  Pentagon aides have confirmed preliminary Soviet testing of
a new generation of land-based missiles, including one roughly the size of the
United States' proposed MX mobile missile.

The Russians are also reported to be working on systems for finding and
attacking American nuclear-missile submarines. But Pentagon officials believe
that the submarines will be invulnerable through the 1980's.

In the area of strategic defenses, the Soviet Union is reportedly modernizing
its force of 64 antiballistic missiles around Moscow and is also said to be
developing laser weapons for use against orbiting satellites.

Although analysts disagree over the effectiveness of the Soviet civil-defense
effort, most accept Secretary of Defense Brown's estimate that it is 10 times
larger than the American program.

AIR AND LAND FORCES

While expanding its strategic arsenal, Moscow has maintained an advantage in
conventional land and air forces. Since 1967, it has added five divisions, more
than 50, 000 troops , for a total deploymentof 30 divisions against Western
Europe. In 19 67, there were 25 Sovietdivisions along the Chinese border; now
there are 46.

The expansion of Soviet air might has also been impressive.  Although Moscow has
long had more fighter planes than the United States and its Western European
allies, most of these planes were designed for defense and lacked the range and
payload of Western models. In recent years, the Soviet Air Force has added new
multirole fighters, such as the MIG-27 and the Sukhoi-19, which are thought to
rival Western jets.

The Russians, according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies,
have 5,000 planes assigned to tactical missions, compared with 3,700 United
States planes.

Both air forces maintain most of their planes in Europe. In addition, the Soviet
Union maintains three tactical air units along the Chinese frontier. The
Americans have the Fifth Air Force in Japan, Okinawa and South Korea and the
13th Air Force in the Philippines.

In Europe, the quantitative advantage is with the Warsaw Pact forces, which have
deployed 1,350 fighter-bombers, 2,050 interceptors and 550 reconnaissance
planes. The Atlantic alliance has 1,602 fighter-bombers, 386 interceptors and
263 reconnaissance planes.

On the ground, the Soviet Army is said to be eroding the West's technological
supremacy. Pentagon aides say the United States' new XM-1 tank is the finest in
the world, but they praise the Soviet T-72 and add that the Soviet BMP armored
personnel carrier is unmatched in the West.

Over all, the Soviet Union has 50,000 tanks, the United States 11,759.  In
Europe, the NATO-Warsaw Pact balance again favors the Soviet side. The Sov iet
Union and its East European allies have 19,500 tankscompared with 7,000 Western
tanks.

United States officers note that while the Army has unsucessfully spent almost a
decade seeking funds for a new generation of chemical weapons, the Soviet
chemical arsenal has been modernized.

NAVAL FORCES
Virtually a coastal defense force until 1958, the Soviet Navy now outnumbers the
American fleet in major surface warships, 289 to 173.  But the American fleet
has 13 aircraft carriers, compared with two in the Soviet Navy, and the United
States Navy is still judged to be superior in firepower, logistics and the
ability to operate for extended periods.

John M. Collins, an expert at the Congressional Research Service, recently
concluded that, for the Soviet Union, ''lengthy large-scale operations would be
next to impossible in sea areas remote from friendly port facilities.''

The Soviet Navy is gradually acquiring such facilities, including the former
American base at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam and a port in Ethiopia's Dahlak Islands
in the Red Sea.

Sacrifices for Security

Will Moscow be able to sustain this effort through the coming decade? Some
analysts, such as Mr. Holzman at Harvard, assert that if it felt threatened, it
would take whatever steps were judged necessary to match a Western buildup.

The experts note that the Soviet military sector has higher and more advanced
standards of production than the civilian economy and that the Soviet leadership
possesses the political power over the population to compel sacrifice.

According to Brig. Gen. William E. Odom, a former military attache in Moscow who
became a national security aide in the Carter White House, Soviet society has
become ''militarized'' in many respects.

Writing in the Government periodical Problems of Communism in the fall of 1979,
General Odom said: ''An enormous military-educational complex is emerging in the
Soviet Union today. It holds a commanding position in graduate as well as
undergraduate training; it permeates the civil secondary-school system and ties
up more than one-fourth of the population in voluntary work in support of
military skill training, and it touches every Soviet citizen by entangling him
in the nationwide civil defense structure.''

Many specialists caution that such military strides must be measured against
internal and external constraints. For instance, there is agreement that Moscow
will face several obstacles in increasing its military effort in the 1980's.

Among these problems are the shrinking size of the population group of military
age, a potential energy shortage, declining industrial productivity and
persistent farm problems.

Listing these problems in a recent issue of Problems of Communism, Seweryn
Bialer, a professor at Columbia University, concluded: ''As growth of the Soviet
economy slows in the 1980's, the leadership of the country will have smaller
increments of t he gross national product to allocate to investment expenditure
s.''

In campaign speeches, Mr. Reagan and Mr. Bush said the shifting military balance
created opportunities for Moscow to project its power in third-world areas such
as Afghanistan and Angola.

Henry A. Kissinger, former Secretary of State, and Alexander M.  Haig Jr.,
former Supreme Allied Commander in Europe, have also suggested that Moscow is in
a position to achieve political gains through its military buildup by forcing
concessions from weaker countries.

Kennan Sees Defensive Aims

A different perspective is offered by George F. Kennan, former Ambassador to
Moscow and an expert in Soviet history and political affairs. Early this year he
said the Soviet drive into Afghanistan reflected ''defensive rather than
offensive impulses.'' He based this on the view that the Soviet Union has been
forced to confront a succession of real and potential threats, ranging from the
1941 German invasion, to the creation of the Atlantic alliance in 1949 and the
emergence of a hostile China in the 1960's.

Moscow's most serious concern is said to be the growth of a foursided global
alliance consisting of the United States, Western Europe, Japan and China.

''The Soviet Union has thus encountered some serious contradictions,'' according
to Helmut Sonnenfeldt and William G.  Hyland, who served as aides to Mr.
Kissinger. In a monograph published by the International Institute for Strategic
Studies, they said:

''On the on e hand, Moscow's military power has grown both absolutely an d
relatively. Moscow's reach has made itself felt in distant place s, and
favorable tides may be running on the U.S.S.R.'s southern rim. ''

''On the other hand, there is a budding relationship among the Soviet Union's
principal adversaries - Western Europe, Japan, China and the United States. The
Soviet Union seems to recognize this, but how she will handle it is far from
clear.''

----
Tomorrow: The technology of Soviet weaponry.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of General Odom (page 22) chart comparing U.S. and
Soviet military establishments (page 22)

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW EXCITEMENT STIRS THE IRISH THEATER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1845 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
Danielle Byrne is a freelance writer who lives in Dublin.
By DANIELLE BYRNE
DUBLIN At least one participant in this year's Dublin Theater Festival was
determined to make a splash. A writer named Maureen Charlton was so incensed by
the bad reviews which her musical, ''Nora Barnacle,'' deservedly received that
she stood up at a Theater Festival press conference and, with a cry of ''This is
what Molly Bloom would have done,'' flung a bowl of beer over two critics. Some
might condone and even applaud Mrs. Charlton's actions but not I. Any sympathy
for her on my part vanished rapidly when some of the beer accidentally hit me,
too.

The rest of the festival was also a source of excitement and heated debate but
with less startling consequences. One of the doused critics has even declared
this festival to be the best Dublin has seen yet. (Others weren't quite so
rapturous but everyone did agree that it was definitely ''exciting.'') The rea
son for this verdict is the 12 Irish shows that were featured in the program, an
unusually high number. More important, a significant pr oportion of these were
the work of new playwrights.

In the 1970's, it was the old stalwarts, the Brian Friels, the Hugh Leonards,
the Tom Murphys, who kept the ball rolling in Irish theater; young hopefuls were
decidedly thin on the ground. Over the last few years the first ripples of a new
wave of playwrights finally became discernible. One play appeared here, another
there, all promising interesting, if not great, things to come. In this
festival, for the first time, this group of new writers could be seen, not as
isolated instances, but as part and parcel of Irish drama.

Two Northerners take most of the prizes in the newcomers' stakes.  The better
known of the pair is Stewart Parker, whose ''Spokesong'' was first presented in
the 1975 festival and has played in New York and London. J. Graham Reid, though,
can't be more than a length behind Mr. Parker and the gap is closing fast. But,
what a contrast!  The two are both from Belfast but there the similarity ends:
their plays couldn't be more different.

Mr. Parker, a writer of great originality - who else would think of setting a
musical in a bicycle repair shop in Northern Ireland? - turned up trumps again
with ''Nightshade.'' Quinn, a mortician, performs as an amateur magician ably
assisted by his attractive but morbid tap-dancing daughter, Delia. The
disappearance (and death?) of his wife, a strike of coffin-bearers and the
subsequent collapse of the business lead him to a complete breakdown and a kind
of living death. Images, allegories and fairy-tales are all piled in with
bewildering complexity. ''Black Comedy'' is a term that automatically springs to
mind but, even then, hardly does justice to this danse macabre.

It's only too easy to fall into the trap of assuming that a play by a Belfast
man that deals with the nature of death must be influenced by the atmosphere of
doom and destruction prevalen t in the North today. No, on e learns that, in
fact, the impetus to write this play derived from the author's own narrow escape
from an early demise.

One doesn't risk making similar such erroneous assumptions when it comes to
Graham Reid. Mr. Reid writes about the innocent victims of the brutality in
Northern Ireland today. Sectarianism, politics and patriotism become virtually
irrelevant. He himself has said: ''Nothing protects you because the violence is
mindless,'' and ''I don't know the answers. I live through (The Troubles) in
despair.''

Like his ''The Closed Door,'' his latest play ''Dorothy'' kicks the audience in
its gut. Dorothy, a nouveau-riche housewife incarcerated in her pristine
middle-class home, is held captive by three men from an ''organization'' and
raped by them in the comfort of her own bedroom just to settle a fictitious
score. The ordinariness of Dorothy and the matter-of-fact attitude of the
rapists injects such a feeling of terror that the play's small failings in
structure and characterization are rendered almost insignificant.

Only one play by a new Southern Irish playwright touches on the subject of the
North. In Shane Connaughton's ''Forever Young,'' a group of 38-year-olds hold a
reunion at a Bob Dylan concert (well, where else?). As radical students, they
had spent the 60's in protest marches and free love. They have now, with the
exception of one character, Jonty, sold out. Or rather, as the one who has
become a dentist says: ''I didn't sell out, I bought in.''

It is questionable whether the mixture of farcical and political elements in the
play really work. It jumps from being a comedy about pathetic and ludicrous
middle-aged people trying to behave like frisky 20-year-olds to being an attack
on their complacent attitude toward Northern Ireland. They were happy to take to
the streets in the 60's for the sake of Vietnam, but in the 70's chose to close
their eyes to what the author takes to be a similar situation closer to home.

Bernard Farrell is another playwright who has tried to combine the comic and the
serious with unfortunate results. Mr. Farrell recently enjoyed a success here in
Dublin with ''I Do Not Like Thee Dr.  Fell,'' a satirical look at group
psychotherapy.

Perhaps we all had raised our expectations too high when Mr.  Farrell's
''Canaries'' opened at the Abbey. It was the only real disappointment of the
festival. It's a comedy set in a package-tour hotel in the Canary Islands, where
ordinary Dubliners try to live up to the jet-set image envisioned by glossy
holiday brochures. The farce disintegrates in the second act when the author
tries to inject a serious moral - one that would have been equally apparent had
the comedy been sustained throughout.

The only glimmer of controversy during the entire festival came with ''I'm Going
to Have My Memories Taken Out'' by a hitherto unknown writer, David Stevens
(who, if he continues in the same vein, is likely to remain unknown). Boxed in
by his life with wife and retarded child, the hero gives vent to his feelings
out loud.  Cudgels were raised because a child actor was present on stage while
his ''father'' spouted sexist obscenities but, this being Du blin, in due course
even these objections fizzled out in a haze of apathy.

It will have become increasingly apparent that this ''new wave'' prefers to use
contemporary themes. Certainly, in the festival, it was up to the more
established dramatists to travel farther afield.  There was Brian Friel, who got
the best reviews of the festival with ''Translations,'' which deals with the
intrusion of English culture on the native Irish culture in the 1830's. Then, at
the other end of the scale, there was the aforementioned Mrs. Charlton, who
received the worst reviews with ''Nora Barnacle'' (which purports to be based on
the relationship of James Joyce and his wife).

The time has long passed of plays about little whitewashed cottages in the West
and lovable stage-Irishmen uttering such unlikely words as ''Top of the mornin'
to ye'' and ''Begorrah.'' Irish drama now tends to be more urban and, on more
fortunate occasions, urbane. The new wave writes about a newly emerged
middle-class, its materialism and the suburbia it has created.

It's a world of commercialism, strikes and package tours, a world we see
mirrored in ''Dorothy,'' the bored alcoholic housewife, in the swinging
holiday-makers of ''Canaries''; in the middle-aged trendies of ''Forever
Young,'' and in the slick business-like attitude of the undertakers in
''Nightshade.'' Even the self-absorbed hero of ''I'm Going to Have My Memories
Taken Out'' is representative of a certain type of modern Irishman.

It's futile to try and classify modern playwrights in terms of Yeats, Joyce and
O'Casey in a country where television is the dominant cultural influence. The
influence of television is further extended for writers as more and more of them
turn to this medium for the financial rewards which the Irish stage cannot
offer. For authors like Bernard Farrell, who is representative of the bulk of
aspiring playwrights in Ireland, writing is a spare-time activity, a pleasure
(or pain) in which to indulge when the daily grind is over. Northern writers are
c onsiderably better off than their Southern counterparts.Graham Reid h as been
able to give up teaching for a year, thanks to aNorthern Irel and Arts Council
grant. Similar grants and awards from British sourc es have helped Stewart
Parker to pursue writing as a fulltime occu pation.

Wit, humor and comedy still combine to be one of the most identifiable and
attractive traits of Irish drama. They are no less present in the works of
modern playwrights than they were in the plays of Shaw, O'Casey, Boucicault,
Goldsmith and Wilde. Even Graham Reid contrives to be witty within the gloomy
confines of his plays and he has been credited with having a ''bleak humor.''
(Personally, I should have thought that ''bleak humor'' would seem like positive
hilarity compared to anything in Mr. Reid's work.)

There were those in Dublin who felt that the festival contributions of the newer
playwrights were disappointing and sometimes of not high enough a quality. For
myself, I'm not a believer in Instant Chekhov.  I do think that unless these
writers are allowed a chance to see their work produced on the stage and to
learn from their successes and failures, there will be no new wave. Besides,
compared to the drivel some of their elders are pushing out, the younger
playwrights have acquitted themselves remarkably well.

The Abbey Theater continues to encourage new playwrights and the publication by
Co-op Books of some of the new plays recently put on in the Peacock/Abbey is
most welcome. These include works by the Messrs. Parker, Reid, Farrell and Neil
Donnelly, another new writer whose ''Upstarts'' was well received in Dublin
recently.

Finally, what about Irish plays in the Irish language? Only one production was
mounted this year: ''Lig Sinn I gCathu.'' This wasn't an original play but an
adaptation by Macdara O'Fatharta from the novel by Brendan O'hEither. In fact,
the odds are against the tiny minority of native Irish speakers producing any
kind of a playwright, especially since drama has never been part of the literary
tradition of the Irish language. It would appear that Irish drama, though
unmistakably Irish, remains firmly rooted in the English language.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Maurie Taylor and Derek Lord photo of Nuala
Hayes

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS;
Withered Weathermen

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 266 words


The Weathermen, while decrying privilege, embodied the arrogance that often goes
with it. Self-righteously radical and the apotheoses of white liberal guilt,
they abjured reform for revolt and in its name were responsible for at least 20
bombings during the sad years of Vietnam protest. In Cuba to meet the Vietcong,
in Algeria to meet the P.L.O., spurned suiters of both black and women's
movements, the Weathermen were skilled manipulators of media and amateurs at
revolution.

It took a bungled bombing that killed three of them in a Greenwich Village
townhouse to make the Weathermen see that guerrilla warfare was no game. ''It
was clear,'' as their leader, Bernardine Dohrn, understated it a few months
later, ''that more had been wrong with our direction than technical
inexperience.'' She also said the truest thing ever said about her faction: ''We
became aware that a group of outlaws who are isolated from the youth communities
do not have a sense of what is going on.''

Miss Dohrn surfaced last week after ten years in hiding. She had lived quietly,
most recently in Chicago and New York, and borne two children. If the experience
of most other returned Weatherman fugitives is any guide, she will probably
receive probation and a fine.

The Weathermen indeed had no sense of what was going on. Unable to see that
violence in any cause was still violence, they were a dishonorable part of an
honorable upheaval, not revolutionaries but bloody nuisances.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE FOLLY OF THROWING MONEY ON DEFENSE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 452 words


To the Editor:

The Reagan Administration should not significantly increase the defense budget.
Rather, it should critically evaluate both ends and means of defense spending
and see how the ends can be most efficiently and effectively achieved with
current spending levels.

First, the main end of defense spending is national security. Our national
security is not increased by undertaking a buildup of new weapons that will
certainly stimulate a similar Soviet arms increase. In such an arms race,
relative military strength is unchanged.  Moreover, the arms race itself worsens
our relationship with the Soviets by increasing mutual fears.

Second, one major lesson we should have learned from the Vietnam War is that
defense expenditures themselves do not produce military effective ness . U.S.
expenditures of money during the Vietnam War werefar greater t han those of the
North Vietnamese and their allies. Yet they - not we - prevailed.

Third, increased defense expenditures will not themselves assure continued oil
supplies from the Middle East to us and our European and Japanese allies.
Increased defense expenditures cannot keep oil flowing if: (a) there is another
coup or revolution like that in Iran, (b) there is another expanded regional war
like that between Iraq and Iran or (c) the Soviets seize control of oil fields
in the Persian Gulf area, since they enjoy a significant geographic and
logistical advantage.

Fourth, indiscriminately throwing money at defense will worsen our economic
problems. Not only will other parts of the Government shrink, but so will
private investment. At a time when it is necessary to reindustrialize basic
American industries so we can compete more successfully in the world economy, it
will not be sufficient for our national economic health merely to increase
Government procurement from selected defense industries. The defense budget
contributes to deficit spending just as much as does nondefense spending, and
thus it too competes with much-needed private capital investment. Wasteful
defense spending that does not significantly contribute to deterrence or
fighting effectiveness needs to be cut.

We must not allow ourselves to be lulled into believing that a certain level or
percentage increase in defense expenditures will buy us true national security.
That requires broader policies, like effective arms control, reducing our
dependency on imported oil, stimulating productive economic investments and
meeting and promoting basic human needs and rights at home and abroad.
JEFFREY S. MILSTEIN, McLean, Va., Nov. 26, 1980.

The writer is a former professor of international relations at Yale and a former
State Department policy planner.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BREZEZINSKI, THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY AND SOVIET

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 345 words


EXPANSION To the Editor:

Zbigniew Brzezinski's conclusion that the recent Presidential election showed
that the Democratic Party must abandon its ''escapist approach'' to Soviet power
(news story Nov. 30) is a misleading rationalization based on a progression of
inaccurate premises. At best, Mr. Brzezinski offers a transparent excuse for the
failed foreign policy which he designed; at worst, he seeks to rewrite history a
bit too soon after the fact.

he party structures in the United States, Democratic and Republican, offer a
broad consensus to diverse coalitions on general domestic-policy issues and
foreign-policy directions. Both parties oppose Soviet domination and expansion,
and both favor peace. To assert, without evidence, that the Democratic Party has
moved ''excessively to the left'' in international affairs is factually
unfounded and reminiscent of the partisan and discarded rhetoric of the 1950's.

To state that the Democratic Party was responsible for the policies that brought
Vietnam is to forget Presidents Eisenhower, Nixon and Ford. In fact, we can only
wonder who or what the Democratic Party is that Mr. Brzezinski seeks to
discredit. A political party has never before been seen as the architect of our
nation's foreign policy - especially by the President's national security
adviser.

Interestingly, Mr. Brzezinski's listings of foreign-policy achievement are
viewed as accomplishments of the Administration. The failures are attributed to
that new foreign-policy force - the Democratic Party.

It is unclear who should be given the credit, or blame, for Mr.  Brzezinski's
behavior at the Khyber Pass in Pakistan. Perhaps Mr.  Brzezinski will accept
that embarrassment as his own responsibility.  RONALD A. STACK Guilderland,
N.Y., Nov. 30, 1980

*

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WRONG HEADLINE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 117 words


To the Editor:

The headline on your reporter's account of an interview with me does his story,
your readers and me a disservice. Nowhere did I call ''... Democrats Soft Toward
Moscow.''

Rather, as the story noted, I pointed out that some Democrats, in the aftermath
of the Vietnam War, sought to escape the realities of power, just as some
Republicans are unrealistically nostalgic for a return to American superiority.

While I can understand the necessity of shorthand in headlines, I would also
appreciate your giving me this opportunity to correct the impression left by
that headline.
ZBIGNIEW BRZEZINSKI, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs,
Washington, Dec. 1, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SALT'S GRAVE DIGGEREditor:

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 405 words


''SALT lies buried in the sands of Ogaden,'' says Zbigniew Brzezinski. The
failure of the United States to respond ''assertively'' when the Soviet Union
took the side of Ethiopia in its war with Somalia during 1977-78 may have
prevented Senate approval of the strategic arms limitation treaty in 1979,
Richard Burt reports President Carter's national security adviser as saying.

If SALT was thus buried, Mr. Brzezinski did much of the shovel work. No one was
more assiduous, in background and on-the-record statements alike, in telling
journalists that Soviet and Cuban assistance to Ethiopia should have been
impermissible but for the ''fatigue'' of the Vietnam War, which prevented U.S.
counteraction whose nature he never bothered to specify.

Yet in 1977-78 and more recently, Mr. Brzezinski conveniently neglected to
mention that the Ogaden desert is territory universally recognized as Ethiopian,
and that the war between Ethiopia and Somalia was occasioned when Somali forces
attempted to fulfill irredentist ambitions by seizing it for themselves.

One need hold no brief for the present repressive Ethiopian Government to
acknowledge that it was entirely within its rights in calling for foreign help
to repel the Somali invasion. And one need not be complacent about Soviet
activities in the third world to recognize that Moscow was acting wholly in
accord with international law in furnishing assistance.

That is what, all along, has made Mr. Brzezinski's efforts to color the map a
fearsome red so dismaying. Being so patently one-sided, they weakened the moral
force of justifiable American outrage when the Soviet Government really did
violate accepted norms of international behavior in invading Afghanistan in
December of 1979.

And they doubtless did contribute to the Senate's failure, earlier that year, to
give approval to a strategic arms limitation treaty whose effect would be to
augment, rather than detract from, American security.  RICHARD H. ULLMAN
Professor of International Affairs Princeton University Princeton, N.J., Nov.
30, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIME;
ROCKY BLIER: THE MAN AND MOVIE

BYLINE: DAVE ANDERSON

SECTION: Section 5; Page 7, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 992 words


AFTER four Super Bowl celebrations and eight consecutive years in the playoffs,
the Pittsburgh Steelers' reign is over. Their nucleus is a little older now, a
little more susceptible to injury, a little less capable of producing the big
play. All those deficiencies were apparent in the Steelers' last stand Thursday
night in Houston, a 6-0 loss. But even if the Steelers were to come back strong
next season, their aura will never be the same because the nucleus will never be
the same. But among the 22 Steelers with four Super Bowl rings, one of the more
distinguished won't be playing football next season.

Rocky Bleier will be doing the television sports news on a Pittsburgh channel
instead.  ''I'll miss the Sundays, I'll miss the camaraderie,'' Rocky Bleier
says. ''But the adjustment won't be that hard. I've had the opportunity to
fulfill a very fruitful career - four Super Bowls, running for over 1,000 yards
in 1976, being around for 12 years. I don't have to say I could have done this
or done that. I did it. And nobody is retiring me. It's my decision. I've been
able to determine my own destiny.''

Destiny is a word usually so overused in sports that it's meaningless. But with
Rocky Bleier, it fits.  Selected out of Notre Dame on the next-to-last round of
the 1968 National Football League draft, severely wounded in both legs in
Vietnam, retained by the Steelers but virtually not used for two seasons after
his discharge until he regained his speed and strength, he emerged as a starter
at running back at the age of 28 and now, at 34, he is the subject of a
television movie, ''Fighting Back,'' that will appear o n the ABC network
tonight.

The movie is based on the autobiography that he wrote in collaboration with
Terry O'Neill, an ABC producer. And it's a good football movie. Not as good as
''Brian's Song'' but good.

Robert Urich, best known as the private detective Dan Tanna in the ''Vega$''
television series, plays Rocky Bleier with the stride and sense of an athlete.
Art Carney plays the Steelers' venerable owner, Art Rooney; the shame is that
there is not more Art Carney in it.  Bonnie Bedelia plays Rocky Bleier's wife,
Aleta, and their sometimes-rocky romance that made him wonder if he was not
invading his own privacy.

''Your ego is flattered by having a movie made about you,'' Rocky Bleier says.
''But when you see some of the scenes being shot, you say to yourself, 'that
isn't anybody else's business.' But in 1980, people are very aware of
relationships. You can't expect an audience to watch 97 minutes of a football
player lifting weights and running up and down stadium stairs.''

His motivation for the movie is the same as it was for the book.  ''After the
book came out,'' he says, ''I got letters from all over thanking me for writing
it. I remember a letter from a guy in Syracuse, a guy who had been wounded in
Vietman, then got divorced and lost his job. When he read the book, he said he
told himself, 'If Rocky Bleier can do it, I can do it.' Now he's remarried, and
he's got a new job. Not that Rocky Bleier is a hero or can be looked on as one.
But there's hope for all of us if you want to do it.''

In the movie, of course, all the scenes do not happen exactly the way they
really did.  ''Some license was taken,'' Rocky Bleier acknowledges. ''Art Rooney
and I have a good relationship. He knows all his players by their first names.
I've never seen him walk through the locker room without shaking hands and
saying something to all the players in his path.  And when I was in Vietnam, he
would send me postcards every few weeks to ask me how I was and to keep me up to
date on how the Steelers were doing. But in the movie, I think it might look
like we're a lot closer than we really are.''

In the movie, Art Rooney is credited with suggesting to Coach Chuck Noll in 1969
that Rocky Bleier be placed on the injured-reserve list rather than released.

''I think it was really Dan Rooney whose idea that was,'' Rocky Bleier says,
referring to one of Art's sons who is the Steelers' president. ''And then
there's the scene where I phone Mr. Rooney during the players' strike after I
heard a fan on a call-in radio show rip me for not showing the Steelers more
loyalty after all they'd done for me. That day Mr. Rooney actually called me and
told me he had heard what the fans said but he told me, 'Don't you ever feel you
owe us anything, what I've done for you, I'd have done for any of my boys.'''

As a consultant during the filming, Rocky Bleier was there to approve or
disapprove a scene.  ''I thought Robert Urich overemphasized the limping when I
got back from Vietnam,'' he says. ''But other than that, I was very happy with
his portrayal. He had played high school football, he had a Catholic education,
he had been an altar boy, his father worked i n a steel mill in Ohio, my father
owned a bar in Wiscon sin - we each had the same routes.''

Some of the best scenes are those involving his Vietnam duty. In one, Pfc.
Bleier persuades a corporal to hold an old Vietnamese man for interrogation
instead of shooting him.

''In actuality, we were on patrol when the Papa-san suddenly came around the
corner of the path we were on,'' he recalls. ''In the movie he comes out of the
high grass near the path after we heard some movement in the grass. I know all
the guys who really were in Vietnam won't buy that. Any time there was any
movement in high grass, you shot, you didn't wait for somebody to come out. But
that's the way the movie people wanted it.''

And in another scene, Rocky Bleier is making a pot of cocoa when a Vietcong
bombardment forces him to take cover. Between the bursts, he races out to
retrieve his cocoa.

''That really happened,'' Rocky Bleier says, smiling. ''But when they filmed
that scene, Robert Urich spilled some of the cocoa when he jumped back into the
ditch. I told him he should have them shoot that scene over. I never spilled a
drop.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE LEGION'S LIVING LEGEND

BYLINE: By John Vinocur

SECTION: Section 6; Page 79, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4830 words


It is a pretty straight deal, really, one that has been working for a century
and a half. Men bring their bodies and their lies and their fantasies, but the
Foreign Legion asks only for the flesh, judging, with a kind of self-interested
benevolence, that the rest is not its property. It is a one-of-a-kind covenant,
very apropos in 1980, a psychological contract of masterful proportions: The
recruit accepts the rather long odds that he might be killed or brutalized as
the result of some totally quixotic gesture of the French Government and, in
exchange, the legion offers him, almost like the way it is in the movies,
reasonable protection from himself. Here is an employer who not only tolerates
problems with the truth and reality, but one who cherishes them because they are
what bring men to the legion, and what keeps them. Four times as many men try to
get into the legion as it needs. The legion has always understood: its own
degree of absurdity against the recruits'. The arrangement is brilliant. After
all, it survives.

There are small monuments to the relationship that can be scrutinized before
doing anything rash. There is the Museum of the Foreign Legion at Aubagne - the
corps headquarters, about 20 minutes from Marseilles - its whitewashed buildings
with red tile roofs, wrought iron grillwork and flowers making it look more like
southof-France hotel architecture on a reasonably good budget than a repository
for tury and a half of fighting the yellow, the brown and the black. Visitors
are lured into a marble crypt where, in a light of pure veneration, lies the
wooden hand of Capt. Jean Danjou, who in 1863 fought to the last man for
Napoleon III at Camerone in Mexico. ''It's a symbol of courage and devotion,''
the guide declares. Actually, someone else explains, the hand wasn't found on
the battlefield, but maybe 120 kilometers to the north. Had to buy it off some
Mexican. Lesson: The legion, with nothing against a good story, takes care of
its own.

These days, the crowds file in, eager, it would seem, for contact with a simpler
time when armies were dispatched without great moral warfare at home to deal
with distant irritations.

The legion is one of those expeditionary forces, par excellence.  And the
shopkeepers and schoolboys peering into the display cases must instinctively
find it relevant again at a time when there is talk of mobile strike forces and
scenarios for oil-field interventions. Didn't Le Monde print a couple of months
ago that a group of high American military officers got a secret briefing about
the Foreign Legion's parachute intervention in Zaire two years ago, and didn't
French television, no shaker of the established order, decide this spring that
the moment, ripe with endless lists of unmanageable and unchartable ayatollahs
and Qaddafis, was right to feature the corps in prime time.

Things are a bit formal at the museum, though, so close to the office of the
commanding general and the legion jailbirds who water the geraniums and pull
weeds from the cracks in the pavement for their misdeeds. Visitors, of course,
get an official version of the legion, drenched in sacrifice and mobility. There
are bars like Le Penalty, or Chez Lola, in Marseilles near the Gare St. Charles,
where the talk is easier and the legion feels at home. Lola, who looks Khmer or
Vietnamese and actually advertises in the official legion magazine, Le Kepi
Blanc, (The White Cap) has turned her bar into a small altar of white kepis and
red fringed epaulets. On the customer's side of the bar there are the relatively
young drinkers, who give themselves away as legionnaires by their close-cropped
haircuts (zero-heads, the legion calls them), and the older ones, maybe
legionnaires, maybe not, who tell the stories.

Before joining the legion, one of them explains, he was an apprentice toreador.
Nobody says anything. He fell in love with the girlfriend of his stepfather.
Still silence. His stepfather's desire for revenge cut the legionnnaire off from
his inheritance and banned him from the bull-fighting ring. The legion had saved
him from despair; the legion had given him back his pride. There he was on
patrol in the Sahara, hunting down the rebels, trekking across the breathless
hamada, desert as hard-packed as superheated concrete, and plunging into the
fesh-fesh, sand so fine it sucked you up like a swamp. Thirsts, my God, that
left you near insane. (Milton Berle, in a legionnaire outfit, always pleaded for
seltzer.)

The pursuit lasted all day. No water. The rebels held the well.  Shooting all
night. When dawn came, three of his comrades had been eaten by jackals, but the
enemy had pulled out. The survivors rushed to the well. It was stuffed with
corpses and the water had turned crimson: ''We took it in our cups and drank to
our fallen comrades,''he says. ''We buried the rebels facing Mecca, their shoes
off, as a sign of respect to Islam and their combativeness. My lieutenant told
me, 'You do honor to France and the legion.'' 'That legion is dead: The legion
of Morocco and Indochina, the one with a dromedary corps, and poets like Alan
Seeger and Blaise Cendrars, and princes like Aage of Denmark (who made the
legion a career) and Rainier of Monaco (who served briefly during World War II),
and the politicals who hated Hitler or Stalin or Franco and later became
generals in their own armies, like David Shaltiel, who commanded Jewish forces
in Jerusalem during Israel's war of independence.

The old legion took itself with immense gravity, prepared as it was to die, or
to lose, which was often the case. Its troopers were given grenades with their
pins pulled to make sure they didn't fall asleep on sentry duty. And it really
did sing ''Je ne Regrette Rien'' (''I have no regrets'), the Edith Piaf refrain,
when the First Parachute Regiment was trucked away from Algiers after it got
mixed up in the putsch to overthrow Charles de Gaulle. The old legion had people
like Lieut. La Broue de Vareilles-Sommieres, a marquis, who, one is told, had
bottles of Bordeaux substituted for mortar shells in the ammunition cases being
dropped to his unit someplace near Dienbienphu. It also had legionnaires of such
overwhelming devotion that they cut new bars of rank from sardine cans when
their officers got field promotions, and pride of such special proportions that
a noncom with a brilliant combat record, who threw a fit when his Nativity scene
didn't win the legion's Christmas Day competition in the Sahara, was transferred
out of the legion as punishment.

When the legion did its last bit of serious shooting, jumping into Zaire in 1978
to chase off a Katangan army massacring French and Belgian mine workers, one of
the paratroopers, an Irishman named Donald O'Brien, wound up in elephant grass
above his head, a radio on his back and his only weapon a pistol. Suddenly,
there was heavy firing. He and another radio man pulled their guns. ''We looked
at each other,'' O'Brien recalls, ''and we almost died from laughing, in that
crazy grass where you couldn't see anything and with pistols that wouldn't have
stopped anything. It was the movies, what we had come for, but it was slapstick.
We couldn't stop laughing.''

In the old days, presumably, there was no one who would talk about his laughing
fit during the legion's last deep swig of glory, and certainly no one who would
set up in his barracks room at Camp de Canjuers, about 40 miles north of St.
Tropez, a domestic row of green plants worthy of mention in any
interior-gardening-on-a-budget contest. The disciplinary section, the notorious
brig that kept the corps in line with its mountains of U-Haul rocks and its
readiness to turn any rule-breaker into a Job or a Sisyphus, was closed down in
1976, the same year the legion shut the doors on its toughest boot camp, at
Corte in Corsica. In 1977, it was the legion's brothel in Calvi, Corsica, the
last official Bordel Militaire de Campagne in the French Army, gone as finally
as the couvre-nuque, the cloth sun protector for the neck that no legionnaire
had really worn since the Moroccan campaign of 1880-1906. The language itself
has changed. Col. Robert Devouges, the legion's second in command, refers to
most of his men as being in a state of rupture d'equilibre (''upsetting the
balance'') when they enter the legion and explains that personnel decisions
concerning them are made only when their drill instructors judge them stabilise
(stablilzed).

The colonel, back when he was a young lieutenant, did not talk like a social
worker the day he and a legionnaire named Torada figured out how they would deal
with an Algerian machine-gun nest holding out in a deep cut in the middle of a
sheer cliff. They would lower Torada on a rope, and swing him like a pendulum
back and forth in front of the Algerians, while he pumped in fire. These days,
you have to pick spots for acts of bravura. Colonel Devouges, a relaxed and
elegant man who passionately loves the legion, remembers his latest with half an
ironic grin. President Valery Giscard d'Estaing was reviewing Devouges's light
cavalry regiment. It was summer, and hot, and time for shirtsleeves to be rolled
up. Devouges sent the guys with good tattoos on their forearms to present arms
in the front row. One does what one can.

''Of course, there's an evolution,'' says the legion's commander, Gen. Bernard
Goupil, whose office seems to have a sound tape going in it. Actually, it is
drumming - the quick, short, legion press roll that reminds some people of the
drum rolls in movie executions - rising from a practice session in the
courtyard. ''We do more now than just shoot and dig and drum,'' the general
insists. ''We are increasingly technical and flexible and skilled. And we are
more in the public view. But there are con-stants. We demand the loyalty of the
legionnaire and we continue to get it. In exchange, he enters the family. He
takes time off at our rest center. He retires at our retirement home. He obeys
our rules and so do we. We offer a refuge and the legionnaire invents the
personality that he wants to fit into it. You smile sometimes, but you don't
ask. That's our part of the bargain.''

The general gives a visitor a copy of the corps' authorized handbook, ''The
Legion,'' It begins: ''... a name that crackles like a machine gun burst. ... a
name that conceals so much mystery and leads to so many dreams.'' The sergeants
who handle induction look at a recruit's face and decide what his new name is
going to be. Ever yone gets one. No t everyone wants a new identity, but the
legion's rationale is that it doesn't want to create a two-tier system between
the 80 pe rcent of the recruits that a French National Assembly report estima
tes have a problem they would rather not talk about, and the 20 perce nt who
joinout of fascination, or boredom, or disgust with the flacci d world they feel
lies outside the garrison gates with the ''Legio Patria Nostra'' (''The Legion
Is Our Fatherland'') emblem on them . It is not lost on the legion, either, that
a new name gives it a psychological hold on its people. ''There's no one here by
that name,'' the legion will tell callers if you have only been involved in what
it defines as one of the ''classic stupidities'' ( like car theft) that stop
well short of holdups, rapes or murders.  The new names can be prosaic - like
Horst Baumann or Fritz Schenk, if you are German -but sometimes they can have
more of a spin on them. One kid from Britain was told that he would get a
perfectly good Scots name. It turned out to be Creysie, phonetically unfortunate
even in French.

The irony was recently extended to a kid from Dallas with something of a
young-waiter-at-aplace-on-the-Uppe r-East-Side look about him who received a pop
singer's last name and Rock for his first. He is 27 and came to the legion, he
says, ''because there are some of us who are not made to cool our heels as
storekeepers.'' Then he thinks a minute. ''Well, perhaps the legion is another
kind of cooling your heels, but I think I can prove myself here.''

He is given a couple of weeks in which to think over whether he could take five
years in the legion, the only kind of hitch it offers. In the old days, it was
sign up and you're off to boot camp, but now there is, according to the
euphemistic padding that increasingly gets laid over the corps' sharp corners, a
three-week ''period of reflection.'' Afterward, the legion gives itself two
periods of six months in which it can drop a recruit. The time serves the legion
to check out backgrounds, which it does with the help of the French police, its
friends, in both high and low places, and a legion old-boy network that even
includes a kind of alumni association in West Germany. On the other hand, two
Englishmen took only about a week to mark the legion off. They didn't get
camouflage uniforms or submachine guns right away, and it all seemed a bit of a
yawn, so they left.

If he lasts, and if the legion agrees, Rock can apply after three years to be
called Warren Smith or Duane Brown again through a process that the personnel
officers call ''rectification.'' A legionnaire is offered his real name back on
the condition that he make good on whatever the induction investigation showed
was the matter on the outside. If Rock had signed a couple of bad checks, he
could stay in the legion, but he couldn't be Warren or Duane again until he
started paying them off. The legion also has a rather more liberal
leave-of-absence policy than some other equal-opportunity employers: a
legionnaire can always get time off, without pay, to make up any jail time he
owes.

Although the legion doesn't want to say anything about it, it seems that most of
the recruits who bring their problems with the police to the legion are French.
They join, with the connivance of the corps, as Belgians or Swiss or French
Canadians, and then surface later on in their real nationalities. As of 1979,
47.5 percent of the roughly 8,000 troops in the legion were French. Foreign
recruits, after completing a brief language course, are paired off with French
speakers.

Traditionally, the legion drew its manpower from areas of upheaval in Europe,
such as Russia after the Bolshevik Revolution. Refugees from Fascist Germany,
Italy and Spain came before World War II, then more Germans, from the Wehrmacht,
after the defeat of Hitler and, more recently, Hungarians and Czechs, when
emigration from their countries was briefly possible. The Germans took the
heaviest part of the Indochina casualties, when the legion's total strength
peaked at about 35,000 men. One of the dead, if you believe the newspaper
France-Soir, was a former S.S. man who was tracked to Vietnam and shot there by
an Israeli legionnaire, Eliahu Itzkovitch, who joined the corps expressly to
hunt him down. Now, going by the legion's classifications, German speakers make
up 11 percent of the corps, Latins 13 percent and Anglo-Saxons - which includes
Americans - 6 percent.

The legion takes in new people like Rock from Dallas, but to do what? Old hired
colonial armies, used to the wars of whites against the other colors, have to
explain their role with delicacy these days.  The small command helicopter takes
off into the sun from the Legion's Second Paratroop Regiment headquarters at
Calvi, Corsica, across the street from a gas station and the Mediterranean,
turns inland toward the ridges and cuts into where there used to be bandits and
shepherds. Now there are mostly tourists, sun-soakers from the north, and the
hotel owners send letters of protest to the regiment's commander, Col. J. L.
Roue, who doesn't even waste a Gallic shrug on their complaints about the noise
from the choppers.

What he kno ws is that, when all the talk and the sensitivities are shucked
away, his regiment is what the French Government really finds useful in the
legion. The other units, at Mayotte, in the Indian Ocean, or in Djibouti on the
Gulf of Aden, or in Tahiti or French Guiana, provide, of course, a French
presence in nervous sections of the world and, through it, a French element to
be traded off on the great geopolitical bourse. While it is in those places, the
legion, according to its tradition, builds things, functioning as its own
Seabees or corps of engineers.

But the legion's paratroop regiment is different. It trains in deserts, jungles
and on skis in the snow. Its 1,300 men give France the flexibility to intervene
quickly wherever it wants through a unit that Colonel Roue, a man with a Marine
Corps approach to nuance, calls, ''without pretension, the best outfit in the
French armed forces.'' Its size fits French ambitions. The Defense Ministry
thinks enough of the regiment to make it the first to get the army's new assault
rifles. ''Outside of the Arctic, we can do anything,'' its colonel says,
straightfaced. ''For Greenland, give me a couple of days.''

Colonel Roue avoids politics, but the utility of the legion's paratroop regiment
when speed is necessary is obvious and overriding: The French Government needs a
vote of Parliament to dispatch any unit composed of conscripts outside France;
with the Legion, it does not. It could, technically, send a regular paratroop
unit made up of volunteers to places like Chad, where the legion lost a handful
of men helping the since-vanished local government in the 1960's and early 70's,
or to the Central African Republic, where legion units now sit waiting for
something to happen. But Frenchmen getting killed fighting to bail out African
regimes with vague attachments to democracy tend to make for newspaper stories
when the bodies arrive at home, and, in general, grieving parents and
questioning parliamentarians hamstring Realpolitik. So the legion, the paratroop
regiment, gets the call. In theory, at least, its suffering leaves wounds only
on itself, and France can still move as it wishes, its domestic political
liabilities held at arm's length.  There are not many reports of the families of
dead legionnaires writing to their delegates in the French National Assembly.

The colonel's helicopter heads for Hill 421 in the Desert des Agriades, no sand
or oasis, but such a bruised and scabby terrain, just rock and the low bushes
called maquis, that the Corsicans consider it, in spite of its greenness, no
better than a desert.

The new legion, the colonel's elite, is down there, but no one is listening.
''Ici Soleil,'' (''This is Sun'') the colonel calls, again and again. ''Mouette
de Soleil'' (''Seagull of the Sun''). No reply on the radio. He calls and calls,
and finally the command post, Mouette, comes on. ''I've been calling you for
about 15 minutes,'' the colonel says. ''Yeah, we've been busy, colonel,'' the
voice comes back.

A landing zone has been cut on the crest of 421 and the field radio is alongside
it. The ''enemy'' is in a shepherd's house in the valley, about a mile away, and
the command post is maneuvering helicopters five and six miles further for a
mock missile attack on the position. Perhaps because there is a reporter along,
a chopper with a sling is summoned to bring a 20-millimeter cannon to a spot
near the command post's landing zone to do some theoretical work on the house in
the valley. The helicopter sets the cannon down, but a bit forward from where it
should be so that its field of fire is cut off; if the weapon had been used, it
would have hit mostly mountain and sky.

''No tragedy, no tragedy,'' a captain says. He is very interested in reassuring
his guest, who doesn't see it as much of a tragedy, either. ''We'd normally put
some rocks under the supports, change the angle. No big deal. It's just an
inconvenience. I think we must have another view of little problems than the
Americans. Another mentality.''

The captain's name is Quiniou and he had jumped, with 405 other legionnaires,
into Zaire when the Katangan rebels were killing whites and, with a little
coaching from the Cubans and East Germans, hoping to split off Kolwezi and its
copper from the Zaire of President Mobutu Sese Seko. French politicians, talking
with the doors closed, often mention the expedition to Americans as France's
what-have-youdone-for-us-lately bit for the West, but Capt. Jacques Quiniou and
his friends - the brightest young combat officers generally pick the legion -
see it all as proof of the legion's value, its uniqueness. They make clear, of
course, that it wasn't comparable to the rescue mission in Iran, but the legion
and the paratroop regiment really believes in getting things done, and how could
you have left so much of your equipment behind in Iran, and, of course, (this
said with real compassion), it was a terrible shame it didn't work out for the
Americans.

In telling of Kolwezi, the deepest satisfaction is saved for the legion 's
triumph in just getting things under way. The det ails of resourcefulness,
perseverance and cohesion come like testi mony for the defense in an argument
that may one day have to be mad e to spare the corps from disappearing: The
French colonel who had th e plans forthe attack was out of commission for four
hours and 15 min utes when his car broke down en route to the staging point at
Kinsha sa airport.There was no air support for the mission, Zaire's Mirage f
ighters being out of order. The legionnaires, cutting down on gear , didn't
bring their own parachutes and had to use the Zaire Army's American chutes,
which had no straps on the harnesses for attaching weapons and equipment, so
they had to improvise tie-ons with bits of wire andcord.

Two aircraft broke down on the runway, crowding groups of 80 paratroopers into
planes meant for 64. With the air-worthy planes all set for takeoff, the mission
was cancelled and the troops disembarked. Another call reinstated the mission,
but by then the Zairian pilots had drifted off. When the planes finally took
off, they headed in the wrong direction, an error caught by the only French
pilot, flying last in the formation. The first wave of legionnaires was dropped
at an altitude higher than planned, so that the pilots in the second wave had to
wrench their aircraft out of the way to avoid cupping the paratroopers already
in the air.

''But, no panic!'' a captain said, a bit breathless. ''Straight ahead!'' As
Foreign Legion stories go, it sounded very much like the truth.  The mission
ended with the invaders gone, five legionnaires dead, two medals for everyone
and several parades. The Legion, which has always gotten the biggest applause
coming down the Champs-Elysees on Bastille Day in its slow march step, got even
more after Zaire. ''They're our cowboys; they're our Marlboro men,'' a Paris
advertising man said.  ''A reasonable little fantasy, right? 'Vive la France.'
Tough guys without names. 'Honneur et Fidelite.'NM (Honor and Fidelity). ''

Corporal O'Brien, who heard this, said, no laughter this time, ''We were about
400 when we jumped. They were supposed to have about 4,000. If they had been a
little organized they would have done us in before we hit the ground.''

The Zaire episode shot up the number of volunteers for the legion, but it also
brought out the politicians, who have more or less been laying for it ever since
1961, when de Gaulle, understandably annoyed with the corps over its involvement
in the Algiers Putsch attempt, was talked out of abolishing it by Pierre
Messmer, a former legion officer and later Prime Minister of France. Last year,
Charles Hernu, the Socialist Party's leading defense expert, a man sometimes
chided for being pro-NATO, said the legion had to go, and the Communist Party,
recalling how the legion was used to put down the Paris Commune in 1871,
disparaged it as an ''instrument of colonial conquest and repression of the
people.'' There was support, too, from a retired admiral, Antoine Sanguinetti,
who was running for office in Corsica, where AWOL legionnaires killed two
shepherds and a German tourist in 1976 and 1977. ''Once upon a time,''
Sanguinetti said, ''there were the Three Musketeers and the Pope had Zouaves,
The legion's time has passed.''

Dissolving the legion came to a vote in the National Assembly's defense
commission late last year and the proposal was easily defeated. But the French
defense establishment is currently going through one of its periods of roiling
and molting, talking about a neutron weapon, changing defense tactics, and even
hearing propositions from Gaullists about the possibility of reducing the length
of time conscripts must serve. The legion, which will celebrate its 150th
anniversary next year on March 10, has enough of a lobby and enough tradition
not to feel threatened by the national elections also scheduled for 1981. Beyond
that, its future might depend more on emotion than reason.  George Tkach had
four days left in the legion. He was going back to Youngstown, Ohio, where hard
times have cut the town's slow breathing to the level of a gasp,

''My mother's old,'' he said. ''I've got to go back. The house is there by
itself. My brother is waiting on me.'' The legion was fair with him and the door
is open if he wants to return. ''It's a special place,'' he said just before his
departure, ''but you can figure it after a while. In a day, this much (he held
his fingers about an inch apart) of what you hear from some guys is true and
this much (he spread his arms wide) is ... . But there's also something very
good. All you've got to know in French is ''C'est personnel'' - 'It's personal.'
You say it, and people leave you alone. Not another word.''

If Tkach had hung on, he could have retired at 55, the same as they do in the
police or the fire department back home. The legion often talks about the number
of its people who become big stuff in business or do something high on the
social acceptability scale once they leave. At the same time, the corps runs its
own infirmary-retirement home, the only one like it in the French armed forces,
for those, as its brochure s say, ''who cannot resolve the problems of
readaptation to civilian life on their own.'' By Colonel Roue's definit ion,
this means ''the guys who might wind up sleeping under bridges. ''

They can go to the home, a lovely place near Aix-en-Provence, where they can
work on pottery - ashtrays in the form of white kepis, for instance - or in the
vineyards, which turn out 125,000 bottles a year of an appellation controllee
red called Reserve Legion Etrangere.  When they die, there are funerals in the
legion's cemetery, full of gorgeous light and cypress trees, at the edge of
Mont-Sainte-Victoire, a favorite subject of Cezanne.

The dead receive full military honors. They get a marble headstone, gilded
letters, and whatever name they choose.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of a recruits room (Page 79) Photo of a wooden
hand in the legion museum (Page 79) Photo of a legionnaire on leave (Page 78)
Photo of veteran legionnaires (Page 77) Photo of legionnaires in Zaire (Page76)
Photo of a scuba diver (Page 76) Photo of legionaires mired in mud (Page 75)
Photo of the morning flag raising )Page 74)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE PASSAGE TO MANHOOD

BYLINE: By HARRY CREWS; Harry Crews's most recent book is ''Blood and Grits,'' a
collection of essays; his latest novel is ''A Feast of Snakes.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 994 words


THE LORDS OF DISCIPLINE By Pat Conroy.  499 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Company. $12.95.

AT CONROY is the writer who previously gave us ''The Water Is Wide'' and ''The
Great Santini,'' both of which were made into movies. I did not admire either
the books or the movies as much as many other people. This time out, however,
Mr. Conroy has found a great subject and has produced a book so superior to his
other efforts that it might have been written by a different person. In fact, I
read the first 200 pages thinking that this not only was a very good book but
also one so memorable and well-executed that it would become the yardstick
against which others of its kind would be measured. Alas, the next 300 pages
proved this not so.

''The Lords of Discipline'' deals with those beautiful, terrible years when a
boy struggles toward manhood, when he must try to decide wherein honor lies,
when he is faced with making the decision about what he wants and what he is
willing to pay to get it. And he must, during this dreadfully uncertain time,
bear the burden of what his parents want and expect of him, as well as the
crushing pressure of his peers. Some fight their way through to their own truth;
others bend or break during the ordeal.

Will McLean, the boy at the center of this story, makes the passage to manhood
without breaking, but he is left with deep and permanent scars. The first
section of the book, about 100 pages, has McLean returning in September to
Carolina Military Institute, located in Charleston, S.C., for his last year of
college. He is a member of the ''cadre,'' a select group of upperclassmen
charged with the responsibility of returning to school early to meet the
incoming freshmen - the plebes - and give them their baptism by fire. But Will,
unlike the other cadets, doesn't really have his heart in it.  The time is 1966,
and he doesn't believe in the Vietnam War - an awkward, potentially fatal,
position for a boy in a military college. He has no desire to brutalize the
plebes. He does not plan a military career. Sin of sins, he even doubts the
efficacy of the system as a training ground for manhood. But as unlikely a
candidate as he is for heroism, he is drawn into the very center of an evil
conspiracy, a plot by officers and cadets to drive out the first black ever
admitted to the Institute.

While the savagery of these first days of this plebe year rages, we are
introduced to Will McLean's roommates and closest friends: Trad St. Croix, Mark
Santoro and Dante Pignetti. St. Croix is from a wealthy, established family in
Charleston (a place that Pat Conroy renders with such lyricism and precision
that the city itself becomes a player in the drama), and on a visit to his
roommate's home one night, Will McLean meets Annie Kate Gervais, a strange girl
given to wearing raincoats when it is not raining and sunglasses at midnight.
She is unmarried and pregnant, and against all odds, Will falls in love with
her.

At the end of this first section, a boy named Poteete kills himself, driven
half-mad by a dread and super-secret organization called The Ten. With that
death, Will McLean is brought inexorably closer to the time when he will have to
confront his own decisions about manhood, friendship and honor.

In the second section of the book, the story that has been set into motion thus
far stops and Will McLean relives his own nightmarish plebe year. This may seem
an unlikely way for the novel to proceed, but to my mind it works and is natural
and necessary. Here Pat Conroy lays open the barbaric nature of the human heart.
Boys set upon other boys like packs of dogs. For the plebes, there is no
recourse, no redress. They either bear it or break. Some break, and many who
don't become sadists.

About the remainder of the book, roughly 300 pages, little can be said without
unfairly giving away the plot and diminishing what power it does manage to
achieve. There is plenty of emotional and physical mayhem. A boy is soaked in
gasoline by his classmates and threatened by fire; a man is tied onto a railroad
track. Another boy has his arms broken. Will McLean's roommate, Dante Pig netti,
deliberate ly walks into a train and is chewed to pieces in full view of all t
he cadets. Annie Kate Gervais's baby is born dead, the umbilical co rd wrapped
about its neck.

The story has more twists than a snake's back. There are reversals inside
reversals. Mysteries sprout like mushrooms after a summer rain. The greatest
plot reversal comes in the final 10 or so pages.  But I was not surprised; I
knew who the arch villain was long before he was revealed. Even if I had been
surprised, I don't think I would have cared. It's that kind of book.

Simply put, after a very auspicious start, Pat Conroy's creative energies are
sidetracked during the course of this book. Ultimately, he is more interested in
posing and solving clever puzzles than in developing the character of the human
beings inside those puzzles.  Consequently, the reader remains unmoved by Dante
Pignetti's death, by Annie Kate Gervais's tragedy and by the ultimate betrayal
that ends the novel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WAR OF OBSESSION

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WAHL; Nicholas Wahl is professor of French Civilization and
director of the Institute of French Studies at New York University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1219 words


THE WAR WITHOUT A NAME France in Algeria, 1954-1962.  By John Talbott.  305 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $12.95.

FRANCE'S convulsive disengagement from Algeria took place almost 20 years ago,
yet it continues to fascinate historians. This is the third major book in
English to appear on the subject in the last two years. Painful as it was, the
Algerian crisis does make a good story. There is the saga of Europe's last
colonial war, there is the mysterious political intrigue surrounding the fall of
the Fourth Republic, and there is a cast of interesting characters, beginning
with General de Gaulle, who returned to power in 1958 on the widespread
expectation that he would maintain France's links with Algeria but who gave the
country its independence four years later.

Beyond the good story, the authors of these recent books sense clearly that the
war was the watershed of France's internal politics and foreign policy in the
postwar period. John Talbott's excellent book borrows its title from the
anthropologist Paul Mus, who wrote in 1961 that France was ''sinking, step by
step, its eyes closed, into a war which does not tell its name.'' Officially the
French called the war a ''pacification'' -the classic euphemism applied to
colonial wars. But there is a better term for it, which Mr. Talbott and others
occasionally mention, though almost in passing: an obsession. Between 1954 and
1962, France had a fixed idea that the outcome of the Algerian war would
determine France's future for generations to come.

While this expectation has proved to be excessive, the aftermath of the war did
bring great changes to France's position in the world.  Peace with Algeria
brought France's imperial era to a close and shifted its military strategy from
maintaining overseas territories to developing an independent nuclear
capability. Peace also allowed France to concentrate on further modernization of
its industry and to take on the unaccustomed role of a major industrial
exporter, especially to the third world. Building upon this new economic
strength and a new-found political stability, de Gaulle forged an assertive
foreign policy that was different from that of France's allies. The end of the
war against Arab nationalism in Algeria permitted France to return to the Middle
East and to create for itself a special relationship there that has had
important implications since the oil crisis of the mid-70's.

Mr. Talbott, who is a professor of history at Santa Barbara, has written a
concise and authoritative account of the war, marked by objectivity and thorough
research. For a book by an academic it is remarkably spare, almost stripped
down. One longs for a few more pages on French internal politics during the war,
as well as a few more on its aftermath. He begins with a first-rate historical
introduction, reminding us that liberals in the 19th century, such as
Tocqueville, had hoped that the colonization of Algeria would lead to the
creation of a powerful French-African state, able to confront the growing
challenge of France's European neighbors. But it was a vain hope from the start,
given the purely colonial nature of French settlement and the underdevelopment
of the Algerian economy.

By 1954, French liberals such as Pierre Mendes-France, Prime Minister at the
war's outset, had turned to the twin ideas of pacification and a crash program
of economic development. As Mr.  Talbott notes, while drawing a telling
parallel, ''French liberals were not alone in thinking that overcoming misery
would be an effective means of combating revolutionary nationalism, as two
decades of American involvement in Indochina attest.'' Of course, most French
conservatives were hardly more prescient. While paying lip-service to economic
reform and espousing the myth of integrating Algeria into a France stretching
from ''Dunkirk to Tamanrasset,'' they really believed that only a military
solution was feasible. A right-wing military commander told me in 1958 that the
rebellion would be over the day that every Algerian Moslem, in no matter what
direction he turned, could see a French flag flying and a French soldier on
guard. I remembered this kind of logic a few years later when the first American
draftees were sent to Vietnam.

Among the many good questions he raises, Mr. Talbott asks whether France could
have kept some links with Algeria by encouraging moderate Moslem nationalism to
reach a compromise with France before the rebellion. His answer is no, because
it is now clear that the European settlers had long held sufficient political
power in Algiers and Paris to block negotiations with any Moslem nationalists -
among whom, moreover, they made no distinctions. An even more essential reason
why neither compromise with the moderates nor economic development could have
worked in France's favor by 1954 is that by that time the rebellion had become a
Moslem movement led by a rural elite scarcely affected by France's ''civilizing
mission.''

During the war only a few obscure specialists noted correctly the role of Islam
as the mobilizing power behind the rebellion. At first, de Gaulle also appeared
to underestimate its importance, but earlier than most Frenchmen he realized
that the war was as much of an obsession for Algerians as it was for his
countrymen. However, for Algerians it was a unifying, future-oriented assertion
of a cultural identity in step with what was happening elsewhere in the third
world. For the French it was a divisive, past-oriented vision that delayed the
pursuit of the social and political change that could give the French a new
self-image and new goals in world affairs. De Gaulle, the conservative, believed
in the weight of cultural and religious factors. By 1960, the possibility of a
French Algeria or even an Algeria closely associated with France had become
unrealistic, indeed dangerous for France's future. Independence became the
prudent course for both French relations with oil-rich Algeria and the rest of
the third world. By and large this conservative decision has proved to be
profitable for France, although not quite as much as French governments like to
suggest. Butas Mr. Talbott's book does demonstrate, skillful leadership can use
acrisis such as the Algerian war to liquidate vexing old problems and to prepare
the way for at least the attempt to attain new goals more suited to the age.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS ANALYSIS;
BONN AFTER ELECTION: BLAHS SUCCEED HOOPLA;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By JOHN VINOCUR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1223 words

DATELINE: BONN, Dec. 7


In the United States, th e two or three months following ins tallation of a new
President usually produce a mild strain of euphoria that in retrospect sometimes
looks a bi t hasty. InWest Germany, the pattern seems to be reversed: the first
months after election of a Chancellor are the morose ones.

It happened in 1976 when Helmut Schmidt won his first full term, and it is
happening again now. All the snapping dogs of West German internal politics are
loose. In recent days, the easy lunch-time talk in a city where, even more than
in Washington, politics is the only business, has turned on whether the
two-month-old Government can last four years.

On Monday, Der Spiegel, which spent most of the campaign publishing photos of
Franz Josef Strauss in which he looked menacing, jaundiced and bloated, ran a
cover picture of Mr. Schmidt, aged and depressed, and the headline: ''Chancellor
at a Low Point.''

Bild Zeitung, the country's largest newspaper and no enemy of a little
sensation, caught up on Tuesday with a file picture of a gloomy Chancellor and a
lead story that asked, ''Is He Throwing It In?'' Most of its information came
from Der Spiegel. By this morning, Mr. Schmidt's spokesman, Klaus Bolling, got
around to saying essentially that the talk of a resignation or big trouble was
preposterous.

Reality Intrudes

The fact is, the Chancellor and his Government have lived through a couple of
hard weeks during which they dealt with more reality than during the election
campaign. The result has been a lot of complaining about these realities,
particularly within the Chancellor's Social Democratic Party, a classic warning
or two from the Chancellor that he did not like the backbiting, and then the
stories that everything was crumbling.

This irritation or moroseness appears built into the way West German politics
has evolved. When a coalition government, composed of two parties with some
basic ideological differences, is returned to office, its first job is getting
together its program for the next four years, and it is in the nature of things
that all the differences papered over in the election campaign come tumbling
out.

This year, because the junior coalition partners, the Free Democrats, are
considerably strengthened, and the economy is considerably weakened, the talks
appeared longer and tougher than usual. They were covered by television as if
they were akin to the old Vietnam negotiations on Avenue Kleber in Paris, with
TV reporters holding umbrellas in the rain and announcing, ''Once again, little
movement tonight.''

To the same extent that the American system grants a new President a lot of good
will and time to reinforce it, the West German way of doing things almost
requires a newly elected Chancellor to disappoint people and lower expectations.


Looking for an Inspiration Speech

Mr. Schmidt's State of the Union speech last week, essentially a long
bookkeeperish accounting of what the coalition had agreed to do in the next four
years, accomplished just that. Although it could easily be argued that Mr.
Schmidt sugared the realities of the country's loss of economic competitiveness
more than pure honesty would allow, some of his party's Bundestag delegation
complained that his speech lacked perspective and inspiration.

The complaints within the Social Democratic Party seem to explain the flashy
stories in the press. The Social Democrats are indeed deeply frustrated, but
there is not much they can do about it or do without Helmut Schmidt.

The party's success during the past 10 years has come in large part from the
network of social services, rivaling Sweden's, that it has helped to build. Now
that there is much less money in the coming budget for more social reform, there
is irritation and a feeling in the party of having lost its raison d'etre. This
is significantly compounded by the international situation, which has become
much darker for detente and Bonn's initiatives toward Eastern Europe, which with
internal change are the trinity of Social Democratic thinking. The Chancellor
may have correctly analyzed that there is going to be less of all three in the
coming years, but it is not something the party likes to hear.

Program for Unions Is Delayed

The Social Democrats were particularly upset that, under pressure from the Free
Democrats, the Chancellor put off for six years consideration of a law that
would strengthen co-determination, the system that gives West German unions
representation on corporative supervisory boards making company policy and
financial decisions. The howling was loud enough to make the opposition
Christian Democrats look a bit more unified and to lead a few commentators to
say that the Social Democrats could splinter and the Government fall.

But it all seems highly unlikely. After a decade in pow er, the Social Democr
ats have become very used to the comforts of governing and the dispe nsing of
jobs, influence and advice. Any a tte mpt by the Free Democrats to break away
from the coalition, a rumor t hat has been denied, would mean breaking a promise
to their voters and likely losses in the next election. Any situation in which
the SocialDemocrats appeared to be turning against Mr. Schmidt, a ma n with
greater individual popularity than the party itself, would be disastrous for the
electoral future as well.

Perhaps the best indication that all the chatter is artificial, the product of a
political caste living in an ingrown, hothouse environment, is that it hardly
seemed to affect the public. The day the Schmidt-in-trouble stories reached
their peak, results of a poll broadcast by one of the state-run television
networks reported that 57 percent of the voters were satisfied with the new
Government. Mr.  Schmidt remained the most popular West German politician.

The Chancellor may be thinking that he has lived through all of this before, and
probably in rather more difficult circumstances, in 1976.

Increase in Pension Postponed

Then, members of his own party protested angrily when the coalition voted to
postpone an increase in pensions that had been a major aspect of the party's
election campaign.

The Chancellor's labor minister, who supervised social security, had to be eased
out of his job. There was a flood of disruptive antinuclear demonstrations and
concern about civil rights and terrorism. When Mr. Schmidt's confirmation as
Chancellor came to a vote in the Bundestag Dec. 15, 1976, two members of his
coalition voted against him. The Chancellor was reported depressed and talking
about resignation.

Barely a month later, on Jan. 23, a newspaper headline, said: ''A Refreshed and
Newly Confident Schmidt Resumes Active Role.'' Like the postelection euphoria in
other places, West Germany's postelection moroseness had pretty much
disappeared.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET BELIEVED EQUIPPED TO WAGE CHEMICAL AND PERHAPS BIOLOGICAL WAR

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1069 words


The Soviet armed forces are fully prepared to wage chemical warfare, and perhaps
biological warfare as well, according to Western military experts. Whether
Moscow has actually used the chemical weapon of poison gas in recent years,
however, remains a subject of debate.

Last April, Secretary of Defense Harold Brown said, ''There is mounting evidence
that the Soviets are using incapacitating gas - and some reports that they may
be using lethal gas - in the Afghan countryside.''

But to date, intelligence officials acknowledge, the case against the Russians
has not been proved. The evidence is circumstantial, based on reports by
refugees, battlefield debris and the fact that Soviet forces took poison-gas
decontaminators with them to Afghanistan.

Moscow has also been accused of providing poison gas to its allies in the Yemeni
civil war in the 1960's and in Laos and Cambodia in 1978 and 1979.

Chemical Arms Ban Discussed

Since 1976, American and Soviet negotiators have been discussing a total ban on
chemical weapons, but without result. Both nations have signed the 1972
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological and Toxin Weapons, but this does not ban chemical weapons.

Three years before the 1972 convention, the United States renounced offensive
biological weapons. American experts say they believe that although the Soviet
Union also signed the convention, it may still be conducting bacteriological
warfare research.

Soviet stockpiles of chemical weapons are assumed to be much larger than those
in the United States. The poison gases most commonly stocked by both belong to a
class of substances called organophosphorous compounds or, simply, nerve gases,
since they destroy the functioning of the nervous system.

In itself, the presumed Soviet lead in chemical arms supplies does not
particularly worry American military leaders. Modern organophosphorus nerve
gases are lethal in minute quantities and fairly easy to make; if the need
should arise, they could be massproduced here and in most other countries in
factories essentially the same as those used to make laundry detergents.
Nevertheless, the Pentagon hopes soon to begin acquiring binary chemical shells,
which are safe to store and handle up to the time they are used.
Soviet Chemical-Defense Drills

Many American officials are worried, however, by another aspect of the Soviet
lead in chemical weapons, noting that Soviet forces and their allies seem much
better trained and equipped to defend themselves against such arms. ''While our
troops go through the chemical drill,'' a senior military official said, ''the
Warsaw Pact people routinely conduct full-dress chemical warfare maneuvers, with
protective suits, sealed vehicles, the works.''

Unlike their American counterparts, Soviet tanks can be hermetically sealed
against chemical attack. Mobile TMS-65 decontaminators accompanying Soviet armor
use powerful jets of air to blast all traces of poison gas from the outside of a
contaminated tank in less than three minutes.

Though poison gas is the main weapon of chemical warfare, techniques for
poisoning food and water supplies also exist. Many chemical agents are liquids,
dispersed by bombs or shells as fine droplets. These mists spread like gas, but
unlike gas they adhere to the skin and resist being blown off the battlefield by
random breezes.

Offensive Gases Stocked

Besides lethal gas, the armed forces of most nations stock various
incapacitating gases; some of these, including CS, or tear gas, were used by the
United States during the Vietnam War.

The main gas in the Soviet arsenal is believed to be the nerve gas Soman. This
is stored as a liquid and can be dispersed by shell and bomb bursts, or from
canisters. It evaporates about as quickly as water and leaves no residue.

An attacking army can move across a battlefield soon after Soman has been used
to destroy enemy resistance. Furthermore, the absence of chemical residue from
the gas may conceal its use from observers who later visit the battlefield.

The nerve g as Sarin is currently the main chemical weapon of the United States
; it is packed with an explosive bursting charge in bombs and she lls.

A feature of nerve gas, which is produced in liquid form, is that it can be
thickened to make it more lethal, much harder to decontaminate and likely to
persi st on a batt lefield for weeks or months.

Fears that the Soviet Union might be carrying on research in bacteriological
weapons were heightened last year when it was learned that an epidemic of
anthrax had occurred near a suspected biological warfare laboratory in a suburb
of the Urals city of Sverdlovsk. There was widespread speculation that an
accident had occurred at the laboratory, releasing airborne anthrax spores into
the air.

Soviet Conceded Epidemic

The Soviet press acknowledged that an anthrax epidemic occurred in the spring of
1979, but said it had resulted from the eating of infected meat and had nothing
to do with germ warfare research. Some Western experts accepted the Soviet
explanation, noting that anthrax spores remain dangerous for many years once
released, and that anthrax is therefore unsuitable as a battlefield weapon.

Before the United States renounced the use of biological arms, the Pentagon
studied anthrax as a possible biological weapon, along with botulinum toxins,
staphylococcal enterotoxins, cholera and other disease organisms.

Soviet military laboratories are believed to have explored the same
bacteriological agents as well as new ones created by genesplicing techniques.

A Soviet microbiologist who defected to the United States said in an interview
that before leaving Moscow he had been assigned a postgraduate student as an
assistant. The student told him privately, the defector said, that he was
employed by a secret biological warfare laboratory and was studying advanced
microbiology to enhance his skills in weapons development.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Defense Minister Dmitri F. Ustinov Photo of
Marshal Nikolai V. Ogarkov

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESSMAN WHO AIDED GARWOOD PLANS TO TESTIFY AT COURT-MARTIAL

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 396 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Dec. 7


A European businessman who helped Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marine Corps
leave Vietnam after the serviceman had spent 14 years behind enemy lines will
testify early this week at Private Garwood's court-martial on charges of
desertion and collaboration with the enemy.

The businessman, reportedly a Finn employed by a multinational organization, was
supposed to have been in a Hanoi restaurant in March 1979, when a note was
dropped into his lap.

''I am an American. Are you interested,'' the note supposedly read. It was
reportedly signed ''Robert Garwood'' and ''USMC.'' That exchange triggered a
series of diplomatic events that resulted in Private Garwood's return to the
United States later that month.

Faces Life Imprisonment

Private Garwood is the only American Vietnam War serviceman to be
court-martialed on charges of desertion and collaboration with the enemy. He
faces life imprisonment if convicted.

The final week of testimony from witnesses summoned by military prosecutors is
scheduled to begin tomorrow, with Dr. Harold Kushner, a former prisoner of war
who is now practicing in Florida, scheduled to take the stand.

Dr. Kushner once testified before a Congressional committee that revised the
military's Code of Conduct, the rules governing a soldier's behavior when he is
a prisoner.

Prosecutors also will call two Vietnamese refugees who say they know about
Private Garwood's activities behind enemy lines.

Government Plans to End Its Case

The Government says it will end its case by the middle of the week, and the
defense plans to begin presenting its case by the first week of January.

Other ex-prisoners of war who have already testified say that Private Garwood
made propaganda broadcasts for the Communists and assisted the Vietcong at
several jungle prison camps.

They said that Private Garwood carried a weapon, boasted of holding rank in the
enemy army, stood guard over his fellow Americans and helped camp officials
interrogate and in doctrinate prisoners.

The defense says Private Garwood, 34 years old, of Adams, Ind., was so severely
tortured after his capture in 1965 that he suffered a mental disease that made
him unable to determine right from wrong.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
A STEP FOR JUSTICE;
by Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 897 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Dec. 7


Those who hold official power do not often impose restraints on themselves for
reasons of principle. An example is at hand, and it ought to be noted.

Last February, the Justice Department won a smashing legal victory for the power
to maintain official secrecy. In the case of Frank Snepp, the Supreme Court held
that someone who has done sensitive government work may be forever liable to
official censorship if he writes on that subject - and be severely penalized if
he evades the censorship.

Snepp was a C.I.A. officer in Vietnam. Deeply disturbed by what he considered
official American blunders in the final days, especially the abandoning of
thousands of Vietnamese who had supplied us with intelligence, Snepp wrote a
book, ''Decent Interval.'' He published it without first showing the manuscript
to the C.I.A., as he had promised to d o in a secrecy agreement.

The Supreme Court found that the secrecy agreement was a binding legal contract.
For Snepp's violation, it imposed an extraordinary remedy: a ''constructive
trust'' entitling the Government to take all his receipts from the book. The
Justice Department took $140,000 from Frank Snepp.

The Court went further. Its unsigned opinion said that any government employee
with ''access to confidential sources,'' even if he had not signed a secrecy
agreement, could be in ''a trust relationship'' subjecting him to the same duty
to clear manuscripts and the same penalty if he did not. The Court said all that
despite Congress's failure to legislate such remedies and despite the First
Amendment's presumption against censorship.

Litigating lawyers dream of winning such a decision. But the official winner in
this case, Attorney General Civiletti, worried about the sweeping power it gave
the Government in the sensitive area of free speech. He set out to draft
guidelines on how the Justice Department would use the power.

The guidelines are now in nearly final form, and they would ease some of the
anxieties aroused by the Supreme Court decision. Most important, they rule out
suing former Government employees on the vague theory that they had been in a
''trust relationship.'' The basis for any suit would have to be violation of an
express secrecy agreement.

The department has gone to court in the past to stop publication of uncleared
manuscripts. The guidelines say that step is ''an extraordinarily serious matter
that should be undertaken after the most searching scrutiny of the strength of
the government's case.'' Any injunction would be limited so as not to cover the
press if it reports what the former employee was going to disclose.

If something has been published without clearance, the guidelines lay out a
number of considerations for officials to weigh in deciding how much money to
seek from the former employee.

Among the questions to be considered are whether the material published is
likely to harm national security, whether it may endanger lives and whether it
discloses specifics about an agency's operations and structure or merely offers
political criticism. The willfulness of the individual in failing to submit
material would also be a factor, as would his care or recklessness about
national security interests.

The Justice Department would consider seeking an author's gross or just his net
receipts, after expenses. The guidelines say: ''The Government does not seek to
reduce defendants to penury.''

*

If Attorney General Civiletti issues those guidelines before Jan.  20, he will
have done something important - and difficult, because the intelligence agencies
would rather have left their new power unregulated. What remains to be done is
justice to an individual.

Frank Snepp did violate his secrecy agreement. But he has always maintained that
he wrote his book, and published it as he did, because the C.I.A. itself would
not look into his complaints about derelictions in Vietnam. He has insisted that
he wrote with deep concern for national security. Now he has support from a new
and impressive quarter.

Robert Amory Jr., for 10 years deputy director of the C.I.A., read the Snepp
book and came forward with an unsolicited comment on its integrity. He said that
in his judgment the book ''reflected a totally responsible concern for security
and told a tale of incompetence at low and high levels in Saigon-Washington that
demanded airing.''

Snepp has been reduced to literal ''penury'' by his case. The Government took
his gross receipts for three years, and he had to borrow $30,000 to pay the
judgment. Other former officials have made large sums from books that disclosed
weighty secrets. Snepp was not allowed at trial to introduce evidence of his
efforts to get an inquiry by the C.I.A., and the Supreme Court decided the case
without briefs or argument.

By the standards of the proposed guidelines, or of simple justice, Snepp has
paid a disproportionate penalty. He has sought no relief from it. But the Carter
Administration, for its sake and ours, should do justice to Frank Snepp before
it leaves office.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LAW STUDENTS DELAY NEWARK'S ANTI-PEDDLER DRIVE

BYLINE: By ALFONSO A. NARVAEZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 726 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, Dec. 3


When Mayor Kenneth A. Gibson walks through do wntown Newark, as he does
regularly, the sight of peddlers hawking wi th impunity a variety of merchandise
is a constant reminder that heis losing the battle to keep them off the main
commercial streets.

His principal adversaries in the fight, now more than five years old, are
students and professors of Rutgers Law School in Newark, who have taken up the
peddlers' cause, challenging the city's antipeddling ordinances in court.

The Mayor said he first became incensed with peddlers in 1974 when he had to
pass through a crowd of them as he tried to walk from City Hall to inaugural
ceremonies at the Robert Treat Hotel a dozen blocks away.

He ordered them removed and later learned that the ordinance on which their
arrests were based was defective. ''We rewrote the ordinance,'' the Mayor said,
''and when we arrested them again, they ended up with better legal
representation than you or I could afford.''

Peddlers Ignore Offers

''These guys,'' he said, referring to Rutgers students, ''were arguing
constitutional law in Municipal Court.'' Louis S. Raveson, an instructor at the
Urban Law Center at Rutgers, laughed when told that his students were considered
expert legal counsel by the Mayor.

''It's not only that,'' he said. ''The Mayor keeps drafting unconstitutional
ordinances.'' The Mayor said the peddlers had ignored offers of space away from
the business district. ''It's a nuisance,'' he said. ''It's unattractive and it
affects adversely the guy who runs the bank, the five-and-ten or the clothing
store.''

Mr. Raveson, who noted that the school had become involved at the request of a
Municipal Court judge, said that three cases were still making their way through
the courts and that they were being handled by third-year law students, until
they reached the appellate or State Supreme Court level.
'Recognized Occupation'

He said the old ordinance had been challenged on constitutional grounds because
of vagueness. A lower court ruled it unconstitutional, and the city has
appealed. That case is now in the Appellate Division of Superior Court.

A second ordinance, also at the appellate level, is being fought on the ground
that the state's new penal code supersedes it and preempts municipalities from
passing ordinances affecting peddlers. A third case, which will be filed next
week in Superior Court, will seek to enjoin the city from enforcing the
ordinance on the ground that it is very long, very explicit and thereby deprives
the peddlers from making a living.

''Peddling is a recognized occupation in common law,'' Mr. Raveson said.  As for
the peddlers, they see themselves as victims of the tug-ofwar between the
business community and the Mayor.
Peddler Defends Actions

''We're not hurting anyone,'' said one peddler who gave his name only as
''Mudd.'' He said he had worked five or six hours a day, on and off, for four
years, as a peddler selling scarves, gloves, hats and umbrellas. ''We don't rob.
We don't mug,'' he said. ''We just make our own living. Sometimes we have good
days and then we have bad days.''

Mr. Mudd said that he wa s a veteran of Vietnam and worked at another job a s a
truck driver for a brewery.  ''I support myself and I support my 7-year-old
daughter,'' he said.''I could pro bably go on welfare but that's not my way.
I've worked since I was 1 2 years old and I intend to continue.''

He said there were about 20 regular year-round peddlers who made their livlihood
on Newark's downtown streets.  ''We don't set up in front of someone's store,''
he added. ''People have the right to buy where they want to.'' However, the
34-year-old peddler, who would not say how much money he took in from his
selling, said that he could understand how some of the merchants felt.

''I suppose that if I owned a store and had to pay taxes, I'd squawk too,'' he
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 8, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ISSUE AND DEBATE;
DOES THE PRESIDENT NEED MORE SCIENCE ADVISERS

BYLINE: By WALTER SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section D; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1406 words


President-elect Ronald Reagan must decid e in the next few weeks whether to
recruit a team of the nation's mos t distinguished scientists to help him assess
the complex sci entific and technological issues that confront the nation over
the next four years.

Several scientists, including most, if not all the former Presidential science
advisers, would like to see a revival of the President's Science Advisory
Committee, which was abolished by President Nixon.

An alternative would be to restore the President's Council on Science and
Technology, created by Congress in 1976 to review major short-term and long-term
policies. The council was abolished by President Carter the following year.

What remained was the Office of Science and Technology Policy, headed by Dr.
Frank Press, who also serves as the President's science adviser. Unlike the
science advisory committee, which operated nearly on a par with the White House
staff, the science office comes under the Executive Office of the President, a
formidable bureaucracy.
Office Has Wider Focus

It is staffed by specialists who prepare reports on a wide range of policy
questions, but unlike the earlier science advisory boards, its focus is not
primarily on military matters.

Dr. Press has been commended by former Presidential advisers for his role in
sustaining Federal support for basic research. But, according to Dr. Edward E.
David Jr., a science adviser toPresident Nixon, ''There is a surprising unease
in Washington about the current state of White House science advising.''

The Background

The science advisory committee was formed by President Eisenhower in 1957 in
response to the shoc k of the first Soviet satellite. Dr.  James Killian ,
president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, w as its chairman, and
the first full-time Presidential science advis er.

The stage for this step had been set by recommendations of William Golden, a New
York investment banker, who had earlier been asked by President Truman to review
science activities by the Government. Mr.  Golden, in a book, ''Science Advice
to the President,'' has assembled comments on the present situation from former
Presidential science advisers and others.

The subject has been further discussed in recent interviews with some current
and past advisers.

For Committee's Revival

In its early years the advisory committee under Presidents Eisenhower and
Kennedy made available to them advice from some of the nation's most
distinguished scientists. They were primarily chosen for their objectivity and
wisdom, rather than their expertise.

Because of the stature of these advisers, Presidential decisions based on their
recommendations carried special weight.  Dr. Killian said the members of the
committee, who had outside jobs and no political ambitions, were able ''to work
with the elective, appointive, and career people in Government in a way that did
not arouse antagonism or fears of territorial aggression.'' The science
committee, he said, also served as a brake on some of the wilder Pentagon
proposals, a brake that Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner of M.I.T., science adviser to
President Kennedy, says he now finds lacking.

The former advisers seemed to agree that rapport between the President and his
science aide, as chairman of the Office of Science and Technology Policy is
essential. Dr. Wiesner said President Johnson ''was a poor listener and didn't
trust anyone he didn't fully control.'' President Nixon, he said, ''didn't like
give and take, didn't trust many people.''

According to Dr. David, who now heads the Exxon Research and Engineering
Company, ''Much of the planning and committee work formerly done by
distinguished contributors from outside the Government is now performed by
interagency task forces.''

Such groups, he said, ''inevitably are bound by the bureaucratic interests of
their agencies. Contributions from outside the Government, through balanced
committees, can produce more novel and imaginative approaches.''

Against Science Panel

The conditions under which the President's Science Advisory Committee was most
useful, it is argued, no longer exist. Its membership was strong in the physical
sciences and well suited to problems in defense and physics. It filled a gap at
a time when there was little scientific contribution to the Government
departments.

Today the diversity of problems, ranging from industrial innovation to health
care, is so great that a committee of advisers meeting a few days a month cannot
be expected to cope with them all. The group not only must understand the issu
es in depth but must sense the evolving political problems of the President.

A question raised by Dr. Wolfgang K.H. Panofsky, director of the Stanford Linear
Accelerator in California and a former member of the science committee,
concerned loyalty. President Eisenhower is said to have referred to members of
the original committee as ''my scientists.''

By the time of the Johnson and Nixon administrations, however, such issues as
the Vietnam War had undermined the relationship and Nixon abolished the
committee. If its members are part-time outsiders, Dr.  Panofsky said, ''Can the
President own them body and soul?''
Ad Hoc Panels Criticized

His chief criticism of the current advisory system is President Carter's
preference for temporary, ad hoc panels. For continuity and the development of
expertise in the areas covered by such panels, Dr. Panofsky believes they should
be continuing.

A major change, since the heyday of the science committee, according to
opponents of its revival, has been the growth of science advice within
Government departments. Ill-considered proposals, it is argued, could no longer
emanate from the Pentagon.

Dr. H. Guyford Stever, science adviser to President Ford, believes Presidents
who experienced the operations of the science committee ''had some reservations
about it because that body had the right to make studies on any subject of its
own determination.'' President Nixon's abolition of the committee came soon
after some of its members publicly opposed such programs as development of
supersonic transports.

The Outlook

Hindering restoration of the committee are the Federa l Advisory Committee Act
and the Freedom of Information Act. These require that the agenda fo r formal
meetings of such committees be published in advance and t hat the proceedings be
secret only for discussions relating to n ational security, budget and
personnel.

Former members of the science panel question whether such a committee could or
would give candid advice except in private, although some believe consultants
could still be protected by ''Presidential privilege.''

A reorganization reportedly under consideration for the Reagan administration
would reduce the number of independent Federal agencies, now in the dozens, by
placing many of them under one of seven or eight cabinet officers. One
suggestion, for example, was that the Office of Science and Technology Policy
report to the Secretary of Commerce instead of the President.

It appears very unlikely that such a removal of the science advisory operation
from direct access to the President would be supported by the panel named by Mr.
Reagan to advise him on science and technology policy.

It is headed by Simon Ramo, a founder of TRW Inc., and Arthur M.  Bueche, a
General Electric senior vice president for corporate technology, and includes
two former Presidential science advisers, Dr. David and Dr. Stever.

The President's science advisory system was legislated by Congress and is
therefore not subject to abrupt alteration. The manner in which it is used, and
modified, will nevertheless rest with Ronald Reagan when he takes office and the
direction such changes will take is still uncertain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. and Vietnam Agree On Immigration Program

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 151 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 8


The United States and Vietnam have reached agreement on a program that will
initially permit the immigration of up to 1,500 Vietnamese and their families to
the United States, the State Department said today.

The first departures from Vietnam, totaling about 250 people, are expected to
begin Thursday aboard a weekly Air France flight from Ho Chi Minh City, formerly
Saigon, to Bangkok, Thailand.

American officials said the Carter Administration, in selecting which Vietnamese
were eligible for entry into the United States, was giving priority to those
with relatives in the United States or those who were formerly employed by the
United States Government.

The State Department spokesman, John H. Trattner, said the program was
humanitarian in nature and was unrelated to the question of normalization of
relations between Washington and Hanoi.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY DOCTORS FIND GARWOOD NOT INSANE WHILE IN PRISON CAMP

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 344 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Dec. 8


A psychiatric evaluation of Pfc. Robert R. Garwood, made public today, concludes
that the 34-year-old marine was sane during the time the Government claims he
deserted and collaborated with the enemy in Vietnam.

The findings of the three military psychiatrists who examined Private Garwood
earlier this year were released as the Garwood courtmartial entered its 10th
day, which included testimony from Dr.  Floyd Har old Kushner.

Dr. Kushner, a former prisoner of war who encountered Private Garwood in a
jungle prison camp in 1967, testified that he had found the serviceman to be
coherent and that he had seen no signs of abnormal behavior.
Private Garwood, who is from Adams, Ind., spent nearly 14 years in Vi etnam
after disappearing from his unit in 1965 before returning to th e United States
in March 1979 with the aid of a Finn.

Called Competent to Stand Trial

The psychiatric report concluded that Private Garwood is competent to stand
trial and that he should have had ''the ability to appreciate the criminality of
his conduct'' at the time the alleged acts of collaboration occurred.

Defense attorneys plan to call their own psychiatrists in an attempt to prove
the Private Garwood was driven insane by torture and deprivation and was unable
to distinguish right from wrong.

The report said that Private Garwood is suffering from mental depression and a
condition in which he consciously or unconsciously attempts to avoid unpleasant
events.

In trying to explain Private Garwood's behavior, the report concluded that ''the
requirements of the law were not of paramount importance to him, as he was
intent on his own survival.''

Dr. Kushner, who practices medicine in Ormond Beach, Fla., was the eighth former
P.O.W. to testify that he saw Private Garwood armed and dressed in the enemy's
uniform. He also said that Private Garwood acted as an interpreter, informant
and guard for the Viet Cong.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICA IS FAILING ITRS LINE SOLDIERS

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 305 words


To the Editor:

This regards Richard Halloran's report of his lengthy interview with Gen. Edward
C. Meyers, Army Chief of Staff, on the state of the Army (news story Nov. 30).

I think the article is a crisp accounting of important specific problems which
face the Army and which Mr. Halloran and The Times have kept in the public eye
(as in the series in the early fall on defense issues). Let's hope that we soon
see signs that Mr. Reagan's intimates grasp the details of the Army's plight, as
discovered in Mr. Halloran's reporting.

There is one necessary note that this reporting has not yet struck.For a reader
who has served in the military or has had a loved one inthe service, there is
this poignant aspect: We have put our line soldiers in n eedless peril.

It is poignant because our professional leaders in the field must put the
published truth to one side. Their job is to marshal the soldiers at hand,
imparting a ''can do'' attitude. Some of us served with these young leaders in
Vietnam; they were the professional soldiers who stayed in uniform. Or we knew
them before they took their commissions in R.O.T.C. or the military academies.
What allegiance do we show these men in the field?

I think of two young officers I knew in Vie tnam, now poised in main fighting
units. Reading Mr. Halloran's r eport, I do not like what I see in my mind's
eye.

I see those officers on the 13th day of battle, with no ammunition, no
reinforcements or organized units supporting them, amid soldiers wounded by
chemical gas and unable to mount a sustained local counterattack. I see them
using their limited remaining tools with courage and initiative, at the last
risking their own lives to save their troops, facing certain death like men.

Failed by you and me.
JOHN P. WHEELER, 3D Kenwood Park, Md., Nov. 30, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

LENNON KNOWEN BOTH AS AUTHOR AND COMPOSER

BYLINE: By ROBERT, PALMER

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1054 words


The Beatles united a generation of young people with their songs, their
attitudes and their sense of style, and John Lennon was the thinking man's
Beatle.

Of the four, he was the Beatle who wrote books, the Beatle who embroiled the
group in a potentially disastrous controversy by suggesting in an interview that
they were more popular than Jesus, the Beatle who embraced the poetic
innovations of Bob Dylan in the mid-1960's and shocked Beatles fans by jumping
into performance art, happenings and political protests in the late 60's and
early 70's.

He was the Beatle who announced, in one of his first solo albums after the
breakup of the Beatles, that ''The Dream Is Over'' - the dream of community
through peace, love, mysticism and psychedelic drugs that the Beatles had
encouraged and advertised.

Never Lost Sight of Dream

And yet, paradoxically, Mr. Lennon never lost sight of that dream.  ''The media
are saying that the 60's were stupid and naive,'' he remarked in an interview
only a month ago. ''But look at how much of what was sniggered about in the 60's
has become mainstream -health food, therapies and all the rest. And love and
peace weren't invented in the 60's. What about Gandhi? What about Christ? The
naivete is to buy the idea that the 60's were naive.''

To protest Britain's involvement in the Nigerian civil war and British support
of the United States' role in Vietnam, Mr. Lennon, named a Member of the Order
of British Empire by Queen E lizabeth in 1965, returned his award. The award,
the lowe st of five divisions of the order, was presented to the four Beatles
for service to their country.

Influenced by U.S. Rockers

John Lennon was born Oct. 9, 1940, in Liverpool, England. In his early teens he
felt the full force of Elvis Presley, Little Richard and Jerry Lee Lewis - the
earliest American rock and roll. When he was 15, he organized his first rock and
roll group, the Quarrymen, continuing it after he entered art school, enlisting
the services of Paul McCartney and George Harrison, and later Ringo Starr.

From 1958 to 1962 the group (renamed the Silver Beatles and later the Beatles)
worked steadily in the port cities of Liverpool and Hamburg, West Germany. In
1961 they came to the attention of Brian Epstein, who secured a recording
contract for them, plotted and executed their conquest of Europe, and arranged
their first tour of the United States early in 1964.

Mr. Lennon and Paul McCartney were the group's lead vocalists and songwriters,
and as the Beatles grew more and more popular worldwide, their songs grew more
complex. By the mid-60's the Beatles were leaders of a worldwide rock movement
that believed music with a beat could and should be intelligent and innovative
as well.

The Beatles were the first popular rock and roll band to write their own
material, to address a range of serious subjects and to embrace influences that
ranged from Mr. Dylan's folk poetry to Indian classical music to Karlheinz
Stockhausen's electronic sound collages. They changed the face of popular music,
and popular culture, radically and irrevocably.
Songs of Conflict and Confusion

Beginning with the mid-60's album ''Rubber Soul,'' the Lennon-McCartney
songwriting partnership began to unravel. Mr.  McCartney began concentrating on
pure pop, contributing ballads like ''Michelle'' and ''Eleanor Rigby.'' Mr.
Lennon wrote more complex songs, embodying the conflicts he was feeling acutely
as a Beatle: between his private life as an intellectual and an artist and his
public persona; between his role as a pop musician and a generational spokesman,
and the unresolved personal problems of his childhood.

Out of this turmoil came exquisite songs of euphoria and confusion (''Strawberry
Fields Forever'' and ''Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds''), some of the first and
best examples of pop surrealism (''I Am The Walrus'' and ''Happiness Is A Warm
Gun''), and electronic experiments that prefigured Mr. Lennon's later
collaborations with the conceptual artist Yoko Ono.

Married Miss Ono in 1969

Mr. Lennon met Miss Ono in 1966 and by 1969, when they married, their romance
was being blamed for the disintegration of the Beatles, who officially disbanded
in 1970. The couple's demystification of the Beatles began with their ''Two
Virgins'' album, with its celebrated cover showing them nude, and continued with
a series of albums that grafted Miss Ono's experimental and sometimes intensely
grating vocal techniques onto Mr. Lennon's sensibility.

The music was dismissed by most critics and fans at the time, but it has been an
important influence on some of the brightest talents in the most recent wave of
rock performers.

His post-Be atles albums continued to mirror his internal struggles, pa
rticularly ''John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band'' (1970), which followe d several
months of ''primal scream'' therapy with Arthur Janov and included songs that
attempted to exorcise childhood traumas. But Mr. Lennon was also, and perhaps
first of all, one of the most tale nted pop tunesmiths of modern times, as he
proved with the subsequen t albums ''Imagine'' (1971) and ''Mind Games'' (1973).

In 1975, after recording an album of rock and roll oldies that he recently
expressed some dissatisfaction with, Mr. Lennon stopped making records to
concentrate on rearing the his and Yoko's son, Sean, who is now 5 years old.
(Mr. Lennon also has a son, Julian, by his first wife, Cynthia).

In his own words, he was a ''househusband,'' tending to domestic duties while
Miss Ono supervised the couple's investments and other business matters.

Finally, in August, the Lennons began making a new album, ''Double Fantasy,''
which was released by Geffin Records last month and is now in the national top
20. Mr. Lennon's first new single in five years, in the top 10, is
optimistically titled ''Starting Over.''

The album was conceived as a ''dialogue on love,'' with songs by Mr. Lennon
alternating with songs by Miss Ono.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

LIBERAL GROUPS REPORT SURGE SINCE REAGAN ELECTION

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 23, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1201 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 8


Within the last month the American Civil Liberties Union headquarters in New
York has received 500 letters a day containing contributions, a development that
one official described as ''fantastic.''

The National Organization for Women, the largest women's rights group in the
nation, suddenly gained 12,000 members in November.  ''It's astounding - the
biggest month we've had this year - and November is usually a slow month,'' said
Eleanor Smeal, chairman of the 125,000-member group.

Officials at the New York offices of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People have been buoyed by a huge advance in membership
-17,200 in the last six weeks alone, atop gains in the tens of thousands
reported earlier this year.

''It's the highest increase since the old civil rights days in 1963-64,'' said
Paul H. Brock, the N.A.A.C.P.'s director of public information, who noted that
the association had been waging a strong drive to build on its membership of
400,000.

Surge of Involvement

Although several liberal groups, like the Civil Liberties Union and the
N.A.A.C.P., have undertaken concerted efforts to bolster membershi p, i t is
evident that the election of Ronald Reagan to the Presidency an d the looming
influx of conservatives into the Senate and House hav e stirred activists and
evoked a surge of involvement incivil liberti es, women's rights and minority
causes.

Surprisingly, many of the women joining feminist groups in recent weeks appear
to be older, in their 50's and 60's, according to Iris Mitgang, chairman of the
45,000-member National Women's Political Caucus.

''Perhaps when you come to a certain stage in life, your perspective
telescopes,'' she said. ''Perhaps these women understand now for the first time
how little women have gained in terms of political power. ''

Many of those joining the Civil Liberties Union appear to be people who were
members in the 1960's and 1970's. ''They write and say, 'I used to be a member,
and I'm rejoining now because we need you,''' said Florence Isbell, assistant
director of the 200,000-member group. ''Quite a few people have written in and
said, 'the Moral Majority scares me.'
Many Fears Are Voiced

The N.A.A.C.P. has received similar comments among people rejoining who dropped
out in the late 1960's.  ''What concerns all of us are the noises made by
various members of Congress assuming leadership roles,'' said Mr. Brock. ''When
they propose cutbacks on food stamps, on affirmative action programs, on voting
rights, well, it's just worrisome because we have fought long and hard for
these.''

The aim of the various groups now seems to be to shape a unified plan to block
conservative moves on civil rights and civil liberties issues.

''People are pulling toge ther, and there's no question of a renewedinterest in
civil rights and civil liberties, '' said John Shattuck, the national
legislative director of the Civi l Liberties Union since 1977.

''There had been a falloff,'' he added. ''The election of Jimmy Carter four
years ago and the defusion of the political-civil liberties crisis surrounding
the Nixon era, the end of the Vietnam War, the waning of the civil rights
movement and the temper of the times were such that people didn't think much
about civil liberties.''

''Now,'' he said with a laugh, ''the phone hasn't stopped ringing.'' To work out
a common strategy, 150 civil rights, civil liberties, labor and women's
organizations are to gather at a two-day ''emergency'' meeting starting tomorrow
in Washington.

'We Can't Be Diverted'

''We really must coalesce our diversity into a common political force,'' said
Mrs. Mitgang of the National Women's Political Caucus.  ''It's certainly
happening among women's groups - the dialogue and cooperation over the past
month has been unprecedented.''

''We have to learn something from the success of the right wing,'' she said.
''We've got to focus, issue by issue. We can't be diverted.''

To many of these groups, Mr. Reagan's election and even the conservative
victories in Congressional offices are far less worrisome than what Ira Glasser,
the executive director of the A.C.L.U., characterized as ''the apparent rise of
the Moral Majority and whole range of evangelical groups whose agenda is
anti-Bill of Rights, for book censorship, prayer in public schools, a
constitutional amendment on abortion.''

Compounding the problem for the liberal groups and, in some ways, symbolizing
the shift in Congress, is the emergence of Strom Thurmond, Republican of South
Carolina, as chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, an influential panel
that controls legislation affecting the courts and the Constitution. Had the
Democrats retained power in the Senate, Edward M. Kennedy presumably would have
continued to serve as chairman.

Victories Seen as Vulnerable

Senator Thurmond has opposed most civil rights and civil liberties legislation
for the last 30 years and favors repeal of the Voting Rights Act of 1965.

''The civil rights victories of the last 15 years are now very vulnerable,'' Mr.
Glasser said, ''and I'm probably as concerned about that than any other single
problem.''

''We're talking about voting rights, affirmative action, fair housing, school
desegregation,'' he continued. ''We're dealing with the potential for a
systematic effort to really stop in its tracks the gains made in areas of race
discrimination.''

Conceding that their tactics will prove largely defensive, the various liberal
groups say their major concerns, besides civil rights legislation, include a
constitutional amendment seeking mandatory provision for school prayer, re
institution of the death penalty for c ertain Federal crimes, the revival of
House and Senate internal secu rity committees and efforts to remove Federal
courts' jurisdiction over claims by citizens that their constitutional
rightshave been vio lated.

The Human Rights Amendment

According to Mrs. Smeal, women's groups are ''alarmed'' about a proposal for a
so-called human rights amendment that would not only bar abortion but also
declare fertilized eggs and fetuses ''persons'' with full constitutional rights.
This would mean, among other things, that women who have abortions and those who
help them could be prosecuted for murder.

In addition, some groups are interpreting the proposal to mean that many forms
of birth control used by millions of women, including the intrauterine device
and low-estrogen birth control pills, would appear to be illegal since these
measures, in some instances, prevent the implantation of the fertilized egg.

''People are realizing that what we're facing is a very serious threat that is
not only anti-abortion, but really anti-woman and anti-birth control,'' she
said. ''It's galvanized us into a very united force.''

Mrs. Isbell of the Civil Liberties Union said that the response to a membership
drive and a full-page advertisement two weeks ago in the Sunday edition of The
New York Times had been ''fantastic.''

''We are so flooded we don't have the staff to open all the envelopes and log
the money,'' Mrs. Isbell said. ''People are just very concerned about civil
liberties in this new climate.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Eleanor Smeal

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EDUCATION;
ENROLLMENT MAY NOT FALL, AFTER ALL

BYLINE: By EDWARD B. FISKE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1440 words


AFTER more than a decade in which elementary schools have been closing faster
than discount gasoline stations because of declining birth rates, conventional
wisdom says that it is now the colleges' turn to face an enrollment crunch.

The direst prophets say that enrollments could plummet by as much as 45 percent
in some parts of the country by 1990. To minimize the effects of the expected
student drought, colleges have beefed up their recruiting efforts, added
vocational programs and even gone coeducational.

A minority of economists and others, however, question these predictions. "You
can't just leap from the fact that there will be fewer 18-year-olds to the
conclusion that overall enrollments will go down," said Clifford R. Wharton Jr.,
chancellor of the State University of New York. "Other factors are involved."

Following is what might be called The Case Against the Conventional Wisdom.  The
Older Students Are Coming. Since the traditional college-age students of the
1980's have already been born, no one questions the basic demographic facts. The
American birth rate peaked in 1961 at 4.3 million and declined steadily until
1973, when it leveled out at 3.2 million. As a result, the number of
18-year-olds will decline through the 1980's and level off about 1991. By then
there will be only three-quarters as many 18-year-olds as in 1979.

Sections of the country that are losing population will feel the crunch more
intensely than others. In New York, which will feel it more severely than most,
the State Education Department estimates that the number of high school
graduates in 1995 will be 41 percent below last year's levels and that full-time
undergraduate enrollment in 1995 will be off by 175,000 students, or 32 percent,
from 1979.

While acknowledging that there will be fewer 18-year-olds inside the ivy walls
in the years ahead, optimists say that other factors will make up the
difference, most notably older students. "The 18-to-21 age group no longer
dominates higher education," said Howard R. Bowen, an economist at the Claremont
Graduate School.  "With the growth of graduate, professional and part-time
education, the majority of students are beyond age 21. Much of the enrollment
growth of recent years has been among the older age groups."

Since the base of older students is much larger than that of traditional-age
students, he argues, "a 27 percent decline in the enrollment of 18- to
21-year-olds could be offset by a 3.5 percent increase in the enrollment of
older students." Mr. Wharton estimates that an increase of 3 to 4 percent in the
number of New Yorkers above the age of 25 who are in college would "more than
offset the projected decline in the entire pool of New York high school
graduates."

"Sibling Squeeze." Richard A. Easterlin, an economist at the University of
Pennsylvania, has studied enrollment of 18- to 24-year olds from 1948 to 1976
and argues that the end of what has been called "sibling squeeze" could mitigate
the predicted declines.

With so many people in the college-age group in the 1970's, the argument goes,
many parents found it difficult to finance a college education. In the 1980's,
though, with smaller families the norm, the college-going rate ought to go up.
"It is easier for parents to send one or two kids to college than three or
four," Mr. Easterlin explained.

Women and Minorities. The American Council on Education, the principal umbrella
group for colleges and universities in Washington, recently did a study of past
enrollment trends and found that "over half of the increase in enrollments
during th e 1970's can be accounted for by minority students" and that women
accounted for 46 percent of the increase. Continued increases in the
college-going rate of these groups could erase some of the expected declines.

Judith Stich, a researcher at the council, said that increasing the women's
college-going rate to that of men would negate more than half of the expected
decline in traditional students. Moreover, most of the decline in the birth rate
has been concentrated in the white population, so black enrollment can be
expected to remain relatively steady.

The Economic Value of a College Degree. Mr. Easterlin, whose study was done with
Eileen M. Crimmins of the California Institute of Technology and Dennis Ahlburg
of the University of Minnesota, also argues that the high number of students in
the 1970's tended to discourage enrollment by depressing the income of
graduates. With fewer students competing for jobs in the coming decade, he
argues, the relative economic value of the college degree will be restored.

Mr. Wharton of the State University agrees that the perceived value of a college
diploma is on the increase for educational as well as economic reasons.
"Employers are speaking out forcefully for the value of a degree, not only in
specific career areas but also in the liberal arts," he said. "Moreover, the
segments of the economy in which jobs are projected to increase are in
technical, professional, service and the information processing fields - exactly
the ones where college is most useful and necessary."

Children Follow Their Parents

The Educational Level of Parents. Social scientists have long pointed out that
the best single predictor of college attendance is the schooling of parents.

Vincent O'Leary, president of the State University of New York at Albany, notes
that "the parents of college-educated youth will be the most highly educated
group in our nation's history." The implication is that a higher percentage of
future parents will want to send their offspring to college.

Unforeseen Events. Some of the big increase in college enrollment in the late
1960's and early 1970's was accounted for by students taking deferments rather
than serving in Vietnam. Restoration of the draft - and deferments - could have
an enormous impact on college enrollments. So would other conceivable events
outside the control of the institutions, such as the growth of day care centers.


The Impact Will Vary

Special Situations. Just as different states will feel the impact of declining
birth rates differently, so will different types of institutions. Thomas P.
Melady, the president of Sacred Heart University in Bridgeport, Conn., said that
enrollment there has risen from 2,400 to 4,100 in the last five years. "A lot of
middle class parents are responding to the soaring cost of college by sending
their children to commuter colleges, and that's what we are," he said.

When pushed, those who challenge the Common Wisdom will usually concede that
some decline in enrollment is, if not likely, at least a strong possibility. "My
point is only that such a drop in enrollment is not preordained," said Mr.
Bowen.

Maybe so, say the defenders of Conventional Wisdom, but they are not persuaded.
Paul Wing, coordinator of post-secondary research for the State Education
Department, said that he would go along with the increased-value-of-college
argument to some extent and maybe even the better-educated-parents one, but he
questioned the others, including the reliance on older students.

Has Saturation Been Reached?

"I happen to believe personally -and this is reflected in the numbers that our
office generates - that institutions will run into significant problems
attracting many more students," he said.  "There is a saturation phenomenon at
play here. A larger percentage of older students of the future will already have
a significant higher education experience and will thus be less likely to be
involved in higher education, and the statistics show that the older you are,
the less likely you are to participate in higher education."

Moreover, he continued, the arguments about more older, female and minority
students "assume that institutions will take the initiatives that are necessary"
to attract them. "Our position is that we can't make assumptions about things
that institutions might do in the future."

Miss Stich said that she was unimpressed with the "sibling squeeze" argument.
"Families that are going to send students to college are already going to do so
one way or another," she said."People already realize that to survive today you
have to send your daughters to college. You can't rely just on your son's
income."

She agreed, however, with both sides that, while the demographic data are
clear-cut, the seriousness of the coming enrollment crunch will depend on forces
that are thus far unknown and, in some cases, far beyond the power of
institutions to control. "That's why, when we do our studies, we calculate," she
said. "We don't project."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: ECHO OF VIETNAM, 'HOW I GOT THAT STORY'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1167 words


AMLIN GRAY'S ''How I Got That Story'' is an explosion of young talent - in
writing, directing and acting - and a bracing demonstration of what such talent
can do when everything goes right.  Though this play calls for only two actors
and a minimal set, it has an epic sweep. Mr. Gray's subject is the American
adventure in Vietnam. One of the actors, Daniel Stern, plays a young reporter
who goes to cover the war; the other, Bob Gunton, plays all the people that the
reporter meets overseas. But this evening is not, as one might fear, a political
chalktalk or merely a hipper version of last season's dreary ''Billy Bishop Goes
to War.'' By turns painfully funny and just plain painful, ''How I Got That
Story'' recaptures both the black comedy and the bottomless tragedy of Vietnam -
and it does so with the simple magic of pure theater.

The play is the season's opening production at the Second Stage, an Off Off
Broadway company that gained attention last spring with its revival of Michael
Weller's ''Split.'' Like the Weller play, Mr.  Gray's is directed by one of the
theater's artistic directors, Carole Rothman. On the basis of this effort, Miss
Rothman can hold her own with most of the best directors in town. Even leaving
aside her work with her two actors, one still is dazzled by the world she has
brought to life on her tiny stage. With the aid of a few screens and props
designed by Patricia Woodbridge, this director effortlessly whips the audience
from Southeast Asia's cities and villages to its jungles and minefields. We are
even taken on a bombing mission - an effect Miss Rothman and her lighting
designer, Victor En Yu Tan, achieve for roughly one-millionth the cost of a
similar sequence in ''Apocalypse Now.''

Mr. Gray's comedy in some ways parallels Francis Coppola's movie, with a little
of Evelyn Waugh's novel ''Scoop'' thrown in for good measure. Its plot, stripped
down to its essentials, is familiar. As the innocent reporter ventures deeper
and deeper into a nominally fictional country named Amboland, he gradually
realizes that both his employer, the Trans Pan Global wire service, and his
government are backing a corrupt Asian regime. Mr. Gray, writing in short,
punchy scenes, steadily revitalizes this tale until his prototypical pilgrim's
progress takes us in shocking directions we don't fully expect.

Some of the writing is surrealistically witty. When the reporter meets the
inscrutable Madame Ing, the queen of the Imperial Palace, she lambastes Time
magazine for not crowning her woman of the decade and gives her guest a most
sobering warning: ''We will never be perfectly inscrutable to you until we have
killed you and you do not know why.''

The reporter also meets a G.I. who gives a riotous demonstration of the swear
words he has learned in battle and a photographer whose proudest achievement is
a photo of his own arm being blown off. In one of the evening's most inventive
scenes, the reporter tries to gauge the feelings of the common people by
dutifully interviewing a bar prostitute. As the hero mistakes the woman's sexual
come-ons for political opinions - and vice versa - a farcical cultural clash
becomes a metaphor for the entire American experience in Saigon.

In Act II, the farce escalates into horror. When the newly radicalized reporter
quits his job, he falls into an exitless nowhere zone worthy of ''Catch-22.''
Now a gung-ho guerrilla partisan, he is captured by the guerrillas - only to be
told by them that he is a decadent observer who has ''no right'' to live in the
country. But it's too late; the reporter, like so many Americans who went to
Asia, has become addicted to his new home. As he searches desperately, in
brothels and orphanages, for a way to connect to the society that spurns him,
''How I Got That Story'' finds its own entry point into the chilling heart of
the American-Vietnamese darkness.

That darkness is brilliantly illuminated by the 21 characters created by Mr.
Gunton. This actor, who originated the role of Juan D. Pero n in t he Broadway
production of ''Evita,'' seems to have a boundless ima gination. Not only does
he nail down a widely diverse crew of peopl e - from Trans Pan Global
bureaucrats to soldiers of allstripes to As ians of every social class -but he
also moves among his various parts with a split-second precision that is
breathtaking.  More amazing still, he plays the various ladies of the evening,
including tha t touching, childish prostitute, without resorting to wigs,
make-up or campy mannerisms. At one point, he even impersonatesMadame Ing as she
impersonates a male guerrilla leader. We never stop suspendi ng disbelief.

Mr. Stern, who played one of the young heroes in the film ''Breaking Away,'' is
almost as impressive. Tousle-haired and gawky, he's at first an amusing innocent
abroad, a naif from Dubuque who can hardly work a tape recorder. When he
witnesses a monk's selfimmolation, he keeps his distance from the pain by
yelling at himself: ''You're just reporting this!'' Once he is swept away by all
the brutality he sees, the actor becomes a madman torn between hysterical panic
and a bombed-out tranquillity. He ends up a pitiable, homeless zombie - a
faceless ''Yankee dressed up like a gook.''

The playwright has a word, ''imprintment,'' to describe his hero's sad fate:
It's what happens when a reporter ''goes to cover a country and the country
covers him.'' But, of course, reporters were not the only ones to be imprinted
during the Vietnam War; the readers back home were, too. That's why ''How I Got
the Story'' transcends its many, intricate parts to embrace the larger story of
the Vietnamization of America during the 1960's. While that story isn't a scoop
in 1980, the Second Stage has abundantly proved that an old nightmare can still
be brought back to stunning life.

Two With Many Faces
HOW I GOT THAT STORY, by Amlin Gray; directed by Carole Rothman; set designer,
Patricia Woodbridge; lighting designer, Victor En Yu Tan; costume designer,
Susan Denison; sound designer, Gary Harris; dance sequence, Harry Streep 3d;
production stage manager, Clifford M. Schwartz.  Presented by the Second Stage,
Robyn Goodman and Carole Rothman, artistic directors. At 23 West 73d Street,
16th floor.  Reporter .................................Daniel Stern Historical
Event ...........................Bob Gunton

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Bob Gunton

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

John Lennon of Beatles Is Killed; Suspect Held in Shooting at Dakota

BYLINE: By LES LEDBETTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1166 words


John Lennon, one of the four Beatles, was shot and killed last night while
entering the apartment building where he live, the Dakota, on Manhattan's Upper
West Side. A suspect was seized at the scene.

The 40-year-old Mr. Lennon was shot in the back twice after getting out of a
limousine and walking into an entrance way of the Dakota at 1 West 72nd Street,
Sgt. Robert Barnes of the 20th Precinct said.

''Obviously the man was waiting for him,'' Sergeant Barnes said of the
assailant. The suspect was identified as Mark David Chapman, 25, of Hawaii, who
had been living in New York for about a week, according to James L. Sullivan,
chief of detectives of the 20th Precinct.

Jeff Smith, a neighbor, said that he heard five shots fired shortly before 11
P.M. Other witnesses said they heard four when the shooting occurred at 10:45
P.M.

With the singer when he was shot was his wife, Yoko Ono, who was not hurt by the
bullets that struck her husband as they entered an archway that led into the
courtyard of the Dakota complex.

Witnesses said Mr. Lennon was wearing a white T-shirt and dungaree jacket when
he was shot. They said Miss Ono screamed, ''Help me, help me.''

They said the suspect paced back and forth in the entrance way to the Dakota
after shooting the musician, arguing with the doorman and holding the gun in his
hand pointing downward.

One witness, Ben Eruchson, a cab driver from Brooklyn, said, ''He could have
gotten away. He had plenty of time.''

There were bullet holes in the structure and blood on the bricks of the
building.

Immediately after Mr. Lennon was shot, hundreds of people began to gather at
West 72d Street and Central Park West. A number of them were crying. By 1 A.M.,
the crowd had grown to 500.

Witnesses said that the shooting took place in the West 72d Street entrance way
of the Dakota, just past the lobby attendant's office.

Mr. Lennon was taken into the office after being shot. Shortly after, he was
taken to Roosevelt Hospital, where he was pronounced dead in the emergency room,
according to a hospital spokesman. A crowd similar to the one gathered outside
the Dakota soon assembled outside the hospital, witnesses said.

Police Officer Anthony Palma, who drove Miss Ono to the hospital, described her
as ''very hysterical'' and said she sobbed: ''Tell me it isn't true.''

Jack Douglas, Mr. Lennon's producer, said he and the Lennons had been at a
studio called the Record Plant in midtown earlier in the evening and that Mr.
Lennon had left at 10:30 P.M. Mr. Lennon said he was going to get something to
eat and then going home, according to Mr. Douglas.

Lieut. John Schick of the 20th Precinct said the gunman let the Lennons pass him
and enter the building's passageway before shooting the singer. Lieutenant
Schick said the man called out ''Mr. Lennon'' and then pulled a gun from under a
coat and started firing.

The police said the suspect stepped from an alcove and emptied several shots
into Mr. Lennon while standing in a combat position. Mr. Lennon then struggled
up six stairs, and inside the alcove to a guard area where he collapsed.

Employees at the Dakota said someone resembling the alleged assailant had
obtained an autograph from Mr. Lennon earlier in the day.

Chief Sullivan said the suspect had been seen in the neighborhood of the Dakota
for several days.

An eyewitness, who only gave her first name, Nina, said that she had approached
the suspect after the shooting.

''I asked him what had happened and he said, 'I'd go away if I were you,' '' she
said.

A bystander, Sean Strub, said he was walking south near 72d Street when he heard
four shots. He said he came around the corner to Central Park West and saw Mr.
Lennon being put into the back of a police car.

''Some people said they heard six shots and said John was hit twice.'' Mr. Strub
said. ''The police said he was hit in the back.''

He said others on the street had told him the assailant had been ''crouching in
the archway of the Dakota.'' He said the suspect was put into another police
car. ''He had a smirk on his face'' when the police took him away, Mr. Strub
said.

The suspect, Mr. Chapman, was described by a witness and the police as a stocky
man wearing a white shirt and brown pants, wire-rimmed glasses and a coat.
Sergeant Barnes said a .38-caliber revolver, believed to be the murder weapon,
had been recovered.

The other members of the Beatles were Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo
Starr. Mr. McCartney has his own musical group, called Wings. Mr. Harrison and
Mr. Starr are still active in the music business. Mr. Lennon, who was widely
thought to be the most intellectual and outspoken of the Beatles during their
heyday, was responsible for writing many of the songs that launched them in the
early 1960's and changed the course of rock music.

In an interview earlier this year - his first major interview in five years -
Mr. Lennon said he had wanted to leave the Beatles as early as 1966 but did not
make the move until four years later because he ''just didn't have the guts.''
Mr. Lennon made his last Beatle album, ''Abbey Road,'' in 1969. After the
Beatles broke up in 1970, Mr. Lennon continued writing songs and recording. But
in 1975 he dropped out of the music business for five years, saying he wanted to
be with his son, Sean, and his wife.

He was born Oct. 9, 1940, in England's northern industrial seaport of Liverpool,
the son of a porter father who deserted the family when John was 3.

When his father reappeared once Mr. Lennon reached stardom, the son slammed the
door in his face. He later recalled, ''I don't feel as if I owe him anything. He
never helped me. I got there by myself.''

Mr. Lennon attended secondary school in Liverpool and then went on to Liverpool
College of Art, where he married a classmate, Cynthia Powell.

They were later divorced. In 1969, Mr. Lennon married Miss Ono, a
Japanese-American artist, who was pregnant. He later said, ''We went to Paris on
our honeymoon, then interrupted our honeymoon to get married on the Rock of
Gibraltar.''

The Beatles' music was as much a staple of the revolutionary 1960's as the
Vietnam War, whose protesters sang their songs in addition to letting their hair
grow long in imitation of the musicians.

''I Want to Hold your Hand,'' ''Love Me Do'' and ''She Loves You'' stayed on the
top of the hit parades for months and heralded Beatlemania, the frenzy whipped
up among their teen-age fans around the world.

After the breakup of the group, Mr. Lennon and Miss Ono lived in seclusion in
New York for several years, but the couple were on the front page again in a
messy deportation hearing.

The United States Government contended that Mr. Lennon, a British subject, was
ineligible for permanent residence because of a 1968 drug conviction in Britain.
Mr. Lennon eventually was allowed to stay in the United States.

Mr. Lennon also was a writer, mainly of light humor, ''A Spaniard in the Works''
and ''In His Own Write.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of John Lennon, 1980 (Jack Mitchell); Yoko Ono being escorted
from hospital after Lennon was pronounced dead (AP); crowd gathering outside the
Dakota (pg. B7)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 10, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LENNON GAVE AN INTERVIEW ON FINAL DAY

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 401 words


Following are remarks by John Lennon during an interview taped for future
broadcast by RKO General Radio Network on Monday, the day he was shot to death.
The excerpting was done in part by RKO General.

We're either going to live or we're going to die. If we're dead we're going to
have to deal with that, if we're alive we're going to have to deal with being
alive. So worrying about whether Wall Street, or the Apocalypse is going to come
in the form of the Great Beast -is not going to do us any good day to day.

I'm talking to guys and gals who had been through what we had been through
together, the 60's group that has survived - survived the war, the drugs, the
politics, the violence on the street, the whole shebang, that we survived it,
and we're here and I'm talking to them and the women's song is to Yoko, and it's
to all women.

The thing the 60's did was show us the possibility and the responsibility that
we all had. It wasn't the answer, it just gave us a glimpse of the possibility
-and in the 70's everybody's going nah, nah, nah and possibly in the 80's
everyone will say, ''O.K.  let's project the positive side of life again.''

I don't want to have to sell my soul again, as it were, to have a hit record.
I've discovered that I can live without it, and it makes it happier for me.

After 10, 15, almost 20 years of being under contract, and having to produce two
albums a year and a single every three months, in the early days, regardless of
what the hell else was doing, or what your family life was like or what your
personal life was like, nothing counted, you just had to get those songs up.

We feel like this is just a start now, you see, ''Double Fantasy'' - this is our
first album - I know we've work ed together before, we've even made albums
together before - but this is our first album,we feel, I feel like nothing has
ever happene d before today.

You have to give thanks to God or whatever is up there to the fact that we all
survived. We all survived Vietnam or Watergate, the tremendous upheaval of the
whole world. It changed. We were the hit ones of the 60's.

But the world is not like the 60's, the whole world's changed. I am going into
an unknown future, but I'm still all here. And still, while there's life,
there's hope.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 10, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BAKER SAYS HE IS CONVINCED HAIG COULD BE CONFIRMED

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 590 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 9


Howard H. Baker Jr., newly chosen as Senate majority leader, said today that
President-elect Ronald Reagan had not decided on whom to nominate for Secretary
of State but that if he picked Gen. Alexander M. Haig Jr., retired, the Senate
would approve the nomination.

The Tennessee Republican took issue with Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the
Senate Democratic leader, and Ted Stevens of Alaska, the Republican whip, both
of whom have suggested that General Haig would face possible rejection through
tough questioning on his role in the Nixon White House and the Watergate
scandals and on how his military background would fit at the State Department.

''I'm convinced,'' Senator Baker said, ''that if President-elect Reagan decides
to nominate General Haig, he can be confirmed and I will support him.'' He
quickly added, however, that he did not think the choice had yet been made.

General Haig, who was commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization from
1974 to 1979, was President Nixon's chief of staff in his final months in the
White House and, before that, an assistant to Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger. He is now president of United Technologies Corporation in Hartford,
Conn.

Announcements Possible Thursday

According to sources involved in the transition, some hesitation has developed
over the State Department post because General Haig has the backing of
conservatives in the Senate and in the Reagan camp while others are leaning
toward George P. Shultz, including some conservatives and more moderate
Republicans with ties to the Nixon and Ford Administrations.

Mr. Shultz, the president of the Bechtel Group, flew today from Calgary, in
western Canada, to New York City, where Mr. Reagan spent the day making courtesy
political calls and attending a dinner party in the evening. The President-elect
was to go to to Washington tomorrow for his second visit since the election.

Top as sociates said that Mr. Reagan hoped t o announce several Cabinet
appointments while in Washington, pro bably on Thursday, but that the first
group of announcements would n ot include all of the key inner circle of the
Cabinet.

Some time ago, Mr. Reagan was reported to have settled on William French Smith,
his personal attorney, for Attorney General and Caspar W. Weinberger, a
long-time associate and former member of the Nixon Cabinet, as Secretary of
Defense. But Mr. Reagan has had trouble on his final choices for the State and
Treasury Departments.

Reviewed the Records

Mr. Reagan has insisted that he will not be infl uenced in his choices by th e
Watergate affair, but some of his aides have conceded privately tha t, as
Senator Byrd warned, Democrats could drag out the Senate's conf irmation process
and cause some embarrassment to the new administr ation by questioning General
Haig closely about such things as for mer President Ford's pardon of Mr. Nixon,
some of the undisclosed N ixon tapes in the Watergate affair and General Haig's
role in some of the Nixon Administration's actions in Vietnam and Cambodia.

In an effort to give Mr. Reagan more leeway, Senator Baker said today that he
had reviewed the public record and some of the private record and that there was
nothing he could see that would upset Senate confirmation of General Haig, if
Mr. Reagan picked him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 11, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Transition Team Urging D ecentralization of V.A.

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 221 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 10


The Veterans Administration should be decentralized and about 7,000 beds should
be added to its hospitals, the head of President-elect Ronald Reagan's
transition team on veterans said today.

William Ayres, who served in Congress for 20 years, said that the team's
official report would not be released until Dec. 22.  Mr. Ayres stressed that
there would be no recommendation for cuts of medical personnel and said that Mr.
Reagan had pledged a 7,000-bed increase in medical facilities.

He said the transition team would recommend that any veterans of the Vietnam War
who felt they were suffering the effects of Agent Orange, a defoliant, be
admitted to and cared for in veterans hospitals.

A report from a special committee consisting of present and former V.A.
administrators has proposed cutting a ''layer of personnel'' from the agency's
structure.

Gordon Elliott, formerly a Los Angeles regional director of the agency and past
state commander of the Disabled American Veterans, said, ''A $22 billion
nationwide agency as diverse as the V.A. cannot operate effectively if every
decision must be made by a very small handful of appointees lacking the
essential experience and training.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 11, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
POWER AND REALISM;
by Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 895 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Dec. 10


It is a time of change and fundamental choice in American foreign policy. A new
President is about to take office with a mandate for rebuilding American power.
The question is how and where the United States should attempt to apply that
power in the world.

That large question is addressed in the new issue of the quarterly Foreign
Affairs in an article that I think will have enduring significance. Entitled
''The Purposes of American Power,'' it is by Prof. Robert W. Tucker of Johns
Hopkins. Professor Tucker has voiced passionate warnings about the decline of
American power. In this article his theme is the need for caution and realism in
the use of power.

Even on the most optimistic view of increased military spending and
effectiveness, Tucker says, this country cannot do everything everywhere in the
world. If it wastes its strength in less important areas or in futile
demonstrations, it will not be able to do what it must. That is the basic
argument, but it sounds too simple without his enriching examples of history and
present challenges.

In the years after World War II, Tucker says, when the policy of containing
Soviet expansion took form, there was a choice between two kinds of containment.
One was a ''limited policy'' grounded in our clearest security interests,
notably in Europe. The other was ''global containment,'' a policy with
''universalist pretensions.''

Gradually the limited security rationale for containment gave way to something
broader and more ideological. Then, in Vietnam, the broader view was discredited
and, Tucker says, ''even the narrower and conventional security policy became
difficult to sustain.'' With that lesson in mind, he argues that today the
United States should focus on its clear and urgent security needs.

For Tucker the great need now is to build Western power in the Persian Gulf. In
his view the erosion of our position there and the tilting of the m ilitary
balance toward the Soviet Union essentially account for t he feeling of
vulnerability in the West. Western Europe and Japan are dependent on Gulf oil,
and the Soviets could so easily dominate the area.

''It is the Gulf that forms the indispensable key to the defense of the American
global position,'' he writes. Compared to that, contests with the Soviet Union
elsewhere in the third world ''have but peripheral significance.''

On the general question of Soviet-American relations, Tucker again warns against
the notion of globalism or an ideological crusade. We have to recognize, he
adds, that no conceivable scenario will give us the kind of military superiority
that would be needed to dictate the results of contests with the Soviets.

''The containment of today and tomorrow will have to make concessions and
compromises,'' he says. And ''if it is at all prudent,'' it will avoid measures
that ''exacerbate the relationship with the Soviet Union and make the prospect
of its future amelioration virtually impossible.''

A prime example of such an unwisely provocative measure would be a U.S. military
alliance with the People's Republic of China, whether formal or de facto.
American policy is already moving in that direction, Tucker says; if it goes
much further, ''it will soon seal the Soviet-American relationship in a fixed
and truly dangerous mold by making it hostage to our relations to China.''

To return to ''the expansive version of containment'' might arouse dangerous
fears within the Soviet Union, Tucker argues. It would also have a divisive
effect among our allies, who will be ready to follow us in rebuilding military
strength only if persuaded that the United States is not planning to ''risk
confrontation with the Soviet Union'' over marginal interests.

Moreover, the idea of ''moderate containment'' fits public opinion in this
country, which wants to see greater American strength but is cautious about new
commitments. Tucker says ''the essential elements of a viable consensus on
foreign policy'' are apparent in the prevailing public mood.

In some, we must distinguish between what w e need to do and what wemerely want
to do. As an example of the latte r Professor Tucker citesthe situation in
Central America, where the t emptations for U.S.  intervention have become even
stronger in the weeks since the articlewas written.

''Our pride is engaged'' in Central America, Tucker says. But the area has no
vital resources and U.S. intervention could be extremely costly. Right-wing
regimes have trouble attracting moderate support and need continuing U.S.
backing, if necessary by military force.  That risks arousing local radicalism
and helps ''legitimize'' Soviet armed intervention near its borders. Tucker
therefore calls for ''a hands-off position ... that implies stopping military
aid to El Salvador.''

For American foreign policy, he concludes, ''a period of withdrawal and of
passivity has come to an end. If it is to be succeeded by a period of an America
everywhere resurgent and activist, we will only risk jeopardizing interests that
are critical to the nation's security and well-being.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 11, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TV: 2 INVESTIGATORS, MAGNUM AND GERALDO RIVERA

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 34, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 911 words


THIS evening's schedule features ''Magnum, P.I.,'' a new series about a private
investigator, and Geraldo Rivera, P.I., a very public investigator, tracking
down heroin connections on ABC News' ''20/20.''

Magnum, making his debut on CBS tonight at 8 o'clock, is Tom Magnum, a retired
naval officer, still youngish at 35 and in good enough shape to hop in and out
of the bathing suit usually required for swimming in the sparkling blue waters
of Oahu. Among other things, Magnum oversees security for a fancy Hawaiian
estate. In return, he gets to live in the guest house and froli c with the
lovelyyoung women who seem to be constantly passing through in the skimpiest of
bikinis.

Also living on the estate is Higgins (John Hillerman), the haughty major-domo
who refers to his ferocious guard dogs as ''good lads.'' He and Magnum play
intense but not unfriendly games of oneupsmanship. The other regular members of
the series are a black helicopter pilot (Roger E. Mosley) and a white nightclub
owner (Larry Manetti), both of whom fought beside Magnum in Vietnam.

The Vietnam motif is central in tonight's premiere. When his closest buddy, a
Navy lieutenant, is found dead, allegedly because of a drug overdose, Magnum
sets off on a scenario that blends the dangerous present with flashbacks to his
tour of duty in Vietnam.  Supporting him along the way, of course, is the dead
man's beautiful sister (Pamela Susan Shoop).

The supporting cast includes Fritz Weaver and Robert Loggia, actors of some
distinction and, therefore, obvious candidates to be playing major roles of the
piece. Any student of television casting knows that such performers are not
likely to accept an inconsequential bit part.

As the centerpiece of a series, the character of Magnum has possibilities. One
of his more interesting gimmicks is to operate on instinct or hunches. ''Don't
ask me why,'' he keeps saying in the manner of a Norman Mailer hero, ''I just
knew.'' This mystical, fatalistic touch is neat. A nd as played attractively by
Tom Selleck, Magnum is sti ll another Burt Reynolds lookalike striving to market
the offhand s tyle that has made Mr. Reynolds a star. Incidentally, tonight's
ins tallment of ''Magnum, P.I.'' is a two-hour special. The series will b egin
its regular weekly run next Thursday at 9.

Geraldo Rivera, needless to say, is played by Geraldo Rivera, the most
controversial, if not the most irritating, of television journalists. A nearly
pure creature of the medium, Mr. Rivera is a master of theatricality, of going
for the jugular in terms of visual content. He clambers over fences, he wades
across Asian rivers, he cries, he badgers, he charms - and he usually gets the
story and makes sure that the persona of Geraldo Rivera is at least as prominent
as the pursued subject.

As a result, the Rivera manner is frequently resented, perhaps envied, by many
of his colleagues in the print and electronic press.  There are complaints about
everything from his feverish ego to his alleged nepotism - tonight's heroin
essay was produced by his brother Craig. In fact, when not restrained by either
ethics or taste, Mr.  Rivera can be singularly infuriating. But when he is on
target, as in this heroin survey, he is undeniably impressive.

The report, which takes up the full hour of ''20/20'' beginning at 10 o'clock,
starts in Southwest Asia as shipments of the drug are followed from Pakistan,
Afghanistan and Iran to Western Europe and the United States. This route has
been traced before by television. I remember, for just once instance, a detailed
essay several years ago on NBC News' ''Weekend'' produced by Reuven Frank.

But Mr. Rivera manages to put his inimitable stamp on the new product. Followed
by hidden cameras, he is seen making a deal to buy 2,500 kilos of opium - 10
pounds of opium can be turned into one pound of heroin - from a conniving tribal
leader in Pakistan. In Rome, he buys morphine on the streets and finds addicts
shooting up on the banks of the Tiber. He interviews pushers, users and
lawenforcement officers.

Back in the United States, Mr. Rivera goes from New York to San Francisco
talking to experts and junkies from varying backgrounds.  The main thrust of the
piece is that heroin use has reached middleclass levels. The title, ''Tracing
the Dragon,'' refers to the practice of smoking the drug, which users think is
not as dangerous as injecting. They are deluding themselves.

A typical Rivera caper, however, finds the news star returning to New York's
poor Lower East Side, where he once lived, in the rather grand disguise of head
bandana, beard and a long bopping cane. The fictional investigators of
television - Toma, Baretta and so on - have nothing on Geraldo Rivera, P.I.

In the end, though, this is a serious and important report on drug abuse. Mr.
Rivera does get his story on all levels from organized crime to hideous
detoxification centers. He names recognizable names in his survey of once and
former users of heroin. He dramatizes the facts outrageously at times, but he
manages to achieve what he set out to get - a solid impact.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of John Hillerman and Tom Selleck in ''Magnum,
P.I.''

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S.-Vietnam Refugee Plan Is Getting Under Way

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 114 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 11


A group of 250 Vietnamese refugees arrived here from southern Vietnam today in
the first phase of an ''orderly departure'' program agreed upon by the United
States and Vietnam.

Earlier, two State Department officers left Bangkok for Ho Chi Minh City to
interview prospective refugees. Their flight to the city, formerly Saigon, was
the first such visit since American officials fled Vietnam in advance of
invading Communists in April 1975.

The refugee plan was worked out by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. It will allow 1,700 Vietnamese to leave in the next three weeks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MEN IN THE NEWS;
EIGHT FOR THE PRESIDENTIAL TEAM

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 685 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 11


The resurrection of Richard S. Schweiker, who was to have left his Pennsylvania
Senate seat and public life next month, is a tribute to the resourcefulness of
the 20-year Congressional veteran and to the loyalty of his Presidential
sponsor.

In July 1976, Ronald Reagan startled politicians of both parties with the
unorthodox announcement that he had decided weeks in advance who would be his
running mate if the Republican National Convention nominated him for President,
and that his choice was Senator Schweiker, whose voting record resembled those
of liberal Democrats.

The maneuver did not win Mr. Reagan the nomination that time around; if
anything, it probably turned some angry conservative delegates to Gerald R.
Ford.

But Mr. Schweiker's willingness to cooperate, and to take considerable heat in
the process, obviously earned him the lasting gratitude of the Californian, who
today named the 54-year-old Senator as Secretary of Health and Human Services.

Plunge in Liberal Rating

The Vice-Presidential experiment was a political watershed for Mr.  Schweiker.
The year before, Americans for Democratic Action rated his voting record at 89
out of 100. The year after, his rating on the liberal index plunged to 15.

As Secretary of Health and Human Services, assuming his appointment is
confirmed, Mr. Schweiker would be expected to reflect the social policies of the
Reagan administration in controversial areas such as welfare reform and
financing of Social Security.

But his long record of support for health research legislation, as ranking
Republican on the Labor and Human Resources Committee and its Health
Subcommittee, could bring him into conflict with administration economic
initiatives if they focused on his department, as some expect they will.

Aides to Mr. Schweiker maintained that his apparent shift from liberal to
conservative was not so abrupt or radical as it seemed in the political
spotlight of 1976. They cited his earlier conservative stands: for school
prayer, against busing for school desegregation, against gun control and for
lower Government spending.

'A Way of Sensing Trends'

''He has a way of sensing which way political trends are moving and getting out
in front earlier than some others,'' a former Schweiker adviser said. ''That's
what happened in 1976. He had been moving that way, but the national publicity
made it seem so sudden.''

Only a few years before, Senator Schweiker had been in the vanguard of
Republican resistance to President Nixon, criticizing the war in Vietnam, voting
against confirmation of both Clement F. Haynsworth Jr. and G. Harrold Carswell
for the Supreme Court and opposing the defensive missile program.

Throughout his Congressional career, Mr. Schweiker has demonstrated
independence. He first won election to the House in 1960, defeating an incumbent
Republican in the primary in a well-to-do Philadelphia suburban district, after
being refused the party endorsement two years before.

Pennsylvania Republican leaders dissuaded him against running for Governor in
1966, but he won the Senate nomination two years later to oppose the two-term
Democratic incumbent, Senator Joseph S. Clark.  Although the Democratic national
ticket carried Pennsylvania by 170,000 votes, Mr. Schweiker won by 280,000.

Richard Schultz Schweiker was born June 1, 1926, in Norristown, Pa., the son of
the owner of a tile company that was later purchased by the National Gypsum
Company.

He enlisted in the Navy when he was 17 years old and served in the Pacific in
World War II as an electronic technician's mate aboard an aircraft carrier. In
1950 he graduated from Pennsylvania State University, where he was elected to
Phi Beta Kappa. Before entering politics, he worked in the family business.

In 1955 he married Claire Coleman, who had attracted his attention as the hostes
s of the Philadelphia version of the children's television pr ogram ''Romper
Room.'' They have five children and one grandchild. D esire to spend more time
with his family was said to be a factor in M r. Schweiker's retirement from the
Senate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Richard S. Schweiker

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FACTS ON DEFENSE COSTS IN THE KENNEDY YEARS

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 262 words


To the Editor:

A recent ''Economic Scene'' column by Alfred Eichner (''Arms Budget's Heavy
Impact,'' Oct. 15) contributes to the myth that defense expenditures had a lot
to do with economic expansion in the Kennedy years. Eichner stated that ''higher
growth rates of the 1960's were achieved only after President Kennedy succeeded
in persuading Congress that, in light of the Berlin crisis, defense spending
should be increased by 50 percent.''

his assertion is not even remotely borne out by the facts: National defense
expenditures rose from $46 billion in 1960 to $47 1/2 billion in 1961 and $50
billion in 1965. That's an increase of less than 10 percent in five years.

Relative to gross national product, defense spending fell steadily, from roughly
9 percent in 1960 to 7 1/2 percent in 1965 (just before escalation in Vietnam).
Over the same period, G.N.P. in real terms grew by 24 percent.

With defense outlays barely rising in absolute terms and actually falling in
relative terms, it just doesn't wash to attribute growth to Kennedy defense
expenditures. But the old canard dies hard.  WALTER W. HELLER Minneapolis, Dec.
2, 1980 The writer, Regents Professor of Economics at the University of
Minnesota, was chairman of President Kennedy's Council of Economic Advisers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
YOU, ME AND HANDGUNS;
by Tom Wicker;
IN THE NATION;
You, Me And Handguns

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 899 words


On the night of Dec. 8, in New York City, John Lennon was killed by four shots
fired from a .38-caliber concealable handgun legally purchased in Hawaii for
$169.

That was three nights after Dr. Michael Halberstam was killed in Washington,
D.C., by two shots in the chest from a .32-caliber handgun.

Police have charged an apparently mentally disturbed young man with shooting Mr.
Lennon. A skilled professional thief, interrupted during a burglary of Dr.
Halberstam's house, has been charged with his shooting.

Mr. Lennon was a musician of world renown. Dr. Halberstam was well known in
Washington medical and literary circles. Thus, their deaths caused much comment
in the press.

Except for that, nothing about either murder was unusual. Such violent and
unexpected deaths happen all the time. They are almost always caused by
handguns, sometimes in the hands of the unstable, sometimes in the hands of the
criminal, sometimes in the hands of people like you and me.

Someone is murdered with a handgun in the United States every 50 minutes; it
could be you or me, or someone we love, or know. Look at your watch; by 24 hours
from the time indicated, 29 persons will have been killed with handguns.

By the end of October, the toll of dead this year from handgun bullets had risen
to 6,660. In 1979, handgun fire caused 10,728 American deaths.

This is not a new probl em, although the cas ualties may have increased. During
the seven peak years of the war in Vietnam, for example, 40,000 Americans were
killed in acti on; during the same years, 50,000 Americans were killed with hand
guns in the nation's streets, barrooms, households and public plac es.

But death is just the most grievous consequence of handgun use.  Next year,
about 250,000 Americans will be victimized in some way - robbed, raped, injured
as well as murdered -by other Americans wielding handguns. That's as if everyone
in a city the size of Sacramento, Calif., were to become a handgun victim.

In 1978, in New York City alone, 23,000 robberies were committed at the point of
a handgun. Handgun killings in the city totaled 882.  Police that year
confiscated 9,100 handguns - a useful effort but a minuscule result.

Minuscule, because no one should be in doubt about what causes this record of
carnage, violence and crime. The reason is that, for anyone who wants one, too
many handguns are too easy to obtain - a fact which no amount of sophistry and
self-delusion and gun-lobby propaganda can refute.

When Peter L. Zimroth, chief assistant district attorney for Manhattan, was
asked by Edward A, Gargan of The New York Times how two boys who had been
arrested had obtained handguns, he made the essential point:

''If you take seriously the estimate that there are one to two million guns in
the city, the question is how a kid can't get a gun.''

That estimate is to be taken seriously indeed. It may be conservative.
Nationally, 55 million handguns are believed to be in circulation. Every year,
about 2.5 million more join the total - nearly 2 million manufactured in this
country, several hundred thousand imported. Handgun Control of Washington, D.C.,
estimates 100 million handguns will be in circulation in the U.S. by the end of
the century.

Many of these handguns are easily obtainable through the 175,000 dealers now
licensed by the Federal Government. In many states, notably in the South, no
more than a driver's license is required for identification of the buyer, and
the license need not even be checked for authenticity.

Other handguns by the thousands are little more difficult to acquire through the
illegal traffic that flourishes in every city.  Thousands of guns are also
stolen every year, obviously not by persons with a legitimate need. There are
few such people anyway; only 26,000 have ever obtained a handgun license from
the New York City police.

John Lennon and Michael Halberstam are dead primarily because of the easy
availability of handguns. So are thousands of other Americans this year, last
year, every year. And those statements cannot be refuted by the mere argument
that some would still have died if handguns were tightly controlled, or that
some would have been killed even if all handguns were confiscated. Of course
some would have been; but most who were killed by handguns would be alive if
Americans were willing to see these weapons adequately controlled or
confiscated.

But the least disputable truth of American politics is that neither of those
things is going to be done. Even though the man who buys a handgun ''to protect
my family'' is demonstrabl y more likely to shoothis wife, or the newspaper
delivery boy, or a barroom buddy, or himself in th e foot, than a burglar or a
rapist; even though the ''legitimate' ' demand of the American people for
handguns makes it impossible to shut off the illegal supply to criminals and
madmen; even so, the truth is that that perverted demand from you and me is so
great that politicians cannot stand against it.

Nor will they ever, while we persist in it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 13, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BERRIGANS SEE A REAWAKENING FOR ANTIWAR ACTIVISTS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM ROBBINS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1175 words

DATELINE: KING OF PRUSSIA, Pa., Dec. 12


As unlikely a band as ever felt the cold steel of handcuffs invaded a General
Electric plant here in September. Armed with hammers, they began banging away at
two of the most lethal weapons in the United States nuclear arsenal.

They included three priests, a nun, a former divinity student, a history
professor, a lawyer and a mother of seven children. Among them, returning from
the recent obscurity of a seemingly inactive peace movement, were Daniel and
Philip Berrigan, brothers whose names have been familiar since their first
attacks on the military establishment in the 1960's.

Both smiled and spoke softly as they talked the other day about their latest
antiwar act. Philip Berrigan, tall and gray, and alreadyshowing a pri son
pallor, wore a blue sweat suit owned by Montgomery County as he sat in its jail
in nearby Norristown. He has been excommunicate d but still considers himself a
priest. Daniel Berrigan,a Jesuit, who has been bailed out by other members of
his order, wa s preparing to read some of his antiwar poetry at the Univer sity
of Pennsylvania campus, about 20 miles away.

Expecting a Sentence

They expect a five-year sentence, if convicted. Daniel is 59 years old, Philip,
57. All eight of the General Electric invaders face a trial next month on
burglary charges.

Neither Berrigan saw anything ludicrous about flailing away at the war machine
with their hammers, nor anything resembling a Don Quixote tilting at windmills.
It was more, said Daniel, like a Gandhi beginning a resistance that ended in
independence for India.

''All great things have small beginnings,'' he said, his smile turning to a
frown at a suggestion of possible futility. ''In the 1960's they called us
crazy. Now they say we are passe.''

''I want to be modest about the results,'' said Philip, still smiling. ''But we
believe we shortened the war in Vietnam.'' ''This,'' he said, referring to the
damage to the warheads, ''was the first disarmament in the last 35 years.''

Movement Gaining Strength

Like others among their associates, the brothers believe their antiwar movement
has been given impetus both by President Carter's renewal of draft registrations
and President-elect Ronald Reagan's call for increased military spending. They
mentioned an increase in protesters willing to accept arrests, attendance at
rallies and participants in peace marches.

''In 1975,'' said Philip, ''we would have to make mailings all over the country
to get 20 people to Washington. This year more than 1,000 have been arrested in
protests at the Pentagon.''

Another protest in Washington is scheduled Dec. 28 to Jan. 1, he said, and will
probably include efforts to block entrances to the Pentagon.

A member of a cooperative group supporting the activists who invaded General
Electric, Robert Smith of the Brandywine Peace Community, also senses a
resurgence of antiwar sentiment.

''For our two-day Pilgrimage for Life for Thanksgiving, when we walked from the
G.E. Re-entry Division headquarters in Philadelphia to the plant in King of
Prussia, we had 60 participants each day,'' Mr. Smith said, ''and when Dan spoke
one evening at a church out there in Wayne, 350 people turned out. That is more
people than we have seen come out in three years.''
Network Around Country

Mr. Smith's group of about 15 members is one of a loose network of antiwar
groups in major metropolitan areas throughout the country. It is one of six such
organizations linked to an umbrella association called the Atlantic Life
Community. That association, in turn, is linked to several others.

Only in the Deep South, said Philip Berrigan, does the movement appear
nonexistent. Elsewhere ''we are in communication with about 30'' other groups,
he said.

The movement is drawing deepening commitments, the brothers said, because
adherents sense an inexorable movement toward a nuclear holocaust.

''It seems to be a more serious situation than we have ever faced before,'' said
Daniel Berrigan. ''It's no longer unthinkable in the minds of authorities that
you can have a limited nuclear war, and the public is being sold on the idea,
and you have generals thinking about first-strike possibilities.''

First-Strike Weapon

''That weapon we attacked,'' he said, ''is a first-strike weapon.  It's designed
to knock out enemy installations before they can strike back. That's insanity.
It's insane to think that anyone can win a nuclear war.''

The Berrigans' view of a resurgent peace movement comes at a time when national
polls indicate that most Americans are quickly moving to the right, becoming
increasingly conservative on a wide range of issues, especially military
matters. The mood is reflected in recent increases in the nation's military
budget and the prospect of even greater increases under a the administration of
Ronald Reagan.

Though unlikely burglars, the brothers have an activist heritage.  Their father,
Thomas, was a Socialist and a union organizer who for a long time was alienated
from the Roman Catholic Church because of his activities.

Baltimore,Catonsville Raids

Their earliest notoriety in the peace movement came in the late 1960's when
Philip Berrigan was arrested for raids on draft board offices in Baltimore in
1967 and in Catonsville, a Baltimore suburb, in 1968 as a member of a group that
became known as the Catonsville Nine, which also incl uded his brother Daniel.

Later Philip, as a member of a group called the Harrisburg Seven, was charged
with plotting while in prison to kidnap Henry A.  Kissinger and blow up tunnels
under Federal buildings in Washington.  A jury deadlocked on those charges, and
they were dropped. Philip was later convicted on a minor charge in the case,
smuggling letters out of prison, but the conviction was later reversed.

Since then the brothers have been arrested several times for minor offenses in
protests.  Though he still regards himself as a priest, Philip Berrigan was
excommunicated from his church after disclosing in 1973 his marriage to the
former Sister Elizabeth McAlister, who had been accused with him as a member of
the Harrisburg Seven. They now have two children, 5 and 6 years old.

Participating in the raid here with the Berrigans were another priest, the Rev.
Carl Kabat; Dean Hammer, the divinity student; Sister Anne Montgomery, the nun;
Elmer Maas, the history professor; John Schuchardt, the lawyer, and Molly Rush,
the housewife. Mr. Maas, Mr. Kabat and Mr. Schuchardt are still in Montgomery
County Prison with Philip Berrigan. The others have been freed on bail.

His wife took no part, Philip Berrigan said, because somebody had to stay out of
prison to take care of their children.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Philip Berrigan

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Peking Sends Protest to Hanoi

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 54 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Dec. 13


China formally protested to Vietnam today over more than 200 incidents that it
said Hanoi had provoked along their border during the past two months, the
official New China News Agency said. At least 6 Chinese were said to have been
killed and 50 wounded in the incidents.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

ALABAMIAN TO HEAD REVIVED SENATE SECURITY PANEL

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 36, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 548 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 12


Even before taking his Senate seat, Jeremiah Andrew Denton Jr. of Alabama has
been handed what may prove to be one of the most controversial assignments in
the new Congress: chairmanship of a newly revived security panel of the Senate
Judiciary Committee.

The name is different: the Subcommittee on Security and Terrorism.  But it is
the direct descendant of the Internal Security Subcommittee that was involved in
widespread investigations into allegations of Communist activity for more than
two decades before it was abolished several years ago. The subcommittee provided
a forum for Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, Republican of Wisconsin, in his crusade
against Communists.

The revival of the subcommittee was announced by Senator Strom Thurmond, the
conservative Republican from South Carolina who will be chairman of the Senate
Judiciary Committee in the new Congress.

Senator-elect Denton, a Navy flier who was shot down early in the Vietnam War,
spent seven years as a prisoner of war in Hanoi before his release in 1973.

Unseated Democratic Incumbent

The retired rear admiral was elected to Congress last month, unseating Senator
Donald W. Stewart, a Democrat, to become the first Republican senator from
Alabama since Reconstruction.

In his campaign, Mr. Denton was strongly supported by the Rev.  Jerry Falwell,
the evangelist who is a leader of Moral Majority. Mr.  Denton, a self-described
morality crusader, is founder of a group called the Coalition for Decency.

In his morality crusade, Mr. Denton has singled out such areas of concern as
adultery, premarital sex among teen-agers and the decline of the family.

However, it is not known yet what areas he will focus on as chairman of the
security and terrorism subcommittee.

Plan for the F.B.I.

''He wants to get a better handle on the matter,'' an aide said.  ''He wants to
talk to the F.B.I. about what it sees as security dangers.''

The old Internal Security Subcommittee was established in 1951 as the Senate co
unterpart to the equally controversial House Un-American A ctivities Committee,
which later was renamed House Internal Secu rity Committee. Both panels were
abolished several yearsago.

Representative Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the Speaker of the House, said this week
that the House did not intend to revive that body's internal security panel,
which was abolished in 1975.

In its earliest and most flamboyant years, the Senate Internal Security
Subcommittee was headed by Senator Patrick A. McCarran, Democrat of Nevada, and
then by Senator William E. Jenner, Republican of Indiana. Senator James O.
Eastland, Democrat of Mississippi, was chairman in later years.

Move to Abolish Panel

The Senate Rules Committee sought in 1976 to abolish the internal security
panel. One of the subcommittee's chief opponents, Senator Mark O. Hatfield,
Republican of Oregon, argued that the panel had done little for years. He said
that from 1969 to 1975 the subcommittee spent $3.4 million dollars and produced
only one bill that became law.

The subcommittee, finally cut off from any financing, drifted out of existence
in 1977, but only after vigorous protests by Senator Thurmond.

''If we don't know who the enemies of this country are,'' he lamented at the
time, ''then we're in real trouble.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error,an arti- cle on Dec. 14 incorrectly described the
panel that Senator Joseph R. McCarthy headed. He was chairman of the Gov-
ernment Operations Committee and its Permanent Investigations Subcommit- tee.

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By ANTHONY AUSTIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 42, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 781 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Dec. 13


John Lennon was mourned in the Soviet press yesterday as a fighter for peace and
a victim of the American cult of violence.

Following up news reports of Mr. Lennon's murder Monday night, several major
newspapers provided appreciations of the musician as, in their view, the most
creative of the Beatles and offered their interpretation of what the manner of
his death revealed about American society.

''The American authorities did everything they could to prevent Lennon, his
wife, the Japanese artist Yoko Ono, and their son , Sean, from remainin g in the
United States,'' said Sovetskaya Kultura, a newspaper of the Ministry of
Culture. ''The reasons? In his day Lennon took p ublic positions in opposition
to the dirty initiatives of the Americ an military and in support of the rights
of the AmericanIndians and s tudents.''
Lyrics That Were Unforgivable

Moreover, the article said, the American Establishment could not forgive him
some of his songs, in which - in the paper's translation of his lyrics - he
evoked a world ''without proprietors or hunger or anything to die for or
anything to kill for.''

Nonetheless, the paper said, Mr. Lennon managed to become a legal resident of
the United States and lived there for 10 years - ''in this mad world of daily
murders, pathological violence and general fear.''

''For the United States,'' Sovetskaya Kultura continued, ''Lennon's murder is a
commonplace, not an unusual, event. He became merely the 701st victim of armed
assault in New York so far this year. In the United States as a whole, the
number of people shot to death last year was 10,700. All of them were victims of
the cult of violence that flourishes in the United States.''

The praise lavished on Mr. Lennon and his partners, Paul McCartney, George
Harrison and Ringo Starr, in this and other Soviet papers is quite different
from the reaction of the authorities when Beatlemania hit the country in the
mid-1960's.

Then, Soviet cultural officials took a hostile view of the powerful influence
that the Beatles' music, brought in by Western tourists and broadcast by Western
radio stations, had on young people. Copied on thousands of tape recorders, the
Beatles' songs spread throughout the country and provided the first impetus for
the transformation of Soviet popular music into its current Westernized style.
They Became 'Progressive'

The official attitude toward the musical revolution gradually changed to
acceptance and approval, and in the Soviet lexicon the Beatles became officially
''progressive,'' particularly after they voiced opposition to the Vietnam War.

What is happening in the United States in reaction to the murder is a far cry
from what could be regarded as sincere grief for a beloved artist, according to
a dispatch by the official press agency, Tass, appearing in the paper
Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya.

''Inflating this tragic occurrence into a supersensation,'' the article said,
American newspapers and radio and television stations report breathlessly on
every detail of the murder and make Mr. Lennon out to be almost ''a spiritual
leader of several generations of Western youth.'' The purpose, the article said,
is clear: ''an elementary striving to make money on his death.'' That, it went
on, is why in terest in the Beatles' records, whic h had virtually disappeared
in recent years, is being ''artif icially whipped up to incredible heights'' and
''lines are forming in front of record stores from early morning.''

'Cruel Exploitation' of Artists

''American show business squeezed everything it could from the rapid rise of
John Lennon and his comrades in the 1960's,'' the article said. ''John Lennon's
life is a typical example of the cruel exploitation of those talented Western
musicians who rise to the crest of success. First a frenzied popularity
stimulated by noisy advertising, then multimillion-dollar contracts and
exhausting concerts. Finally narcotics, disappointment in life and feverish
efforts to stay on the wave of popularity.''

Komsomolskaya Pravda, organ of the Communist Youth League, gave a particularly
warm review of the Lennon career, saying it was ''a bitter irony that a man who
devoted his songs and his music to the struggle against violence should himself
become a victim of violence.''

''Meaningless murders are becoming more and more typical of New York and the
whole of the United States,'' it added. ''It is becoming the fashion to murder
prominent people. The motive for the crime, as a rule, is primitive and inhuman
- to become famous, if only for a day; to see your name in screaming newspaper
headlines so as to escape the emptiness and hopelessness of daily life.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Egil Krogh Takes Post At Law Firm in Seattle

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 51, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 171 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, Dec. 13


Egil Krogh, former head of the White House ''plumbers'' unit that worked to stop
disclosures of information in the Administration of President Nixon, has
returned to the practice of law.

Mr. Krogh, 40 years old, joined one of Seattle's top law firms, Culp, Dwyer,
Guterson & Grader.  Mr. Krogh headed the ''plumbers'' unit at the time of the
1971 burglary of the office of Dr. Lewis Fielding, the psychiatrist of Daniel
Ellsberg, who said he disclosed the Pentagon Papers, classified information
about American involvement in the war in Vietnam. Mr. Krogh was later convicted
of conspiring to violate Mr.  Ellsberg's civil rights and served four months in
prison.

Mr. Krogh fought for and won the right to practice law again after his
conviction. William Dwyer, a partner in Culp, Dwyer, Guterson & Grader, was Mr.
Krogh's attorney in proceedings before the Washington State Bar Association and
the State Supreme Court.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A SOCIOLOGIST 'EMERITUS' WHO IS FAR FROM RETIRED

BYLINE: By NAN ROBERTSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 102, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1229 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


He elegantly inhabits an old white farmhouse in the middle of this academic
town, dimly lighted inside, shadowed by tremendous maples outside. This is the
sociologist David Riesman, now 71 years old, 30 years after ''The Lonely Crowd''
and five months after his July 1 retirement from Harvard. ''Emeritus,'' he says,
and crooks two fingers on either side of an empty space for quote marks, as if
to say, ''Don't you believe it.''

For the rare interview - he has never gone on television or radio, never
participated in a talk show, wouldn't sit still for a Time magazine cover story
- Mr. Riesman was wearing a scholar's crisp and correct tweed jacket and gray
flannels - and butterscotch leather jogging shoes from L.L. Bean.

While he talked, his delicate wife, Evelyn, a writer and art critic, floated
silently about the all-black study, tendering crackers and Swiss cheese. They
have four gifted children, now grown and scattered, and the parents recall with
delight the chamber music the family played around the grand piano in the living
room.

''Emeritus,'' Professor Riesman sniffed again. ''I've got two secretaries
working hard. I've got the same old office I always had in William James Hall,
jammed with books and papers, with floods of mail. I no longer have formal
classes, but there's no less traffic.  When you've taught that many students
over the years, one has a comet's tail of those who need jobs, tenure,
fellowships, Guggenheims. I write at least three letters of recommendation a
day, and for years I've oriented the Nieman fellows in journalism.''

Vein of Self-Criticism

He has written 10 books and torrents of essays and articles. None was so famous
as ''The Lonely Crowd,'' done with Reuel Denney and Nathan Glazer. Television
was in its infancy in 1950; civil rights, Vietnam, flower children, nuclear
proliferation and the campus revolution he followed and wrote about with such
perception - all were yet to come. To his astonishment, his scholarly book
tapped a deep, then-submerged vein of self-criticism in Americans, and it was
absorbed into the popular culture as a perennial big seller.

Millions who never read his classic were glibly pigeon-holing their friends as
''inner-directed'' or ''other-directed.'' By 1960, he was writing wryly that
''the great majority of readers in the last 10 years have decided that it w as
better to b e an inner-directed cowboy than an other-directed advertising man
.'' The same might be true today, particularly among the young. Thr ee years ago
the book was still going strong and ''I was handed the millionth copy,'' he said
with disbelief.

Thirty years later, Mr. Riesman finds ''inner-directed and other directions
totally irrelevant.'' As he said this, his face was transformed. In repose, with
his elongated nose and down-turning mouth, the professor looks a bit as if he
had just swallowed a pickle; then he bursts into a sunny smile that makes him
the least forbidding of men. He does not pull his punches, at others or at
himself, and if one of his own pet theories is obsolete, he says so and then
laughs.

He further said about ''The Lonely Crowd'': ''It was an entirely intra-American
book, written as if this country were alone in the world. One could not
conceivably write such a book today. One must take account of the spaceship
Earth.''

Opposes Equal Rights Amendment

Mr. Riesman - a specialist in the sociology of American higher education during
his 22 years at Harvard - has recorded or forecast many trends that have gripped
campuses and the whole society. But of all of them, he said, ''I regard the
women's movements - and I insist on the plural - as the most important of my
time. And it's not true, as some say, that they're over. They have become so
much the fabric of the country that one no longer thinks of them as a
movement.''

Yet he is against the proposed equal rights amendment. ''As a Constitutional
lawyer, I find it self-defeating,'' he said. Mr.  Riesman's early career as a
law clerk to Associate Justice Louis Brandeis, a lawyer in Boston, a deputy
assistant District Attorney in Manhattan and a law professor at the University
of Buffalo has been overshadowed by his later fame as a sociologist.

He has seen an ''enormous widening of career opportunities'' for women and,
early on as now, was urging them to expand out of what he calls ''the talk
trades'' into science and technology. He has long believed in single-sex
education for its encouragement of excellence in fields once thought improper
for women. ''Mount Holyoke turns out more scientists than Radcliffe does,'' he
added with relish.

Harvard Parties a Shock

''One reason we stopped going to parties when we came to Harvard,'' he said,
''was that men and women were separated. We were shocked at this stag point of
view. Parties at the University of Chicago were totally integrated. I was the
first person to bring a woman tutor into a male house, and 40 to 60 percent of
my staff members were women.''

The Riesmans still give fall parties in their spacious house. He has firm ideas
on this: ''We are active hosts. I do believe in hosting. We move people about
from room to room: they tend to cluster. We have place cards. I believe parties
should have some formality, but there are those who accuse us of being stuffy.''
For many years they gave a large party in the spring, inviting staff and their
spouses, alumni of the general education course he taught, ''people whose works
we read, and some friends, of course.''

''The younger people brought what I call their 'quasis' - their proto-marital
partners,'' he said, again flowering into that puckish smile.

Mr. Riesman, who never visited a campus without briefing himself months in
advance by reading student newspapers and other nonscholarly material, still
feels close to the young. He fought for greater university response to student
demands before the notion became a popular, or even visible, cause. But when
protest erupted into violence at Berkeley in 1964, igniting a powder train
across the nation, he instantly remonstrated with the student radicals. He
argued that the establishment they were attacking was a frail web they could
destroy.

Students Not Patronized

The magazine Psychology Today said a decade ago: ''Riesman refuses to patronize
students by treating their opinions any less critically than he treats those of
adults. He makes them squirm, as he does their elders, by knowing better than
they do where their heads are at.''

This discomfort has rarely prevented students - except at the height of campus
revolt during the 1960's - from beating a path to Mr. Riesman's door. They do so
to this day, wandering into his cluttered office in search of wisdom and warmth.
Mr. Riesman said one told him recently, ''You're the only professor with whom
I've ever had any contact.'' With pride he remarked, as night stole through the
windows: ''They consider me close.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of David Riesman

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW IBSEN FATHERED THE MODERN DRAMA

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3446 words


''I'm half inclined to think we're all ghosts,'' says a character in one of
Henrik Ibsen's plays. ''It's not on ly what we've inherited from our fathers and
mothers that exists agai n in us, but all sorts of old ideas and opinions. They
aren't actual ly alive in us; but theyhang on all the same, and we can never rid
ou rselves of them.''

In so many of Ibsen's works, it is the dead who determine the actions of
characters in the present, and it is somehow fitting that Ibsen, the
acknowledged ''father of modern drama,'' should have fastened upon such a theme
of hereditary guilt, for he has left behind a considerable patrimony of his own.
''Everything since Ibsen that isn't a copy of him, is a reaction to him,'' says
Eric Bentley, a critic and Ibsen scholar. ''Everyone who's written for the
modern theater has had to come to terms with this giant father figure - he has
been loved and hated, but he has never been ignored.'' Indeed Ibsen left his
imprint on those great masters Shaw, Strindberg and O'Neill and through them,
the Norwegian dramatist's legacy has endured, affecting virtually every
dramatist who has come of age in this century.

Thursday night, a revival of ''John Gabriel Borkman,'' starring Irene Worth,
E.G. Marshall and Rosemary Murphy, opens at the Circle in the Square, and it is
a suitable occasion for re-examining Ibsen and assessing exactly how his
achievement has affected these successive generations of playwrights and the
theater of today. His second to last play, ''Borkman'' sketches the fall of a
financier and his dream of recovering what he has lost, and like all of Ibsen's
late plays, it concerns the emotional costs of achievement. Although it is a
rarely-produced work with formidable staging difficulties, its structural
innovations, as the play's translator Rolf Fjelde notes, ''anticipate the
expansion of drama into the realms of dream and myth and the irrational.'' In
that, it resembles the rest of Ibsen's oeuvre - its influence has been
remarkable indeed.

Given the passage of years and the proliferation of new dramatic movements, it
is difficult now to appreciate just how phenomenally radical Ibsen's
contributions once were. He was the first major dramatist to deal convincingly
with controversial, topical subjects - shocked at a reference to syphilis in
''Ghosts,'' one critic in 1891 called it ''an open drain, a loathsome sore, an
abominable piece, a repulsive and degrading work'' - and the first to use the
theater as a form of social revolt. He was a pioneer in moving tragedy from the
courts of kings and queens to the living rooms of the middle class.  He refined
prose dialogue, developed the subtext, and he opened the way for plays of
psychological density.

Ironically enough, Ibsen now strikes many, in Henry James's words, as
''massively commmon and middle-class,'' a mere inhabitant of the ''tasteless
parlor.'' His plays are not produced as frequently as those of his more
commercial heirs, but have been consigned, instead, to the classroom and
library; and the man whose iconoclasm so impressed James Joyce that he learned
Norwegian in order to read the plays in the original, no longer occupies an
adversary position.  Clearly this is the eventual fate of any radical impulse
that has been absorbed into the mainstream and become the dominant mode, but in
Ibsen's case, the process is magnified by the thoroughness with which his
disciples have domesticated his achievement.

Ibsen's innovations, both structural and thematic, were long ago
institutionalized; they are conventions of the modern theater and many
playwrights are now indebted to him without being aware of a direct debt of any
sort. ''People tell me my plays have been influenced by Ibsen, and maybe they
are,'' says Lillian Hellman, whose realistic dramas are frequently regarded as
Ibsenesque. ''He was not a direct influence, but it was a form I guess I
unconsciously chose to write in.'' Lanford Wilson, the author of ''Talley's
Folly'' and ''Fifth of July,'' adds, ''I'm sure he's had an influence on people
who have had an influence on people who influenced me.''

Questions of literary inheritance, of course, are always delicate ones. Ibsen
himself was notoriously unwilling to admit influence, maintaining that ''what
makes a work of art its creator's spiritual property is the fact that he has
imposed upon it the stamp of his own personality.'' Still, it is possible to
identify the most resonant effects of Ibsen's work, for his heirs are
distinguished and numerous: some have appropriated and absorbed his
contributions; others, feeling the need to free themselves from his authority,
have defined themselves by opposition.

Although Ibsen is best known for such realistic ''middle'' plays as ''A Doll's
House'' a nd ''Pillars of Society,'' his career actually spans three d istinct
periods, each of which is influential in a different way . His early poetic
epics anticipated the avant-garde movement: Alf red Jarry, for instance, who
would have such an effect on the surrea lists and the so-called
theater-of-the-absurd, worked ona production of ''Peer Gynt'' in Paris in 1895
and drew heavily on that experien ce in writing ''Ubu Roi.'' And Ibsen's last,
increasingly metaphorical works, including ''Borkman,'' presaged a whole new gen
re, in which realism would be repudiated in favor of a more symbolic drama.

According to some critics, even Chekhov, whose impressionistic comedies of loss
might seem quite opposed to Ibsen's harsher vision, was indebted to him. ''
Condescend to reserve a seat for me for the 'Pillars of Society,''' he wrote a
friend in 1903. ''I will even pay for my seat. You know Ibsen is my favorite wr
iter.'' Tolstoy, who hadno great regard for Ibsen, said of Chekhov's ''The
Seagull,'' ''it isabsolutely worthless - it reads like a play b y Ibsen,'' and
critics would later point out that Chekhov had, in fa ct, used a presiding
symbol in that play much as Ibsen had done in ''The Wild Duck.''

Yet as Ibsen's biographer Michael Meyer observes, ''his immediate influence was
on Shaw,'' and it was Shaw, through his famous essay ''The Quintessence of
Ibsenism,'' who would perpetuate the most popular and enduring portrait of
Ibsen. This portrait of the dramatist as a ''social pioneer,'' the master of
realism and relevance, would, in turn, influence playwrights as disparate as
Granville-Barker and Galsworthy; Osborne, Wesker and the other Angry Young Men
in England; and in America, Arthur Miller, Lillian Hellman and Clifford Odets.
Edward Albee's insistence that drama should not just entertain, but also
criticize society is consistent with this view, and as Robert Brustein notes,
the Vietnam plays of David Rabe and many ''black and feminist plays could be
considered Ibsenesque in this respect'' as well.

The problem is, however, that this portrait is a limited one: just as William
Archer's praise of Ibsen as the maker of a new dramaturgy based on the well-made
play neglected his other, more interesting structural innovations, so did Shaw's
commentary attempt to squeeze a sprawling, contradictory career into a neat
package labeled the play of ideas. In fact, in celebrating him, Shaw remade
Ibsen in his own image.

If a certain misreading was involved, Ibsen's achievements were not lost on Shaw
himself. It was following the publication of ''Quintessence,'' after all, that
Shaw, then a failed novelist, turned his attention to the theater, and his early
plays such as ''Candida'' were indebted to Ibsen in both form and content. ''The
Philanderer,'' in which Shaw begins his ongoing war on marriage, actually
features characters who belong to something called the ''Ibsen Club,'' and his
''unwomanly woman'' is a relative of such Ibsen heroines as Nora Helmer and
Hedda Gabler.

But while Shaw was a resolute supporter of women's rights, Ibsen, radical
individualist that he was, never expressed much interest in that cause -or for
that matter, in any social issue. ''I have been more of a poet and less of a
social philosopher than people have generally been inclined to believe,'' he
said at a testimonial banquet given by the Norwegian Society for Women's Rights.
''I thank you for your toast but I must decline the honor of consciously having
worked for women's rights. I am not even quite sure what women's rights really
are. To me it has been a question of human rights.''

Even so, it was Ibsen's depiction of strong women - specifically Nora in ''A
Doll's House'' - that so enraged his Scandinavian rival, August Strindberg, who
dismissed him as ''that Norwegian bluestocking.'' Actually, Strindberg started
out as a great admirer of Ibsen: ''his technique in 'The Father' and other
realistic plays derives from Ibsen,'' wrote the late Harold Clurman in his last
book; and other critics have pointed out that ''A Dream Play'' has roots in
''Peer Gynt,'' that early epic in which Ibsen began to dissolve the boundaries
between the conscious and unconscious.

Over the years, however, Strindberg grew increasingly hostile, eventually going
so far as to accuse Ibsen of stealing his ideas.  This antagonism was not only
the result of Strindberg's own bitter view of women, but also of his growing
anxiety about Ibsen's influence on his work. Referring to Ibsen as a
''fertilizing spirit,'' in a letter written in 1887, he expressed his fear of
''becoming pregnant with other men's seed and bearing other men's offspring.''

Exactly 21 years younger than Ibsen, Strindberg began writing when the older
writer was regarded as Europe's master dramatist, and he felt compelled to
define himself against his mentor. He did this, in part, by intensifying certain
aspects of Ibsen's work: while Ibsen disguised the autobiographical elements of
his work, Strindberg made his subjectivity explicit; and while Ibsen conveyed
psychological truths through a carefully worked subtext, Strindberg laid them
out in fantasies and dreams.

Strindberg also accentuated the rivalry by characterizing Ibsen as a stodgy
realist concerned with social issues, and himself as the proponent of a new,
more fluid drama of self-expression. While the comparison wa s quite probably
calculated in Strindberg's favor, it seems to have lodged in the imagination of
the theater. Until quite recently, say s Mr. Brustein, people categorized all
American plays as belonging to a school - ''one of expressionism represented by
Strindberg, a nd the other of realism that goes back to Ibsen.'' No doubt some
cr edence was lent to Strindberg's thesis by Ibsen himself, who did little to
quiet the antagonism. Of a picture of Strindberg th at hung over his desk, he
said once, ''He is my mortal enemy and sha ll hang there and watch while I
write.''

Years later, Tennessee Williams would hang a portrait of Strindberg over his
desk in New Orleans, explaining ''I like him - there's a certain madness there,
you know.'' Mr. Williams, o f course, is hardlythe only modern writer indebted
to Strindberg (and hence, indirectly,to Ibsen). There are elements of
Strindberg's famous love-hatred doctrine in such plays as Mr. Albee's ''Who's
Afraid of Virginia Woolf?'' and in the movies of Ingmar Bergman.
''Strindberg,'' said Mr. Bergman once, ''has followed me all my li fe - he
expressed thingswhich I'd experienced and which I couldn't fi nd words for.''

Certainly the most renowned of Strindberg's admirers remains Eugene O'Neill, who
called him ''my inspiration down all the years.'' For O'Neill, after all,
Strindberg was not simply a literary mentor; he was also a kind of kindred
spirit whose dark vision was remarkably similar to his own. Both charted the
terrain of the unconscious, and both exposed and expiated their lives through
their work.

It was not just by way of Strindberg, however, that Ibsen affected O'Neill. The
younger writer read ''The Quintessence of Ibsenism'' while in high school, and
his early play ''Servitude,'' which one reviewer described as ''what happens to
a Nora after she slams the door,'' possesses strong echoes of both Shaw and
Ibsen. There are also overtones of ''The Wild Duck'' in ''The Iceman Cometh,''
for both are concerned with the necessity of illusion - an idea that Pirandello,
who once said ''after Shakespeare I unhesistatingly place Ibsen first,'' would
also make the centerpiece of several plays.

But it was the theme of the family, of hereditary guilt, that was the most
lasting of Ibsen's legacies to O'Neill as well as to Miller and Albee and many
others. Ibsen, says Mr. Fjelde, who has translated most of Ibsen's plays, was
the ''first dramatist to understand the spiritual implications of Darwinism,''
and in that sense ''O'Neill's greatest plays are Ibsenesque plays - the
exploration of the family, this pressing deeper and deeper into the soul.''

Thanks to his adaptation of ''An Enemy of the People'' and the polemical nature
of his own plays, Arthur Miller is usually associated with Ibsen's social
impulse, yet many of his plays from ''Death of a Salesman'' to ''The American
Clock'' are also Ibsenesque in their focus on the family. ''Miller found in
Ibsen the means by which to write a family play, to show the conflict of
generations,'' says Mr. Bentley. ''Although he was claiming to be something of a
Marxist, there's a Freudianism there from Ibsen that comes down through
O'Neill.''

Mr. Miller himself reserves his highest praise for Ibsen's structural
innovations - not his earlier use of techniques taken from the French well-made
play, but his adoption, later on, of a method originating in Sophoclean drama.
It is a method in which the play starts late in a story, thereby turning the
''action'' of the drama into a working out of consequences. ''It seemed to me
Ibsen was carrying on the Greek tradition,'' says Mr. Miller, who used this
technique in ''All My Sons.'' ''The structure where you have the enormous weight
of the past, and the present being a kind of symptom of the past. The spirit of
that was important for me - like most of your influences, you absorb them and
learn to elaborate on them.''

For Mr. Miller's entire generation, in fact - a generation that included Lillian
Hellman, Clifford Odets and William Inge - Ibsen was clearly a formative
influence. But what they and lesser dramatists tended to take from Ibsen were
the most readily accessible of his innovations - namely, his realistic
dramaturgy and topical subject matter. And in the process, many of Ibsen's more
radical impulses were diluted or ignored. ''What happened was his structure was
adopted for melodramatic purposes or social purposes, but the tragic element too
often was forgotten,'' says Mr. Miller. ''The bottle was admired and the wine
was never tasted.''

Ibsen, for instance, used realistic, middle-class situations in his plays to
challenge his audience: ''Zola goes to bathe in the sewer, I go to cleanse it,''
he said once, explaining that he used realism not to document the surfaces of
domestic life, but to penetrate them.  Some of his followers, however, have used
the same idioms of contemporary life to soothe and placate. The result is an
ironic one: today the influence of Ibsen, that most radical of playwrights,
seems most pervasive in conventional, commercial drama. Situation comedies, in
fact, represent a kind of degenerate Ibsen play.

''The central mainstream of contemporary American drama is deeply influenced
formalistical ly by Ibsen,'' says Mr. Brustein. ''Every contemporary play you
see on Broadway shows some formal influence from him. It' s the whole notion
that drama deals with a contemporary subject, take s place in contemporary
living rooms. It's a part of histhinking he r epudiated, but his followers have
domesticated him and it makes for successful box office drama.''

Unfortunately, it was mainly through the work of his disciples that the current
generation of dramatists first came to Ibsen, and for the most part, they
rejected what they found. This was partly the impulse of the avant garde to
willfully jettison all that was conventional and ''middle-brow,'' and it was
partly the simple need of a new generation to clear some imaginative space of
its own. For a long time, says Lanford Wilson, ''Ibsen was influential in what
we refused to do.''

John Guare, the author of such plays as ''T he House of Blue Leaves'' and
''Marco Polo Sings a Solo,'' ini tially felt oppressed byIbsen's paternal
presence as well, for he ide ntified the Norwegian with the work of American
playwrights of the 40's and 50's. ''All you're aware of at first with Ibsen is
the ma chinery and you say 'My God, what I want to do is throw that machiner y
out,''' he says. ''In a play as well-crafted as (Hellman's) 'The Li ttle Foxes'
the machinery produces and produces and comes up with nothing. It became more
interesting to write about the fear at t he end of the play, thanthe machinery
that led up to it.''

As they reach artistic maturity, however, many of the younger playwrights have
developed a new appreciation for craft, and they have also discovered Ibsen -
not as revised by the previous generation, but as he wrote a century ago. When
Mr. Guare finally sat down to study Ibsen, he says he realized that the
dramatist ''didn't use the machine to grind out easy sausage the way so many of
his American followers did, but used it to produce passionate poetry.'' So great
was his enthusiasm that Mr. Guare recently wrote a forward to a new edition of
''From Ibsen's Workshop,'' and he is now working on an adaptation of ''Peer
Gynt'' for the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center.

Thomas Babe, the author of ''Kid Champion'' and ''Fathers and Sons,'' is also
working on an adaptation of Ibsen - in his case, a version of ''The Wild Duck''
that will open at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in the spring. As he worked on a
new play of his own alongside the adaptation, he says he began ''to go to school
with Mr. Ibsen.'' ''It's marvelous to really meet him,'' says Mr. Babe. ''For a
long time I hated his guts; I thought he was an old prude. He was the biggest
influence on the playwrights I grew up with, a time when people didn't do crazy
stuff, and I felt why couldn't there be music and wonder and mystery in the
theater - that was before I discovered the music and wonder and mystery in him.

''I think it's safe to say Ibsen will have an effect on my writing. Ibsen is a
craftsman and that's something that will be gained. The other thing we probably
are going to have to learn is to write plays that are responsible to the values
of the world at large. We've had a glut of serious plays that didn't touch on
things that matter. No one lives in a 'Deathtrap;' no one's an 'Elephant Man.' I
think there's a craving for serious theater about serious subjects that touch
concerns shared by people in the audience. They have to be good and very close
to the bone, things Ibsen is very good at.''

As for Ibsen himself, he would no doubt be somewhat distressed to find that he
has influenced so many playwrights, that he has become a great father figure in
the theater. It was the will of the individual that he upheld in play after
play, after all, and like so many of his heroes, he claimed he always stood
alone.

''I firmly believe that an intellectual pioneer can never gather a majority
around him,'' he said once. ''The majority, the masses, the mob will never catch
up; he can never rally them behind him. A crowd now stands where I stood when I
wrote my earlier books. But I myself am there no longer, I am somewhere else far
ahead of them - or so I hope.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Henrik Ibsen photo of G.B. Shaw photo of Arthur
Miller photo of Lillian Hellman photo of Edward Albee photo of Tennessee
Williams photo of Eugene O'Neill photo of August Strindberg drawing of Irene
Worth, E.G. Marshall, and Rosemary

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
WHEN MOVIES ARE POLITICAL HARBINGERS

BYLINE: VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1691 words


Seldom are commercial movies wildly radical in their social and political
content. They tend to soothe and reassure, to persauade us that the world we go
to sleep in tonight will be the one in which we awake tomorrow. Perhaps even
better. Occasionally there have been brief periods when we've had a string of
films that, in one way or another, have expressed strong reservations about the
established order. In the late 60's and early 70's a number of professional
commentators were alarmed at the appearance of such films as ''Easy Rider,''
''Catch 22,'' ''M.A.S.H.,'' ''Five Easy Pieces,'' ''A Clockwork Orange'' and
''The Conformist.''

Movie makers, these sages said, persisted in merchandising the dark, perverse,
ugly despairing side of life when they should be out beating the drums on behalf
of positive, cheerful, optimistic attitudes. Implicit in such criticism is the
conviction that people who make movies are somehow so magically free of
commercial obligations that they can make whatever kind of film they want (''I
say, gang, how about a $40 million musical about the romance of urban garbage
disposal?''), or that they operate in a world separate from the one the rest of
us inhabit.

The truth is that movie makers, even the ones who live in the most splendidly
air-conditioned of isolations, respond to the same daily stresses everyone else
does. It's the rare movie maker who starts a trend. Like most of us, he suddenly
finds himself in the grip of a trend or, if he's lucky, being able to exploit
one.

To anyone who had studied a list of the most successful and/or most typical
films of the last couple of years, the swing to the political right confirmed by
the November elections would not, I think, come as much of a surprise. Though
the people who loyally attend these films may not be exactly the same people who
were responsible for this year's Republican victories, all of them go to the
same supermarkets, read the same newspapers and magazines, watch the same
television shows, and pay the same price for a gallon of gas and the same
interest rate on their personal bank loans.  Moviegoers have been on a decidedly
conservative kick for some time, not, ce rtainly, for ideological reasons, but
because these conservative movies satisfy mostly unexpressed needs for social
and political ord er, for the efficacy of individual struggle to make
lifebetter, for t he possibility of salvation.

To call a film conservative is not automatically to downgrade it but to attempt
to describe at least part of its appeal. Examine the following 10 movies:

''Private Benjamin.'' In this rambunctiously funny comedy, directed by Howard
Zieff and acted with commanding looniness by Goldie Hawn, a well-to-do,
footloose, none-too-highly-motivated widow finds true friendship and a reason
for living when she joins the United States Army. Though service comedies have
been popular since the days of silent pictures, they fell into disrepute during
the Vietnam years, when the only way to get a laugh out of military service was
to make the film so outrageous that the characters had the effect of being
revolutionaries, as in '' M.A.S.H.'' At the beginning of her enlistment, Pvt.
Benjamin (M iss Hawn) is miserable, homesick and unable to cope. When ordered to
clean the latrine she uses her electric toothbrush. It's not long, though,
before she discovers the joys of camaraderie and of havi ng a job she can do
well. Will she seek an honorable discharge to marry a rich, handsome,suave male
chauvinist? Does the Army give mer it badges for high treason? With ''Private
Benjamin,'' the milit ary regains a lot of itslost prestige. One can believe in
brass again .

''Superman,'' ''Flash Gordon'' and ''Popeye.'' It's still too early to tell
whether ''Flash Gordon'' and ''Popeye'' will be successful at the box office,
but they'll do all right if each can match the business of ''Superman,'' which
is soon to be followed by ''Superman II.'' These movies have more in common than
the fact that each is based on a comic strip. Each is about a supposedly average
guy who becomes, in moments of crisis, the sort of fellow who can settle the
most complex problems simply by going into a telephone booth for a quick change
of habit, by eating a can of spinach or, in the case of Flash, by adopting the
expression of a cat determined to leap onto an off-limits windowsill. In the
comic strip reality of these films, might not only makes right, it's right to
start with.

''La Cage aux Folles.'' The sexual revolution seemed to be getting out of hand
at about the time that ''La Cage aux Folles'' opened a couple of years ago. The
newsstands were loaded with newspapers and magazines whose covers flaunted every
conceivable kind of sexual behavior once scourged as deviant. There were ''Gay
Pride'' marches down the main streets of our cities in which homosexuals and
their supporters challenged a mostly silent majority, many of whom probably
didn't want to become a backlash while secretly fuming that enough is enough.
Along comes ''La Cage aux Folles,'' about two aging queens who, wonder of
wonders, act just the way that middle-aged suburban couples behave not in life
but in idealized, socially acceptable, tepid Broadway comedies of the 50's and
60's. No need to fret about Gay Liberation any longer. As identified in this
movie, it's benignly bourgeois.

''The Elephant Man.'' John Merrick, a poor, grotesquely misshapen English
fellow, became a celebrity in Victoria's London because, though he was
alarmingly ugly, he was also gentle-mannered, polite and expressed real feeling
for the beautiful things of Victorian life. John Merrick's story has been called
''a study in dignity.'' More accurately - at least, as it's shown in the finely
acted and set movie -it's a triumph of genteelness over revolution and madness.
John Merrick has every reason to be furious at the world, but his anger is
overwhelmed by his desire to be liked, to be (as he puts it in one scene)
''good,'' to do the socially correct thing, to make the proper conversation over
afternoon tea. ''The Elephant Man'' is a most comforting picture for anyone who
fears the restlessness of the Lower Orders. If the sans-culottes in Paris in
1789 had shared Merrick's high regard for manners, France today would be the
kingdom of Louis XXVI.

''Airplane.'' Though it's undoubtedly the funniest, most successfully zany movie
in a very long time, ''Airplane'' is, effectively, a conservative movie. By
making fun of the idiocies of the movies it parodies, it simultaneously
certifies those movies and the values of the society that made them possible.
Otherwise it wouldn't bother.

''The Empire Strikes Back.'' This is not a comic strip movie but a movie that
celebrates technology - the technology that makes a movie like this possible as
well as the technology displayed non-stop within the movie. It may be stretching
things to read it as either liberal or conservative, but any movie in which
there is so much running around to so little permanent effect (good or bad) must
inevitably serve the status quo, whatever that is in ''the Empire.'' Superheroes
are matched against supervillains, and they're all so far away from this time,
place and circumstance that the outcome is beside the point.

''The Blue Lagoon.'' Teen-agers going all the way in shabby motel rooms or in
the back seats of Volkswagens are not to be tolerated, but it's diff erent when
they live in another era (the turn of the century) and in a setting (a deserted
South Sea island) that suggests, alt ernately, the Garden of Eden and a Pago
Pago Hilton. Thechildren in t his film are so romanticized that they seem less
possibly real than a pair of unicorns.

''Urban Cowboy.'' Although it hasn't been the blockbuster that its producers
anticipated, and although its depiction of blue-collar life is precise and
accurate, ''Urban Cowboy'' adopts the same sunny attitude toward barren lives
that we used to get in B-pictures in the 30's and 40's. The characters in
''Urban Cowboy'' haven't one coherent idea in their heads. They are untutored in
everything except physical activities and though they get depressed from time to
time, they know that life can be beautiful with Mr./Miss Right. Here is
existence reduced to a series of Saturday nights. There's nothing wrong with
this in a movie but it's not a movie to stir many doubts about anything except
the number of calories in your favorite namebrand beer.

Given these circumstances, I'm happily surprised that ''Ordinary People'' is
apparently as successful as it i s . On its surface, I suppose, the film is an
upbeat picture of one young man's successful coping with an impossible family
situation. U nderneath that surface, however, ''Ordinary People'' is much more
int eresting - a grim portrait of middle class America. Robert Redf ord, the
director, catches the emotional emptiness of these live s in almost every shot
inside that fancy Lake Forest house - a serie s of rooms with not enough people
in them. As the characters don' t make contact with eachother, the rooms look
untouched by the people who inhabit them. I, for one, do not believe that the
breakthrough between the father and the son, which ends the film, means that
life for the Jarretts is ever going to be any better.

''Ordinary People'' is a very good film, but it's not easily reassuring, nor are
''Stardust Memories,'' ''Raging Bull'' and ''Melvin and Howard.'' It might not
be quite accurate to describe them as ''liberal,'' maybe ''non-conservative'' is
better. They acknowledge the existence of problems that can't be solved with by
simply adopting a stiff upper lip.

''Raging Bull'' offers no neat explanation for the behavior of Jake La Motta. He
exists and must be faced. That's all. ''Stardust Memories'' dares to suggest
that an artist might have ambivalent feelings about a kind of popularity that
most of us think we'd die for, and ''Melvin and Howard'' ebulliently and sweetly
describes the bitter-end of one young man's American Dream.

These are not films to reflect a Reagan Administration or, at least, the widely
expressed hopes for it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GROWING UP WITH THE BEATLES

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 2; Page 30, Column 6; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words


Is there anyone who grew up with the Beatles in the 1960's who can imagine life
without them? The murder of John Lennon this week was the most personal kind of
loss. When the news broke Monday night, ex-Beatlemaniacs, now poised on the
brink of middle-age, raced to their phones to console each other, to sob, to
remember. And the more we talked about those memories, the more we realized that
our childhoods would have been empty without the Beatles. And that the Beatles
would have been nothing without John Lennon. And that now our last secret,
impossible dream - that the Beatles would some day reunite -was truly dead.

In a sense, the world the Beatles made was born a few years before they actually
arrived. The 60's had begun with the inauguration of John F. Kennedy, a
President whose youthful, iconoclastic style had started to change the whole
tenor of American life. He was assassinated months before the release of ''Meet
the Beatles'' and the group's legendary appearance on ''The Ed Sullivan Show.''
By sheer fate, it was the Beatles who picke d up Kennedy's torch, and once they
did , they ran with it.

My own experiences with the Beatles are not exceptional. Indeed, they're
entirely typical, and, for that reason only, worth recounting. Before the
Beatles, I didn't feel terribly passionate about rock music; these were the
songs one danced to or necked to or listened to in the car - enjoyable junk
food. Nor when one first heard about them, almost subliminally, did the Beatles
seem like anything other than a new group with a gimmick - long hair and British
accents. But when they arrived in America for their first tour, an insane fever
swept through our lives.

In Washington, where I lived, they stayed at the Shoreham Hotel, a few blocks
from my home, and one snowy afternoon, I found myself drawn irresistibly to the
Shoreham's lobby. It was a mob scene - all I saw was John Lennon's back - and it
was entirely irrational to have wanted to be a part of it. But from that moment
on, there was no turning back to rationality.

Like everyone I knew, my life was now inextricably tied to these four men from
Liverpool. At first this passion took the simple form of listening to their
music, of haunting record stores waiting for the release of a new album, of
debating endlessly the respective merits of John and Paul and George and Ringo.
Especially John and Paul. Paul was the ''cute one,'' the middle-of-the-roader,
the balladeer. John was the intellectual wise guy, the adventurous
exhibitionist, the hero of self-styled ''serious'' Beatles fans. As it turned
out, these initial identities would never change.

In my case, the fever became so int ense tha t I soon connived a tripto Northern
England, where I forlornly stalke d about Liverpool searching for the Beatles'
roots as though th ey were my own. But it hadn't really been necessary to
meditate at t he Mersey River; the Beatles came to us. Such was the nature of th
eir music that it soon brought about a social and cultural revolutio n that
transformed almost everything that mattered: Not just tas tes in music, but in
fashions, movies, art, sex, drug use, politic s, religion, everyday behavior. It
was, of course, Lennon who did m ost to push the Beatles's music into these
other realms.

In its early stages, the impact of Beatlemania was superficial.  Boys started
wearing their hair long and girls shortened their skirts in emulation of Carnaby
Street fashion dictates. Since these were punishable offenses in the high
schools of that era, many obedient middle-class American kids inadvertently
found themselves challenging authority for the first time. When ''Sgt. Pepper's
Lonely Hearts Club Band'' was released in 1967, that revolt quickly found other
outlets.

''Sgt. Pepper'' was the right record in the right place at the right time. The
first so-called conceptual rock album, in which the various songs bled into each
other to form a unified work, it broadened the Beatles's audience beyond their
early fans. It allowed less attentive observers, like parents, to distinguish
the Beatles from all the other rock groups and fads that had contributed to the
so-called ''British invasion'' of America. The album also made rock music a pop
artform worthy of serious discussion by critics and forced every other major
rock group of the time to change directions.

Yet ''Sgt. Pepper'' was as much an historical event as a pop culture sensation.
It dovetailed perfectly with two larger phenomena - the Vietnam war and the
growing popularity of drugs. With its complex layers of sound, ''Sgt. Pepper''
solidified the growing suspicion that rock music could be most fully appreciated
when stoned. With the record's release, the connection between drugs and rock
music was institutionalized. Meanwhile, specific songs on the album - most
memorably ''A Day in the Life'' - tapped into the alienation that the war was
creating among young people throughout the country. The Beatles had become the
de facto cultural mascots of a political upheaval.

The rest of the Beatles' story, right through the group's break-up, parallels
the story of a generation. The 60's ended when the Beatles did. But if that
story is over, it still casts a long shadow over the lives of those who lived
it. We'll always listen to the music, pore over our scrapbooks, remember
precisely where we were and what we thought and felt when every album came out.
But now that story is colored not only by John Lennon's death, but also by the
way in which he died. Lennon was the most pacific of rock stars. He was the
family man, the guru, the chanter of ''Give Peace a Chance'' -the least likely
target for an assailant with a gun. If there were any illusions left at all for
children of the 60's, they too died on Monday night.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN ONE HOUSE, DIVIDED, THE DEMOCRATS PLAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1008 words


STRATEGY

By MARTIN TOLCHIN

WASHINGTON - ''We're Americans first, Democrats second,'' House Speaker Thomas
P. O'Neill Jr. declared last week. ''We won't be obstructionist. We'll have our
own ideas. But on the economy and defense, we'll work with the President.''

W hen the Republicans take over the White Ho use and Senate next month, Mr.
O'Neill will become the Democratic Party's highest rankingelected official,
leading, with his occasiona lly fractured syntax, the Congressional opposition.
In a party that has swung back through the center and to the right, he remains
an un reconstructed New Deal liberal.

By Mr. O'Neill's own count, liberals, once a majority of House Democrats, will
comprise 27 percent of the new 243-member Democratic caucus. And he himself was
the only liberal awarded a leadership post last week. Only one key seat -
chairman of the budget committee - went to a conservative, Jim Jones of
Oklahoma, who narrowly defeated a liberal, David R. Obey of Wisconson. But three
others went to moderates who tend to be conservative on fiscal issues. They are
Jim Wright of Texas, re-elected majority leader, and Tom Foley of Washington and
Gillis W. Long of Louisiana, named majority whip and caucus chairman.

For all his strong views, the Speaker is a realist, who frequently counsels more
intransigent colleagues that politics is the art of compromise. Although his
party will have a numerical majority in the new House, Republicans and
conservative Democrats will enjoy a working majority. Mr. O'Neill consequently
strengthened the role of the party's conservatives, giving Bo Ginn of Georgia,
Tom Bevill of Alabama and Wes Watkins of Oklahoma posts on the Democratic
Steering and Policy Committee. Some liberals were outraged. But, as a top aide
said, ''The Speaker has to work with what America sent him.''

And for all the pledges of cooperation, Mr. O'Neill has been busy planning some
booby traps in the form of rules changes, the most important of which would be a
restriction on the use of legislative riders on appropriations bills. Liberals
once used such riders freely. Queens Democrat Joseph P. Addabbo's rider during
the Vietnam war, prohibiting the use of Federal funds for the bombing of
Cambodia, is one instance. In recent years, however, conservatives have used the
appropriations bills to, for example, thwart Federal funding of abortions. Such
votes placed liberals in politically vulnerable positions; the influx of
conservatives suggests that the use of legislative riders could be expanded even
further.

House liberals are also seeking to increase from a simple majority to two-thirds
the number of House members required to sign a petition to bring to the floor a
measure blocked by a House committee. Years ago, it was the initiation of a
discharge petition that led the Judiciary Committee and its chairman, Emanuel
Celler, to reverse themselves and allow the Equal Rights Amendment to come to
the House floor. In 1981, the conservatives have some constitutional amendments
of their own; they would ban abortion, involuntary school busing and
prohibitions on school prayer.

And it was 20 years ago that a new, liberal President, John F.  Kennedy, sought
to expand the Rules Committee to get out from the iron rule of Howard Worth
Smith, then the committee's chairman. Mr.  O'Neill has converted that committee
into an instrument that frequently refuses to allow floor amendments to be
offered to controversial legislation. In the Rules Committee, the Speaker
insists, the Democrats still have a margin of 2 to 1, plus 1.

As for the Republicans, ''We want to cooperate with Speaker O'Neill, to work
together,'' says Representative-elect Bill McCollum, Republican of Florida, vice
chairman of the Republican freshman class. ''But we can't do that with a
'politics as usual' approach.'' Last week, the House G.O.P. members elected a
skilled parliamentary tactician, Robert H. Michel of Illinois, to lead them in
the 97th Congress. Mr. Michel defeated Guy Vander Jagt of Michigan, an
aggressive partisan Republican and keynote speaker at the convention that
nominated President-designate Reagan.
The Senate Plans Pitfalls Too

In the Senate, Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, now majority leader and in
January minority leader, spoke enthusiastically of the pitfalls that the
Republicans will face. ''It will be far more difficult to provide leadership and
provide the votes in a positive way, to enact the programs and enact the laws,
than it was to sit back and criticize,'' the Senator said. ''The last time the
debt limit was extended, for example, most Republicans voted against it.  The
Democrats provided the votes and were accused of voting to increase government
spending. But now the Republicans have to make the Government work. They will
have to provide the votes.''

The Democrats will be watching Republicans try to balance the budget, cut taxes,
reduce inflation, increase defense spending, decrease government spending and
adhere to their platform. ''People are going to see that those promises can't be
kept,'' Senator Byrd said.

Democrats a nd Republicans in both Houses already are preparing for 1982. Some
ar e actively campaigning. The Democrats have begun to emulate the c ampaign
financing and organization that helped the Republicans i n November. But they
are not sanguine. The 1980 census is expected t o further erode Democratic
strength by giving the Sunbelt more than 16 new seats. And in 1982, as in 1980,
a large block of libe ral and moderate Senotors will be up re-electi on. ''The
pendulum has shifted,'' Senator Byrd said, adding philosop hically, ''and will
shift again.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr.

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A REAGAN ADVISER'S OMINOUS CHINA PERSPECTIVE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 428 words


To the Editor:

President-elect Ronald Reagan's principal adviser on Asian affairs, Ray Cline,
is reported to have stated that, in return for recognizing China, President
Carter should have demanded that that country ''return to the norms of civilized
behavior -dropping aid to Communist insurgency movements, announcing a policy of
the non-use of force towards Taiwan, freeing market forces and opening up the
country to the outside world.''

One wonders how, if Cline had lived in the 18th century, he would have reacted
to large-scale French ''aid'' to the ''insurgency movements'' in Britain's
Thirteen Colonies. Or what his response would have been to the Boston citizens
who opposed ''opening up the country to the outside world'' and therefore dumped
into the harbor the tea belonging to the then-current multinational cor-poration
- the East India Company.

Cline's statement is reminiscent of 19th-century British imperialists who
assumed that global free trade was divinely ordained and who provoked repeated
wars to compel China to accept their opium and textiles. Indeed, the British
navy at that time actually had an officer with the title ''Vice Admiral of the
Yangtze.''

But those days are gone forever, as we should have learned when Chiang Kai-shek
was driven out of China despite our vast economic and military aid, and when our
Saigon puppets were defeated despite even vaster United States aid.

If this elementary lesson is beyond Cline's comprehension, it is to be hoped
that Pr esident-elect Reagan's other advisers are more educable. For if they
aren't, Mr. Reagan inexorably will end up as a one-term Pres ident hounded from
office, as was President Lyndon Johnson. The analogy of Reagan and Johnson is
compelling. Both won overwhelming electoral victories. Both were committed to
sweeping domestic refo rm: Johnson to state intervention in order to attain the
Great Soc iety, and Reagan to extricating the state from excessiveintervention.

Johnson's passionate hope for his Great Society was dashed by the Vietnam
disaster. Reagan's equally passionate hope for a freer American society could be
dashed by many other potential Vietnams that await those who presume to dictate
to sovereign nations that they must embrace ''market forces'' and ''open up to
the outside world.'' As Peking properly observed, such arrogance is hardly
''civilized behavior.''
L. S. STAVRIANOS, San Diego, Dec. 3, 1980

The writer, emeritus professor of history at Northwestern University, is a
research associate at the University of California at San Diego.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW IS FICTION DOING?

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3339 words


The Book Review asked a number of fiction writers the following questions: As we
move into the 80's, what is happening to fiction? Is it becoming more realistic
and less experimental? Are writers more concerned with historical and
nonfictional material and less interested in being ''self-referential,'' in
writing about writing?  Are we really living, as one critic put it, in a Golden
Age of the American Novel? The responses appear below.

Joyce Carol Oates's most recent novel is ''Bellefleur,'' John Barth's is
''Letters,'' Norman Mailer's is ''The Executioner's Song,'' Scott Spencer's is
''Endless Love.'' Alan Saperstein is the author of ''Mom Kills Kids and Self,''
Jayne Anne Phillips is the author of ''Black Tickets,'' Ella Leffland is the
author of ''Last Courtesies and Other Stories.''

JOYCE CAROL OATES

The 1980's may prove to be a Golden Age and an Age of Lead, simultaneously.
Golden for some, Leaden for others: The poles of commercial ''success'' and
''failure'' being farther apart than they have been since the latter half of the
19th century, when brainless moralizing romances by novelists like Mrs.
Southworth sold in the millions; and the large publishing houses of New York,
Boston and Philadelphia were not primarily concerned with publishing literary
books of any kind.  Observers of contemporary culture who worry that trash
publications will drive out serious publications might be interested to learn
that the same fears were voiced in the 19th century; in the 1870's, in fact,
concerned librarians in such cities as Cleveland actually tried the desperate
tactic of denying patrons access to library stacks, and failing to keep up
purchases of new, light, easily-read romances.  Unsurprisingly, the number of
library patrons diminished, and the plight of serious fiction was not greatly
eased. But culture clearly survived, and a Golden Age of sorts - involving
writers as disparate as James, Garland and Crane - evolved.

All of which suggests that our prophecies remain comfortingly similar over the
decades - yet irresistible nonetheless.  But if ''Golden'' may be taken to
indicate, as we wish it would, not commercial success but the imaginative
freedom of the novelist in his or her craft, then it is likely that we live in
the very best of times.

I anticipate novels that are in fact prose poems; and novels that are written
for the ear - to be ''read aloud, silently.'' I anticipate lyricism and
airiness, luxuriant space, the freedom to attempt virtually anything within the
elastic confines of the ''novel'' - and the privilege, perhaps unprecedented in
literar y history, of b eing as experimental as one wishes in the guise of being
traditi onal, or even readable.

I anticipate a greater use of historical and nonfiction elements in fiction -
but a wild and surrealist employment of these elements, in the service of a
metaphoric vision. Not the didacticism of a Dos Passos, but the sleight-of-hand
of an E.L. Doctorow. The ''selfreferential'' novel may be dead - was it ever
alive? - but experi mentation of all kinds is surely not de ad. There is, of
course,little challenge for the writer and little reward for the reader in
novels that labor to ''break down'' forms already broken down in the 60's (or,
to be more accurate, in the 20's - by James Joyce); but there is an exhilarating
challenge in making prose outrageous and beautiful and idiosyncratic.
''Realist'' and ''surrealist'' have long ago wed, in our lively American
literature, and perhaps in the 1980's critics will resist categorizing writers
and chiding them for violating outdated expectations.

I anticipate more novels that are both difficult and popular - difficult to a
degree, popular to a degree -like Shirley Hazzard's slow, cold, baroque and
magisterial ''The Transit of Venus,'' and John Updike's masterpiece of style,
the self-proclaimed ''The Coup,'' a world of precarious sentences, astonishing
as a city built of pickup sticks.

I anticipate, in my idealism, novels by women that are not women's novels;
novels by minorities that range beyond the passionate but delimited concerns of
minorities; more and better small press publications; and, if this season's
record is any indication, a renewed interest in the possibilities of first
novels.

JOHN BARTH

In the American 1960's there was an efflorescence of literary convention-busting
that harked back not only to the great modernists of the early part of the
century, but to such romantic American precursors as Whitman and Melville. Most
of the experimenting was forgettable stuff - most of any generation's output is
forgettable stuff - but it was a decade in which so unconventional a novel as
Richard Brautigan's ''Trout Fishing in America'' could attract a numerous and
serious readership.

In the general conservative reaction of the 1970's, this spirit all but
vanished. Perhaps half of the talented apprentices in a serious graduate-level
writing seminar in 1969 were involved in formally innovative writing of one sort
or another; by 1979, virtually no one was. A Proposition-13 mentality pervades
the medium; our literary Howard Jarvises are in the ascendancy, preaching ''the
family novel'' and ''a return to traditional literary values.'' And, in the
Reagan Country of at least the early 1980's, one may expect more of the same:
The decade of the Moral Majority will doubtless be the decade of Moral Fiction.

Happily, a culture's trends are not necessarily its monuments, and Reagan
Country is not the whole of Western civilization. The Howells Medal of the
American Academy of Arts and Letters, bestowed every five years upon the most
distinguished work of American fiction published in the half-decade, was awarded
in 1975 to Thomas Pynchon's ''Gravity's Rainbow'' - a novel much more in the
spirit of ''Ulysses'' and ''Moby Dick'' than in the spirit of William Dean
Howells, from whom the medal takes its name. A genuine, vigorous
''post-modernism'' thrives among Latin American novelists, of whom Gabriel
Garcia Marquez is the great exemplar. If the novels for which the American
1980's are later remembered turn out to be exceptions to the trend of the
decade, there will be nothing new in that. Let's hope there's someone left to
read them.

NORMAN MAILER

The future for fiction? Cut off on one flank by film and on the other by history
(which has become more novelistic than the novel), inundated at the root by mass
marketing, and breathing the philosophical jargon of futurism, sex-ideology and
the 57 varieties of psycho-analysis, fiction has become a basket case. Yet only
great fiction can save the world. So believe all good novelists! For fiction
still believes that one mind can see it whole. Of course, this is the 20th
century with its lack of respect for one mind. This is the century of the
committee worshiping the computer. Nobody can see a thing. Yet novelists never
give up. We will break out of our cyst, infiltrate other disciplines, inhabit
new epistemological modes. We will exfoliate. Our prediction is safe. The novel
will produce flowers never glimpsed before. Let us hope they are not weeds.
Excelsior! I mean, Excalibur!

SCOTT SPENCER

As publishing has, over the past decade, adopted the standards and procedures of
big business, many novelists have had to face a desperate choice: either find a
larger and larger audience or risk not being heard at all. It is hard to measure
the destructive effects of this relatively new rough-house business atmosphere.
Surely, there have been manuscripts submitted by young or difficult writers
which once publi she rs might have invested in but which now are rejected, and
there hav e been other books which have found their way into printbut which hav
e been so half-heartedly published that only dedicated bibliophiles and
relatives of the author have been aware of them.

Yet, paradoxically, the comparatively unhealthy climate has not had a crippling
effect on the novel itself, which - if we can look upon it as an amorphous
entity - seems to be prospering. It remains for future literary journalists, who
can view our moment with a cert ain Alpine objectivity, to decide how our
novelists compare with the great American novelists of the past - ho w Isaac
Bashevis Singer compares with Mark Twain, how William Styron compares with
Thomas Wolfe, how Philip Roth compares with Nathanie l Hawthorne. And if the
future deems our novelists as among the ables t America has known - which is my
suspicion - then it is also conce ivable that the often lamented shifts in the
business of publishing will be seen to be not nearly so destructive as many have
feared.

An interesting characteristic of our times is a change in appetite in our
novelists. Surely, some publishers and booksellers seem willing to distort the
community of books in their quest for quick and enormous profits, but serious
novelists also want to speak to far larger numbers of readers than the literary
novelists of the recent past thought necessary - or honorable. And, in order to
approach this wider audience, novelists have had to reclaim some of the subject
matter which they had earlier abandoned to the manufacturers of mass culture.
After a period of experimenting with the novel as word machine (as in John
Barth's work) or the novel as a reflection of the artist's highly tuned
sensibilities (as in books like ''Speedboat'' or ''Sleepless Nights''), the
general direction of the serious, literary novel may now be heading toward
character and story, as novelists, in order to survive, take back from pulp
fiction and the movies the rich subject matter which they so carelessly cast
off, thinking they no longer needed it.

Novelists will, I think, be returning in increasing numbers to their old
functions of storytellers and describers of public rather than private (or
verbal) universes. The current phase of the socalled nonfiction novel is most
likely a stage of transition, a bit of marking time while some novelists attempt
to regain the full use of the imagination necessary to write the sort of novels
they clearly want to - and must. If the novel does succeed in recapturing a
portion of its popular preeminence, I think a book like ''The World According to
Garp'' will be seen as a bridge linking the formerly ''respectable'' subject
matters of academia and the artist's inner life to the broader themes of
history, family life and popular entertainment. Its triumph might turn out to be
emblematic of the literary novel's awakening from its long swoon of
self-effacement, its reaching out for an audience it needs, and finding, to its
great relief, that the audience is, in fact, there.

ALAN SAPERSTEIN

The war in Vietnam really happened. But the version we watched on TV could not
have been the real war. It was distorted by the time frame and picture frame of
television. News of an execution out West that once might have taken a century
to travel east in the lyrics of a folk song now threatens the easy digestion of
our dinner via satellite coverage on the six o'clock report. Because we get this
news so quickly and in such exaggerated detail, Gary Gilmore instantly becomes a
grotesque character in the American mythology.

Writer and reader are wired into the grotesque reality. Never before have we
been so overexposed to television and computer technology, so overfed with
scraps of information that don't belong on the same plate, so overanxious to
process data into something more than Dada. This leads the same writer to create
an experimental novel about a real event (Mailer's ''Why Are We in Vietnam?'')
and a true life novel about a mythological reality (Mailer's ''The Executioner's
Song''). It also leads me to this conclusion: If, in our quick-cut/ printout/
transistorized atmosphere, fiction is becoming more realistic, it is only
because reality is becoming more abstract. As always, the best novels experiment
with the reality of the times to create a timeless reality of their own. The
novelist may write on litmus paper, but he remains an alchemist.  What the
critics and the public believe, however, is beyond the novelist's control. He
can't worry whether or not this is a Golden Age of the American Novel; he can
only make sure his novel doesn't have a tinny ring. Though the public may crave
the psychological, sociological and historical truth, the novelist simply sticks
to his magic. Sometimes the hidden mirrors reflect realistic elements (Robert
Coover's angry rewrite of history in ''The Public Burning,'' Maxine Hong
Kingston's novelized family memoirs in ''The Woman Warrior''), and sometimes we
can see the marvelous mirrors themselves (Gabriel Garcia Marquez's nightmare
logic, Burroughs's fold-in, cutup technique). But in the end, either the trick
works or it doesn't. Truth, fact, history, reality have nothing to do with it.
As Vladimir Nabokov said, ''To call a story a true story is an insult toboth art
and truth.''

JAYNE ANNE PHILLIPS

It seems a bit soon to forecast the 80's as a Golden Age of the American Novel;
but we can certainly hope for such a development, since it seems unlikely the
80's will prove a Golden Age for anything else. American writers will find
themselves working in an atmosphere of spiritual disaffection possibly unequaled
at any time in the history of the arts in this country. American fiction is
perhaps dealing more with histo rical and nonfictional worlds; but history,
undertaken by the fiction writer and explored as material, refers always to the
particular. This transposition into the specific is by nature self-referential,
though not narcissis tically so; there is theattempt to present history as
sensory detail, as visual image, as time which reverberates in our time.

In ''The Executioner's Song,'' Norman Mailer portrays the history of a time and
culture as built on the specifics of one life catapulted into myth. American
myth, which is seen in the firm retrospect of the prose as both accidental and
ordained, is a process addressed in the book with such accuracy and care as to
compose the literary equivalent of Neil Armstrong's moon walk. The interplay of
media and modern myth is matched in complexity only by the effect of media on
event itself; it is this relationship that Mailer observes and records even as
the fractured love story of Gary Gilmore and Nicole Barrett unfolds. Mailer's
use of white space on the page and the fragmenting of the prose into short
pieces within carefully detailed sections curiously evokes distance: distance
felt as physical imagery and as the spiritual displacement of belonging nowhere.

E.L. Doctorow's ''Loon Lake'' is a more fictionalized reworking of history but
bears some relation to ''The Executioner's Song'' in its courageous scrambling
of structure and willingness to break the novelist's rules. The story of Joe
Patterson fulfills the traditional demands of story - heights and depths, the
circular patterning of fate, uncertainty and resolution -yet the narrative risks
proceeding in a carefully detailed mosaic created by the prose itself, a hall of
mirrors in which the faceted presentation of a reality, a history, is as
forcibly the heart of the book as the story itself.

This is also true of Tim O'Brien's ''Going After Cacciato,'' which stands in
American fiction as literature of a history better understood as dream, as omen
initiated by the event of the Vietnam War and its seem-ingly endless effect on
our lives. The Canadian writer Margaret Atwood, in her accomplished ''Life
Before Man,'' deals with a specific violence - one act of self-destruction - and
its reverberations on the interrelated lives of the characters. Again, it is the
form the artist chooses which makes the material of the book experimental. From
Elizabeth's opening ''I don't know how I should live,'' geologic history forms a
backdrop for the perception of the writer; that perception ranges like a deadly
accurate searchlight across, through, within characters who together comprise
the consciousness and conscience of the book.

Treatment and invention of history within the novel connote a certain merging of
forms. In addition, writers like Grace Paley, Raymond Carver and Leonard
Michaels, who work primarily in the short story, have evolved as voices so
distinct that collections of their stories, taken as wholes, are seen to contain
and turn on novelistic elements. This interplay and sense of continuation, this
largeness of effect, can be the result of a writer's immediately recognizable
voice. Other recent books of short fiction strain the novel/ story distinction
in more conventional terms: Alice Munro's miraculous ''Beggar Maid: Stories of
Flo and Rose'' comes to mind, as does the work of another Canadian, Michael
Ondaajte, whose ''Collected Works of Billy the Kid'' and ''Coming Through
Slaughter'' are examples of the power possible in fragmented narrative composed
of poetry and prose.

American writers in particular must concern themselves with a history of the
spirit in personal and (intrinsically) national terms, with an exploration of
what survives as American, with what continues, with matters of loss and
strength. In the emergence of this decade, Pound's maxim from the ''Cantos''
resonates: ''What thou lovest well remains/ the rest is dross.'' Loving well,
and with intelligence, seems the task ahead, or what must be saved will not be
saved.

ELLA LEFFLAND

I think it's difficult to say if fiction as a whole is growing more realistic,
more concerned with historical and nonfictional elements. With the publication
of ''In Cold Blood'' and ''Armies of the Night'' the nonfiction novel came into
existence, and now we have in addition a genre in which historical figures do
the work of fictional characters, such as in ''Ragtime,'' ''The Ghost Writer''
and ''Sophie's Choice.'' There's also the fact of the popularity of such
fictionalized histories as ''Roots'' and ''Shogun.'' All of which would seem to
point to a definite trend toward ''reality'' - yet, after more than a quarter
century of surreal black comedies, of fabulists and fantasists, the mythic and
metaphor ic, there's no evidence that the Pynchons, Hawkses, Barths, Barthelmes,
Burroughses and Vonneguts are closing down shop; and not too long ago ''The
WorldAccording to Garp'' was received with what can only be described as more
than ope n arms. I would then think that serious American fictionwill continue a
very mixed bag of fantasists, factualists and traditionalis ts. As to whether or
not we're living in a Golden Age ofthe American Novel - probably no age, gold or
otherwise, can be identified as such until it has receded well into the past.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Joyce Carol Oates photo of John Barth photo of
Norman Mailer photo of Scott Spencer photo of Alan Saperstein (page 30) photo of
Jayne Anne Philips (p age 30) photo of Ella Leffland (page 3 0)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ENVIABLE HEROES

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1133 words


FAULTLINES By James Carroll.  248 pp. Boston: Little, Brown. $11.95.
THEGHOSTSOFAFRICA By William Stevenson.  400 pp. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich. $12.95.
HISMAJESTY'SAGENT By David Shahar.  Translated By Dalya Bilu.  392 pp. A Helen
and Kurt Wolff Book.  New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.  $14.95.

By STANLEY ELLIN

EFLECTING on these three novels I was struck by the thought that the word
''glamorous'' applies quite strictly to th eir protagonists: Each is chari
smatic and adventuresome, and each, as my dictionary requires, is engaged in
''unusual activity such as to arouse envy.''

In ''Fault Lines,'' James Carroll presents us with three people who are the
points of a triangle bound to implode. The mover and shaker of this trio is
Cheney McCoy, celebrated and talented star of stage and screen, who involves
himself so intensely in his stage roles that he comes to live them offstage.
Considering that the role he's currently rehearsing is that of Richard III, some
of whose less lovable traits Cheney already shares, it's clear that those
treading on his self-declared prerogatives are going to face retribution sooner
or later.

The two marked for it are David Dolan, an antiwar activist who had taken refuge
in Sweden during the Vietnam War and who has now secretly returned to the United
States; and Eddie McCoy, Cheney's wife (from whom he's separated) and also the
widow of David's brother Brendan. Hostage to everyone's fortune is little Bren,
Eddie's child by her first husband, but so ad ored by Cheney that he formally
adopted the boy and, despite his sep aration from Eddie, now feels he has a
powerful claim on him. Inevita bly, all wind up together on an isolated Maine
island where a lifetime of accounts must be settled for each one.

This material could trip up many an author, but Mr. Carroll deals with it
masterfully. The characters are shown in depth, are always plausible and, even
in Cheney's case, sympathetic. And while the climax -actually a dual climax - is
a shade contrived, I found the story gripping from start to finish.

*

For his enviable hero of ''The Ghosts of Africa,'' William Stevenson goes right
to history and comes up
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Stanley Ellin frequently reviews fiction in these pages. His most recent book is
''The Specialty of the House and Other Stories, 1948-1978.''
with something special, namely Col. Paul von Lettow-Worbeck, more often recorded
as von Lettow. During World War I, von Lettow was leader of the scanty German
forces in German East Africa that were pitted against the troops of British East
Africa. Supported by a handful of regulars and untrained natives, he managed
through brilliant guerrilla tactics to stymie his adversaries through the four
years of the war.

Add to this that von Lettow, although Junker born and bred, had political
sensibilities far ahead of his time: a concern for the native populations (his
daring to arm them was regarded as madness); a respect for the burgeoning
feminist point of view; and a sympathy for that Zionist wing, which saw in
colonial Uganda its Promised Land.

In a concise, well-written epilogue to the novel Mr. Stevenson demonstrates what
a fine biography he might have produced from this material. As novelist,
however, he offers wooden characters speaking wooden dialogue. And, despite his
apparently exhaustive research through the voluminous records of these dramatic
and colorful events, Mr. Stevenson also fails to convey a sense of the period's
texture.

Scene after scene that should have been lit by incandescent bulbs and
accompanied by a waltz or foxtrot is described anachronistically - as if it were
bathed in fluorescent light and filled with the beat of jazz or hard rock. Thus
a British officer wants to ''liberate'' a fine clock. Von Lettow finds his
mistress ''feisty.'' Chief Obowe of Uganda is admiringly called ''Big O.'' A
flossy British officer says of the war: ''Wham! Bam! Over by Easter,''
suggesting that Mr.  Stevenson had not for an instant thought how odd this
sounds from the lips of a Sandhurst man in 1915. And by what exception to
linguistic logic is von Lettow strangely designated Kommandeur rather than
Kommandant or Befehlshaber?

Too bad, as is the distortion of characters and events for mass market melodrama
and sexual titillation. Von Lettow deserves much better than this, and perhaps
Mr. Stevenson himself, who did so well in his book ''A Man Called Intrepid,''
will some day deliver a biographical tribute without trimmings. I can only hope
so.

*

The title of David Shahar's novel, ''His Majesty's Agent,'' may suggest Ian
Fleming, but there is nothing James Bondian about this kaleidoscopic rendering
of several lives bound together through some 30 years of Palestinian history
from World War II to the Yom Kippur war.

Espionage and terrorism are here, of course, but are only elements in what is
essentially a wide-ranging and affectionately sardonic remembrance of things
past. The narrator, who as a child was close to a pair of star-crossed lovers -
Heinrich Reinhold (magnetic and mysterious young soldier) and Tamara Koren
(exotic and mysterious wife of an Israeli businessman) - is moved to search out
their t rue identities an d natures decades after they have dropped from sight.

In the course of this, we relive much of the modern history of the Near East
from the inside and are introduced to a marvelously varied cast of characters.
And to Mr. Shahar's credit, he never descends to the stereotypical or
ideological, so that in the end what remains most vivid to the reader is not
politics but people. In this, David Shahar, one of Israel's most esteemed
writers, would seem to provide a lesson for all those outside his country who
choose to deal with it in fiction.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER;
THE EARLY '60S LIVES

BYLINE: By JOSEPH CATINELLA

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 35, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1034 words

DATELINE: MONTCLAIR


THEATRICALLY, Herb Gardner's ''A Thousand Clowns'' was one of the rebel yells of
the early 1960's, a nonconformist cry to avoid the flannel suited complacency of
the Eisenhower years, to run barefoot in the park (with or without Neil Simon)
and to flee the clutches of organization men and corporate ''me-tooism.''

No matter if the decade was to be clouded by Vietnam, the 1968 Chicago
convention riots or the hallucinatory skirmishes at Woodstock. For a brief hour,
anyway, everything looked like Camelot.

In 1980, however, we can watch Mr. Gardner's play dispassionately and note how
smartly it straddles ideas of personal freedom with a sense of caring for the
people we love.

In the Whole Theater Company's absolutely smashing revival of ''A Thousand
Clowns,'' which will continue through Jan. 4, we run into the rubbery grins and
antics of Murray Burns (Larry Pine), a former scribe for a television serial
called ''Chuckles the Chipmunk.''

Unemployed for five months, Murray doesn't give a fig about the future, lives in
a one-room junk shop on Manhattan's West Side and swaps showbiz gags with his
nephew (Jonah Pesner), an endearing lad who is wiser than Methuselah and 10
times funnier.

They're not really an odd couple because Mr. Pine - an actor who can express
jubilation and heartbreak in a mere sigh - is terribly concerned about the
12-year-old boy, a virtual foundling born out of wedlock by a mother who makes a
career out of divorce and who forgot to give her son a first or last name.

Packed in the serviceable plot are two social workers: a priggish drip (Tom
Costello), who bewails Murray's spotty record as a household provider and
guardian of youth, and a demure miss (Barbara Eda-Young), who gets so involved
in Murray's plight that she bursts into tears, spends the night with him, redesi
gns his flat and dumps Mr. Costello for the cozier Mr. Pine.

Starting each day by chatting with the recorded babble of a telephone weather
girl, Mr. Pine extols his dreary brick-wall of a view or climbs onto a fire
escape and playfully addresses the stony souls who inhabit the building next to
his.

Throughout all this, Mr. Pine is infinitely touching, for he longs to curb his
self-indulgent whims, although he pays lip service to the ''thousand clowns''
who signify those independent buffoons he supposedly envies.

Mr. Pine, whose features are carved out of Mount Rushmore and whose voice blares
with Tin Pan Alley rhythms, is especially hilarious when, baring his teeth and
bulging his eyes, he mimics a chipmunk.

But he also projects a genuine, God-fearing respect for his nephew's unformed
self, plus an old Adam appetite for Miss Eda-Young, who exquisitely girds
herself to shun a nervous breakdown by firming up Murray's quirky character.

Even with the omission of one critical scene between Murray and his
agent-brother, the evening plays beautifully under David Rotenberg's direction.
The leads are surrounded by such good performers a s Mr.  Costello (in his
chocolate suit and shoes, he's a crisply over-baked Brownie), by Apollo Dukakis
as the brother who is full of sound advice and a bushel of honeydew melons and
by Bill McIntyre as the roly-poly hos t of the ''Chuckles'' program.

With its panoply of wall clocks, Patricia Woodbridge's comic-book set ironically
informs Murray and us that vital, everyday decisions must be made if life is to
become intelligible. Sigrid Insull's witty costumes and Marshall Spiller's
charmingly modulated lighting round out a rousing production.

NEW BRUNSWICK ''Purlie,'' co-produced by the George Street Playhouse and the
Crossroads Theater, will be at the playhouse through Jan. 10. It's a gala
musical send-up of the stereotypes that have plagued the races for centuries
and, as such, both enlightening and enjoyable.

Faithful to most of Ossie Davis's ''Purlie Victorious,'' which was partly
responsible for having new generations of black playwrights taken seriously by
theatergoers, critics and scholars, ''Purlie'' tosses around dozens of cliches
about black mores and packages them in bright, parodic quips and delightful
melodies.

Set in the white-ruled region of Cotchipee County, ''Purlie's'' locale may be
mythical, but its characters have an inner realism that belies their external
trappings. Purlie Jordan, ebulliently played and sung by Jim Cyrus, wants to
salvage his old barn of a church and even integrate it with some of his saner
white brothers.

In the rigmarole of a plot, an Alabama-bred damsel (the petite,
eyelash-fluttering Vickie D. Chappell) is Purlie's ploy to wrench $500 from the
bigoted Cap'n Cotchipee, a Southern fruitcake who cherishes his ''darkies'' as
long as they pick enough cotton to make their master feel like the mighty
fortress of Georgia.

Because of Mr. Davis's libretto, written with Philip Rose and Peter Udell, and
Gary Geld's wonderful turn of gospel, comic and blues songs, ''Purlie'' is
almost as victorious at the George Street Playhouse as when it first wowed
Broadway. And, through Rick Khan's slick direction and Al Perryman's
thigh-slapping, finger-clicking dances, audiences today still welcome its sly
humor and nearfarcical hullabaloo.

When the Cap'n dies, in both the prologue and epilogue, the company is thrilled
to ''Walk Him Up the Stairs.'' Purlie's perversely amusing ode to conquer any
enemy (''The Harder They Fall'') is ignited by Mr. Cyrus with the vocal drive
that gears up his viewers to the happiest kind of pandemonium.

The male and female choruses are vastly entertaining, and Jeffrey V. Thompson
stops the show as a riotous, Uncle Tom field hand who's hip enough to know the
cynical ways of ''Skinnin' a Cat.'' The cast also includes such Crossroads
favorites as Venida Evans, Eugene Lee, Judy Tate and Brenda Thomas.

Daniel Proett's broad-beamed wooden shanty and Linda Reynolds's dowdy or
dandified costumes contribute to a production in which satire, one of the
healthiest of all art forms, reigns supreme.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo from ''A Thousand Clowns''

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Afghan Rebel Says Troops From Vietnam Aid Russians

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 76 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Dec. 14


A rebel source in Afghanistan said over the weekend that Vietnamese troops had
joined Soviet forces in a fifth unsuccessful attempt to capture the rebel-held
Panjshir Valley in northeastern Afghanistan. He said 1,500 Soviet and Vietnamese
soldiers were killed and hundreds of vehicles destroyed.

There was no independent confirmation of new fighting in the valley or of the
presence of Vietnamese troops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RELATIONSHIPS;
WHEN DEATH IS SUDDEN

BYLINE: By Georgia Dullea

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 762 words


SHORTLY after the shooting of John Lennon, his wife, Yoko Ono, responded in a
manner said to be classic in cases of sudden or violent death: "Tell me it isn't
true."

"Every year thousands of new widows and widowers utter such words." said Edwin
Shneidman, professor of thanatology at the Unviersity of California at Los
Angeles.  "Unexpected death of the beloved whether due to heart attack,
assassination, suicide, automobile or airplane accident catches people with
their psyches down."

When death is expected, according to those who study or counsel the bereaved,
there is time to explore feelings about the dying person.  There is time to
disengage, to gear down as truck drivers do when descending a steep hill.  The
landing is not a total shock.

But when death comes suddenly, violently, the psyche acts to blunt the shock by
denying the tragedy.  In the Lennon case, mental health professionals point out,
published reports quoted Roosevelt Hospital's director of emergency service as
saying that his widow refused to accept his death "for quite a while, for
several minutes."

"Denial becomes your chief mechanism at this point," said Anne Rosberger, who,
as executive director of Manhattan's Bereavement and Loss Center has counseled
many survivors of violent death.  In two ofher cases, the widows of men who had
been gunned down by strangers managed to come to terms with the deaths when
counseled together, she said.

While not presuming to read Miss Ono's mind, those who deal with violent death
note that it is not unusual for survivors to take hold, as she did soon after
the killing by issuing a public statement and plans for the silent vigil.

This is a sign that the survivor has entered what Dr.Robert Jay Lifton, the Yale
psychiatrist, calls the period of "psychic numbing." "In situations of great
pain and loss," he said, "this is an early and strong defensive pattern because
one can't handle the kinds of emotions stimulated by the situation."

The period of numbness is said to last about two months in many cases.  "It's
the only phase we have been able to get timing on," said Jane Slaven-Simdorn, a
social worker in New York who has studied the impact of suicides on California
families.  "After that, the process is a very individual thing.  In general, it
takes two years before survivors are ready to put the dead person in their
histories."

Not only is the initial shock more traumatic, but the entire grieving process
becomes intensified in the case of violent death, according to Dr.Ari Kiev,
associate professor of psychiatry of New York Hospital - Cornell Medical Center.

Feeling of loss, separation, guilt, anger and loneliness are he ightened, he
noted, as the survivor relives the moments before th e tragedy and attempts to
rewrite them.  ("If only I had jumped in the way.  If only we had stopped for
coffee.")

Dr.Kiev and others stress that well-meaning friends may add to the bereaved
person's pain by looking for "the positive side when, in fact, there really
isn't any positive side to murder." Rather than uttering platitudes ("He lived a
full life") they suggest that friends offer "plain chicken soup" or emotional
support and a ready ear.

"This is not an intellectual process," Dr. Kiev said.  "The person has to be
able to express feelings.  Since those feelings are uncomfortable ones to
express as well as to hear, friends tend to start talking to shut off
communication.  They don't want to listen."

What is advised in most cases is a trained listener, a therapist, to guide the
survivor through the phases of grieving.  Those who try to go it alone may
become frozen in one of the phases and, as a result, develop phobic reactions,
become litigious, or, as is most common, fall into a deep depression.

Medication, while useful in treating other forms of depression, is not
necessarily the answer when depression results from such a death, psychiatrists
say.

Dr. David V. Forrest, who, as a combat psychiatrist in Vietnam, treated cases of
"survivor guilt" among servicemen who lost buddies in action said: "Most
sedatives and minor tranquilizers interfere with the working through of the
mourning process.  Although it's terribly painful, a person needs his full
emotional and intelectual resources and bodily health to go through the process.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section C; Page 7, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 876 words


Oilers Triumph, 22-3, and Tie for Lead in A.F.C.'s Central Divison

GREEN BAY, Wis., Dec. 14 (AP) - Earl Campbell rushed for 181 yards and two
touchdowns and Chester Marcol, signed as a free agent by Houston yesterday,
kicked a 27-yard field goal as the Oilers scored a 22-3 victory over the Green
Bay Packers today.

The triumph, coupled with Cleveland's loss to Minnesota today, left the Oilers
tied with the Browns for first place in the American Conference's Central
Division. The Pittsburgh Steelers also won and remained a game behind.

If Houston wins next week it is assured of at least a wild-card berth and pos
sibly the division championship if Cleveland loses. If the Oilers lo se, they
could still win the division title if the Browns lose, and could get a wild-card
spot if New England is beaten by the Saints .

Campbell, who carried 36 times, scored from a yard out 7 minutes 16 seconds into
the game after a 46-yard run by Rob Carpenter. Marcol, who was released by the
Packers Oct. 8, missed the extra-point attempt. But he made a 27-yard field goal
with one second remaining in the first half to give the Oilers a 9-3 lead.
Campbell Credits Wilson

Campbell later capped a 66-yard, nine-play drive when he raced 24 yards for
Houston's second touchdown with 3:27 to play. He increased his league rushing
lead to 1,731 yards, his single-season high as a pro.

After the game Campbell credited his backfield partner, Tim Wilson, who did not
carry the ball all day.  ''Tim Wilson was my eyes today,'' said Campbell. ''I
was just supposed to go where he was. He hit most of the holes for me, and I
just followed him through,''

''It's a pleasure just to be in the same backfield with Earl,'' Wilson said.
''He's the best. I get a better feeling blocking for him than I do running.''

''Earl has something I've never seen in a running back.'' he said.  ''He has the
ability to keep going when it looks like he's down and out and doesn't have
anything left. Somehow he finds more.''

The Oilers also scored on the game's last play when John Corker recovered a Lynn
Dickey fumble and ran 43 yards to a touchdown.  The Packers scored on a 28-yard
field goal by Jan Stenerud 2:27 before halftime, cutting the Oilers' lead to
6-3. The field goal came after Johnnie Gray, a Packer safety, recovered a fumble
by Tim Wilson at the Green Bay 34, and, four plays later, Dickey passed 43 yards
to Ron Cassidy to the Oiler 13.

The Oilers stopped two other Packer threats. Vernon Perry intercepted a Dickey
pass at the Green Bay 9 late in the first quarter, and the Oiler linebacker, Ted
Washington, recovered a fumble by Gerry Ellis at the Houston 12 early in the
final period.

Steelers 21, Chiefs 16

PITTSBURGH, Dec. 14 (UPI) -Rocky Bleier, playing his final game at Three Rivers
Stadium, raced 11 yards today for a fourth-quarter touchdown that lifted the
Steelers to a 21-16 victory over Kansas City and kept their slim playoff hopes
alive.

Jack Hamm intercepted a pass by Bill Kenney deep in Pittsburgh territory late in
the fourth quarter to secure the Steelers' victory.  The Steelers now stand at
9-6, a game behind Cleveland and Houston in the A.F.C. Central. Pittsburgh can
make the playoffs only with a wild-card berth. For that to happen, the Steelers
must beat San Diego next week, New England must lose to New Orleans, the Raiders
must beat the Giants and the Browns and Oilers must win. That would leave the
Steelers in a tie with the Chargers for a wild-card spot, the only such tie they
would win.

The Chiefs fell to 7-8 and were eliminated from the playoff picture.  Bleier, a
decorated Vietnam veteran who came fighting back from serious war wounds to star
with the four-time Super Bowl champions, was given a standing ovation by the
crowd of 50,013 after he scored the touchdown that capped the Steelers' comeback
from a 16-7 thirdquarter deficit. He was given a second standing ovation when he
was removed from the game with 7 seconds to play.

''Everybody kind of grabbed me, congratulated me and said, 'It's been a
pleasure,''' Bleier said, recounting the moments after his score. ''I said,
'Hey, you've got to put up with me at least one more week.'

''During the national anthem of every game I've ever played in I say a prayer.
Today was so special since it's the last time I'll ever play here. I thank the
good Lord for letting me play here, for letting me use my talents, for letting
me be part of something that hopefully will go down in history.

Terry Bradshaw completed a 9-yard touchdown pass to Lynn Swann in the first
quarter and combined with Theo Bell on a 13-yard scoring pass that began the
Steelers' fourth-quarter comeback.

It was Bradshaw's own mistakes, however, that had put the Steelers in the hole.
Kansas City used his three turnovers to score field goals.

Bradshaw's first interception, grabbed by Gary Barbaro, led to a 36-yard field
goal by Nick Lowery in the second quarter to narrow Pittsburgh's halftime lead
to 7-3.

Dino Mangiero intercepted a Bradshaw pass in the third period and Lowery
followed six plays later with a 22-yard field goal. Later that same period,
Mangiero recovered a Bradshaw fumble and four plays later Lowery kicked a
50-yard field goal for a 16-7 Kansas Cit y lead.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AMY HURWITZ IS MARRIED TO LOUIS GORDON, BROKER

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 5; Society Desk

LENGTH: 114 words


The marriage of Amy Louise Hurwitz daughter of Mr. and Mrs.  Nathaniel H.
Hurwitz of Great Neck, L.I., to Louis A. Gordon, son of Mrs. Nash Gordon of New
York, and the late Mr. Gordon, took place yesterday afternoon at Temple Emanuel
in Great Neck. Rabbi Robert Widom performed the ceremony.

The bride is a graduate of Goucher College and a sportswear buyer in the home
office in North Bergen, N.J., for Diana Shops, a subsidiary of W. R. Grace &
Company. Her father is a real-estate consultant in New York.

Mr. Gordan attended the University of Oklahoma and served with the Marine Corps
in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 15, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. TROOPS GET LESSONS IN DESERT WARFARE IN EGYPT

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1252 words

DATELINE: FORT CAMPBELL, Ky.


In their 10 days in the desert, American soldiers on their first training
mission in Egypt were surprised to learn that assault helicopters could fly
unseen but that pilots tired more quickly there than elsewhere. They discovered
that motorcycles were good for reconnaissance but that radio range was cut in
half.  They had to revise their ground tactics, but leaders found that
controlling platoons and companies was easy because they could see so far.

The soldiers were stunned by the vast, barren space of the desert but discovered
that they could find places to hide. They saw that their camouflage battle
fatigues and their sandbags were the wrong color and that foxholes had to be dug
specially.

The sand, fine but coarse and driven by a relentless wind, got into everything.
It gummed up rifles and machine guns, eroded rotor blades on helicopters,
clogged filters in jeeps and trucks, jammed radio switches, and, late in the
exercise, may have caused diarrhea because so much had infiltrated into the
food.

The exercise, known as Operation Bright Star, was the first overseas venture for
the new Rapid Deployment Force. It involved 900 soldiers in a reinforced
battalion from the 101st Airborne Division here, along with 600 members of the
Air Force and the deployment group's headquarters. The operation, which took
place last month, was estimated to have cost $25 million.

Helicopters Suited to Desert

They returned from Egypt just before Thanksgiving and have since been sorting
out the lessons learned in the desert for an Army whose middle-grade officers
and senior sergeants fought in the jungles of Vietnam and then prepared for a
war in the plains, forests and mountains of Europe.

''We learned a thousand new things, mostly little things,'' said Maj. David H.
Ohle, an operations officer. ''We could spend months, or a year, in the desert
out West and not learn as much as we did in Egypt.''

Maj. Charles T. Chase, a combat support officer, said that ''maintenance was a
nightmare, but there are ways to beat the sand and we learned them.''

Perhaps the most important lesson learned was that helicopters, the main means
of transportion for this division, were suited to war in the desert, even
against an adversary armed with tanks.
Mobility Is Key

''We found out that we can kill tanks on our own terms as long as we have
ammunition,'' said Lieut. Col. W.W. Hunter, another operations officer. ''The
guy with the most mobility and who uses it the best will win.''

The commander of a troop-carrying helicopter company, Maj. William A. Glennon,
said, ''We can fly and navigate in the desert and stay hidden. That was the
biggest revelation I had.''

The desert at first appeared flat. But both helicopter pilots and infantrymen
found gullies to move through and high mounds to hide behind. Major Glennon said
he could fly his helicopter a few feet off the ground at 45 miles an hour and
not leave a ''signature'' of swirling sand because of the way the air flowed
horizontally through the rotor blades.

But the flying was hard. That terrain of undulating white sand all looked the
same and was blurred by the sunlight and the haze of floating dust. There were
no trees or other visual cues.

''You really had to concentrate to pick out the terrain features,'' Major
Glennon said. ''And with all that concentration, the pilots got tired faster.''
Sand Causes Wear

When the helicopters hovered to pick up sling loads, they stirred great storms
of sand that chewed into the rotor blades. ''It was like sand-blasting,'' said
Lieut. Col. Robert S. Young, commander of an Air Cavalry squadron of gunships
and reconnaissance helicopters. ''We had six months' wear in 10 days of
flying.''

The pilots also found more erosion in the moving parts of the engines. A rubber
strip on the edges of the blades cut down on the erosi on there , but Colonel
Young said that better protection for the engines would be needed.

Flying at night was another challenge. ''It was mind -boggling to fly out there
and see no lights on the ground at all,'' Major Glennonsaid.

The soldiers found that they could have used two or three times the six
motorcycles they took for reconnaissance. The four-cylinder dirt bikes with
large mufflers were fast and quiet.

''They got within 50 meters of us and we never saw them or heard them,'' said
Capt. Carl S. Carrano, whose company played the opposition force. The company
used Soviet-made armored personnel carriers borrowed from the Egyptian Army.

Light trucks mounted with antitank guns had little trouble moving so long as
they went from one rocky area to another.
Easy to See Troops

''We could shoot at 3,000 meters,'' said Colonel Hunter, ''then move back and
shoot again. We could eat up enemy tanks as long as we had room.''

The infantry commander, Lieut. Col. H.D. Kuhl, said he could disperse his troops
more than usual to cover more ground and make it harder for an enemy to hit
them. Colonel Kuhl, who served two tours in Vietnam, said that despite the
dispersal he could monitor the movement of the troops. ''It gave me a sense of
security because I could see everyone,'' he said.

Colonel Kuhl and other officers noted that in the desert the avenues of enemy
approach come from 360 degrees. That made the leaders change their tactics from
a linear to a circular front.

Constant maneuvering, especially by helicopters, was the key to success in the
desert, Colonel Kuhl said.  ''Holding ground is not the name of the game out
there,'' he said.  ''It's to shoot and move. If you don't move, you might as
well stay home and watch TV.''

Equipment Is Wrong Color

Sgt. Karl D. Keefer, a squad leader, said the infantrymen found that removing
all the oil from their rifles so that the sand did not stick and then cleaning
them three times a day made them work. But machine guns jammed from overheating
when the oil was removed and if they were oiled they became gummed up and
clogged with sand, he said.

Sergeant Keefer also noted that ''all of our equipment was green when it should
have been brown for the desert.'' In digging foxholes, the American soldiers
learned to put their equipment upwind and throw the sand downwind, no matter
where the enemy was. Usually a soldier puts his equipment behind the hole and
throws the dirt to the front.

The sergeant said: ''I was surprised at how quickly we acclimated over there.
But the breeze was deceiving. It was hot but dry and you didn't feel hot or
sweaty.''

That is why the soldiers at first drank less water than expected.  But after
several became dehydrated or constipated, the orders went out to drink more
water. Sergeant Keefer said it was the squad leader's responsibility to see that
his men drank more when they lined up three times a day for water.

In communications, signalmen found that FM radios lost about half their range
because the sand absorbed radio waves. They also found that batteries that might
last 24 hours at Fort Campbell ran down in two or three hours in the desert.
They said they did not yet know why.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of troops from 101st Airborne Division from
Kentucky in Egypt

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 16, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Prosecution Rests Its Case In Garwood Court-Martial

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 127 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Dec. 15


Military prosecutors, dropping a Vietnamese refugee from their witness list
because he feared reprisals against family members still in his homeland, rested
their case today in the court-martial of Private Robert R. Garwood of the Marine
Corps.

The Government presented 13 witnesses in 11 days of testimony in its case
against the 34-year-old marine, the only serviceman to be court-martialed on
charges of joining forces with the enemy in the Vietnam War.

Private Garwood returned to the United States last year after spending nearly 14
years in Vietnam.  Defense attorneys are scheduled to call their first witness
Wednesday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Robert R. Garwood

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 16, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 952 words


By John Leonard
THE CHINESE. Portrait of a People. By John Fraser. Illustrated. 463 pages.
Summit Books. $14.95.

THAT John Fraser should have been reporting from China for The Toronto Globe and
Mail came as a surprise even to Mr. Fraser. One day he was The Globe and Mail's
drama critic; the next, after an ''immersion'' course in the language, he was on
his way to Peking, where he abided from December 1977 until September 1979. It
is as if The New York Times were to send a book reviewer on the Voyager fly-by
to Saturn. We'd go, of course, but what do we know from rings?

Mr. Fraser was reminded of Evelyn Waugh's novel ''Scoop,'' in which a London
newspaper by accident sends its gardening columnist to cover a war in East
Africa. But Mr. Fraser of The Globe and Mail was more ambitious than William
Boot of The Daily Beast. He wanted, it seems, to be another John Reed, reporting
a revolution while helping to make one. ''The Chinese'' is his gee-whiz
equivalent of Reed's ''Ten Days That Shook the World.''

For Mr. Fraser, it was more like a week, the week of the Xidan Democracy Wall in
Peking, a week of the uninterrupted pasting-up of posters and grievances, before
the authorities got nervous. Mr.  Fraser was right in the middle of it. Thinking
that he had lost a gold signet ring at the Xidan Wall, he put up a poster
himself, a ''dazibao,'' which he concluded with a vague political sentiment. As
a bizarre consequence, he was invited to address the teeming masses in Tienanmen
Square.

Maneuvers at the Wall

Robert Novak, the syndicated columnist, was also mixed up in the Xidan events,
although his role deserves an Evelyn Waugh to render it. Essentially, Chinese
''democratic activists'' put their grievances to Mr. Fraser in the form of
questions, which questions he turned over to Mr. Novak, who then asked some of
them in an interview the next day with Senior Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping. Mr.
Deng's enigmatic answers were relayed by Mr. Novak to Mr. Fraser, who went back
to the Wall and read a statement that encouraged the activists.

There followed several nights of free-speaking and general commotion. Mr. Fraser
was set upon by police bullies. The activists would later be tried and convicted
of subversion, when they didn't just disappear. And the Wall was no longer
Democratic.

But the young Mr. Fraser's notoriety - the Chinese called him Fu Ruizhe -did
help him climb over another sort of wall, the one between Westerners and
natives. He succeeded in making friends with a number of Chinese, most of whom,
to be sure, victims of the Cultural Revolution for which Mao Zedong's widow,
Jiang Qing, and the Gang of Four are said to be solely responsible.

Mr. Fraser has a lot to say about the Cultural Revolution, which he managed to
miss in Toronto. It was, we are told, horrible. No doubt, although Mr. Fraser is
innocent of statistics. It is easy enough to imagine the self-righteousness of
adolescents deployed against a bureaucracy, with a license from on high to stamp
out ''bad elements.'' But how high up was ''on high''? Mr. Fraser seems to agree
with the widow Jiang, the ''White-Boned Demon,'' that Mao himself unleashed the
''left wing deviationist thinking'' in a power play.

This is the same story we've been getting daily in the ''Doonesbury'' comic
strip, although G.B. Trudeau is more amusing on the subject than Mr. Fraser. Mr.
Fraser is at his best reporting on what he has actually seen -the tummult at
Democracy Wall, the situation in repressed Tibet, the ''model Cambodia atrocity
village'' the Chinese maintained for visiting journalists, gambling and
firecrackers, rural communes, movies and ballet, daily life in the foreigners'
compound, etiquette, the vicissitudes involved in getting a story straight. This
is his John Reed aspect.

Given to the Oracular

He has, however, another aspect. Self-described as talkative, opinionated,
impetuous and ''snotty,'' he is also given to the oracular. He is not the least
bit diffident about reading the dead Mao's mind. After a brief visit, he
pronounces all of North and South Vietnam a ''Gulag.'' A week in Taiwan is all
he requires to sum up the divided legacy of Sun Yat-sen. Yes, we are told, there
is crime on the mainland. There is also racism. Nevertheless, they are better
off than they were before. Still, Westerners who entertained the Chinese
revolution as a pure project of noble discipline merely fantasize out of
personal need. Even as there is a nonconformist democratic ''germ'' in the
Chinese, there is a totalitarian ''germ'' in the West. And so on.

There is no reason to doubt any of this. Nor is there much reason to believe it
automatically, either, when a reporter doesn't bother to do what reporters do
best - collect the facts. How many crimes, of what sort? How many political
prisoners? How many liquidations?  Compare crop yields and pig-iron production.
Attempt a head count of the activists. It is not enough to generalize as you are
drowning in a billion people. John Reed died before the first Soviet purge; he
had an excuse.

When Mr. Fraser is being John Reed, he is a brash delight, and we are introduced
to individuals extraordinary in their variety and courage. When he is being
Oswald Spengler, by cablegram, he might as well be writing a gardening column or
reviewing a book as twitchy as the one he has written.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 17, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
STEELY VETERAN OF NIXON DAYS

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1987 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 16


Twelve years ago, the career of Alexander M.  Haig Jr. was at something of a
standstill. A 44-year-old Army colonel, he had seen little combat and seemed
years away from promotion. Mr. Haig has still not commanded a division, but
since then he has been vice chief of staff of the Army, chief of staff of the
White House, commander of NATO forces in Europe and president of the United
Technologies Corporation.

Until today, when he was selected by President-elect Ronald Reagan to be
Secretary of State, Mr. Haig owed his meteoric rise primarily to one man:
Richard M. Nixon.

Among those who have known him along the way, there are two basic views of Mr.
Haig's personality. To some, he is brilliant, diplomatic and an organizational
wizard. To others, he is manipulative and ruthless.  But all agree on three
adjectives: Al Haig is ambitious, hard-working and loyal.

Senate May Shift the Focus

In choosing Mr. Haig for his Cabinet, Mr. Reagan no doubt focused on the
qualities cited by the admirers. But when Mr. Haig comes before the Senate for
confirmation, there may be a different focus.

While he was chief of staff in Mr. Nixon's White House, Mr. Haig refused to
testify before Congressional committees investigating the Watergate scandals on
the ground that his communications with the President were privileged.

After he had left the White House and become commander of NATO forces in Europe,
he maintained his silence about Watergate, saying it was improper for a man in
uniform to speak out on political matters.

Even when he had retired from the Army and had embarked on a nationwide speaking
tour to test the waters for a run for the Presidency, Mr. Haig continued to
refuse to talk about the subject.  His resolve not to discuss Watergate, he told
a recent interviewer, was based on ''an intellectual conviction that, I think,
has served me well and the nation well.''

Questions From Senators

Now that he has been nominated to be Secretary of State, Mr. Haig apparently
will have to break that resolve of silence. Democratic Senators have said that
they will press Mr. Haig for details about Watergate during his confirmation
hearings.

Why, the Senators want to know, did Mr. Haig arrange for the Federal Bureau of
Investigation to place wiretaps on the telephones of Government officials and
journalists? Did he approach Vice President Gerald R. Ford about pardoning Mr.
Nixon before the Nixon resignation? Why was he not more forthcoming with
Congressional investigators and the Watergate special prosecutor? Why did he
advise Mr. Nixon not to tell the full truth?

In California today, Mr. Reagan said that he was well aware of the questions
that would be raised in the confirmation hearings, but the President-elect
asserted that he was ''deeply convinced'' that Mr.  Haig had the personal
qualities needed for the job.

Mr. Haig's ambition and appetite for work were apparent from early age.
Alexander Meigs Haig Jr. was born in Philadelphia Dec. 2, 1924, and was reared
in that city's suburbs. His father, a lawyer, died of cancer when he was 10,
leaving the family in decidedly modest financial circumstances. While attending
parochial and public schools, the boy almost always had a job, delivering
papers, working in the post office, acting as a security guard in a department
store.

According to his family, Al Haig had always wanted to be an Army officer and,
after a year at Notre Dame, he fulfilled his dream and won appointment to the
United States Military Academy.

The first two decades of his life in the Army were hardly extraordinary. He
graduated from West Point 214th in a class of 310.  He served as a junior aide
to General MacArthur in occupied Japan, where he met and married Patricia Fox,
the daughter of a senior Army officer. They have three grown children.

After serving a tour in Korea and winning a master's degree in international
relations from Georgetown University, Mr. Haig got his first big break. A
lieutenant colonel, he became a staff assistant in the Pentagon in 1962.

Within two years, he had become a special assistant to Defense Secretary Robert
S. McNamara. Joseph A. Califano Jr., who was also on Mr. McNamara's staff at the
time, recalls Mr. Haig then as the ''ultimate professional.''

Despite his success in the Pentagon, Mr. Haig felt that his career would benefit
from combat duty, so he requested and was given a field command in Vietnam. He
won a Distinguished Service Cross for leading troops in action near An Loc and,
in 1967, he returned to the United States as a full colonel and served as
regimental commander and then deputy commandant at West Point.

Two years later, in January 1969, Mr. Kissinger brought Mr. Haig into the White
House to be his assistant. Mr. Haig's first job was preparing the daily
worldwide security briefing for President Nixon.

Mr. Haig was willing in those days to work as many as 20 hours a day, and Mr.
Nixon and Mr. Kissinger quickly began to rely on him for ever more important
duties. By one count, the President sent Mr.  Haig on 16 fact-finding trips to
Southeast Asia. He was in Paris for the first round of peace talks with the
North Vietnamese, and he led the advance party that planned Mr. Nixon's trip to
China in 1972.

Favored Mining of Haiphong

But it was two specific acts in those years on Mr. Kissinger's staff that are
likely to be most carefully scrutinized during Mr.  Haig's confirmation hearings
- his role in having wiretaps placed on the telephones of officials and
journalists and his advice to Mr.  Nixon on the bombing of North Vietnam at
Christmastime in 1972.

In 1969, the Nixon Administration in general and Mr. Kissinger in particular
became disturbed about unauthorized leaks of information.  In an effort to plug
the leaks, wiretaps were placed on the telephones of 17 individuals, including
members of Mr. Kissinger's staff, other officials and reporters. Mr. Haig went
to the F.B.I.  and personally requested the taps on 14 of those people. In 1970,
Mr. Haig asked the F.B.I. to tap four other individuals, including a top State
Department officer.

In testimony in 1974 before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Mr. Haig
declared that Mr. Nixon had given him the names of four persons to be tapped and
that the rest of the names had come from Mr. Kissinger. Mr. Haig said that in
going to the F.B.I. he was carrying out an assignment.

In 1972, Mr. Haig, then one of Mr. Nixon's foremost advisers on Southeast Asia,
encouraged Mr. Nixon to bomb Hanoi and place mines in Haiphong harbor, actions
that were subsequently criticized at home and abroad as excessive. Mr. Haig has
said, however, that he is ''happy to accept'' his role in the bombing and
believes that the advice he gave was correct.

While on Mr. Kissinger's staff, Mr. Haig won two promotions, to brigadier
general and major general. In early 1973, Mr. Nixon made him vice chief of staff
of the Army, passing over 240 more senior generals. Thus, in four years on the
White House staff, Al Haig had risen from colonel to four-star general. Few
military officers have ever risen in rank so fast, especially if, like Mr. Haig,
they had never commanded a division.

At the time, Mr. Haig's appointment seemed to be the capstone of a military
career, but it was to last for only a few months. In April 1973, with new
Watergate disclosures breaking daily and a Senate investigation of the scandal
about to begin, President Nixon's two top aides, H.R. Haldeman and John D.
Ehrlichman, resigned under fire. A few days later, Mr. Haig was brought back to
the White House, this time to be chief of staff.

In his memoirs, Mr. Nixon called Mr. Haig ''steady, intelligent and tough'' and
said he had chosen the general to head the White House staff because ''what he
might have lacked in political experience and organizational finesse he made up
in sheer force of personality.''

Mr. Haig needed all his talents during the next six months. The existence of the
White House tapes was disclosed, the Watergate special prosecutor, Archibald
Cox, was discharged, and Vice President Spiro T. Agnew was forced to resign.

Mr. Haig had been back in the White House for less than a month when, on June 4,
1973, he and Mr. Nixon discussed how to respond to allegations being made by
John W. Dean 3d, the former White House counsel. According to a tape recording
of the Nixon-Haig discussion that became public during the impeachment
proceedings, Mr. Haig advised Mr. Nixon to duck questions about the allegations
by saying, ''you just can't recall.''

An Order From the Commander

In October, Mr. Haig tried several times to get Mr. Cox to limit his inquiry.
When the special prosecutor refused, Mr. Nixon instructed Mr. Haig to have Mr.
Cox discharged. Attorney General Elliot L. Richardson refused to dismiss Mr. Cox
and resigned. Mr.  Haig then called William D. Ruckelshaus, Mr. Richardson's
deputy, and, according to later testimony, told Mr. Ruckelshaus that he must
obey the President's instructions because, ''Your Commander in Chief is giving
you an order.''

Most accounts of Mr. Nixon's last days in office depict Mr. Haig as virtually
running the White House, helping Mr. Nixon defend himself against the enveloping
charges and eventually persuading the President that he had to resign.

Leon Jaworski, the second Watergate special prosecutor, once described Mr. Haig
as trying ''to placate me while helping Nixon frustrate me in the search for the
truth.''

In his memoirs, however, Mr. Jaworski was more charitable. ''I do not believe he
ever lied to me,'' he wrote of Mr. Haig. ''He drew some conclusions that went
far afield, and I told him so. But he had a goal: to keep his President in
office. And he tried.''

Recently, Mr. Jaworski, who supported Mr. Reagan's candidacy, described Mr. Haig
as the ''hero'' of Watergate for convincing Mr.  Nixon that he had to resign.

Watergate, the Toughest Battle

For Mr. Haig, the Watergate period period was the trial of his life. ''There is
nobody in the White House who has suffered more from walking close to Richard
Nixon than I have,'' he told an interviewer. ''Nothing on the battlefield was as
tough as this. Nor did I ever see more human tragedy. But, if I had to do it
again, I would do it - to preserve the provisions of our Constitution.''

According to some accounts, Mr. Haig went to Vice President Ford before the
resignation to suggest that, if he became President, he issue an unconditional
pardon to Mr. Nixon. Mr. Ford's closest aides have denied those accounts.

In any event, Mr. Haig stuck around the White House for a few months after Mr.
Ford was sworn in. Mr. Ford reportedly considered making him Army Chief of
Staff, but that job would have required Senate confirmation. Unwilling to risk a
confirmation fight, Mr.  Ford made Mr. Haig NATO commander in December 1974.

In Europe, the choice was initially an unpopular one. NATO generals thought Mr.
Haig inexperienced as a combat or staff officer, and European political leaders
were wary of anyone with a Watergate background. By the end of his five-year
tour, he had won over the generals and had earned the friendship and respect of
political officials.

In June 1979, Mr. Haig resigned from the NATO command and retired from the Army.
After a week's vacation, he embarked on a nationwide speaking tour that raised
hundreds of thousands of dollars and served as a way to try the political waters
for a possible run for the Presidency.

In the end, the decided that he did not have the political base to run for
office, and he accepted the presidency of the United Technologies Corporation in
Hartford, Conn.

Last April, Mr. Haig underwent open heart surgery in which three veins from his
thigh were used to bypass three blocked heart arteries. He has said that the
operation was ''completely successful,'' and he resumed his duties at United
Technologies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Alexander Haig

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 17, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN NAMES HAIG TO STATE DEPT. POST; BATTLE IS EXPECTED

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1166 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 16


President-elect Ronald Reagan today nominated Alexander M. Haig Jr., a retired
Army general, as Secretary of State and Raymond J. Donovan, a construction
company executive, as Secretary of Labor.

In a prepared statement, Mr. Reagan said Mr. Haig and Mr. Donovan were ''united
in their determination to send a signal to the world that America is on the
march again - that our foreign policy will be clear, consistent and strong and
that our domestic policy will be one of common sense, fairness and equality of
opportunity.''

The selection of Mr. Haig, former commander of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization forces, appeared certain to become one of Mr.  Reagan's most
controversial actions as President-elect.

Challenge to Haig Planned

Senior Democrats in the Senate announced that, before voting to confirm him as
Secretary of State, they would look into Mr. Haig's role in the Watergate
scandal and the wiretapping of various persons during the Nixon Administration.

Mr. Haig, who is president of the United Technologies Corporation of Hartford,
was chief of staff for Mr. Nixon in the last part of his Presidency.

On Capitol Hill, Senator Edward M. Kennedy, the Massachusetts Democrat, said Mr.
Haig's selection raised ''serious questions'' that had to be resolved. Senator
Alan Cranston, a California Democrat, went further, asserting that the
nomination ''should not have been made.''

Reagan Confident on Confirmation

In Los Angeles, Mr. Reagan told reporters that he expected no difficulties in
winning confirmation for Mr. Haig.  ''I know that the Senate will look at
everyone that I appoint,'' he said, ''but I am deeply convinced that General
Haig has the qualifications for the job, and that there is nothing uninvented
that could be brought up against him.''

The President-elect made his comments before visiting his barber in Beverly
Hills. He said he had chosen Mr. Haig ''because of the respect he has, and is
held in, by foreign leaders, particularly in Europe, his knowledge of world
affairs, his integrity,'' adding, ''And I didn't do this without confirmation
myself by men who have been much closer and know him better than I do.''

Mr. Haig, appearing late this afternoon before reporters outside his home in
Farmington, Conn., said he regarded his chances of winning confirmation as
''very good.''

Haig Ready for Any Queries

''I am very honored and very pleased and very excited to have an opportunity to
serve our nation again,'' he said. ''I have no concerns about my past service to
our country in or out of uniform.  I'm more than ready to try to set the record
straight.''

Asked if he had any ''skeletons'' in his closet relating to Watergate, the
Vietnam War or the pardon of Mr. Nixon, Mr. Haig joked: ''Well, I guess
sometimes I feel like it's Halloween with so many bones rattling about.'' But he
said he was ''ready to answer any questions put to me,'' particularly by Senator
Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the current Senate majority leader, who had
warned that Mr. Haig's nomination might provoke a confirmation fight.

One other sign of a potential confirmation battle came this afternoon when it
was disclosed that Democrats on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee had hired
Terry Lenzner, a former Senate Watergate investigator, as an investigator of Mr.
Haig's role at the White House.

''If we tried as amateurs to put something together, we'd fall on our face,''
said Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, a member of the foreign relations
panel.

Reagan aides expressed confidence that Mr. Haig would win confirmation, but
agreed privately that the fight could be difficult. They said Mr. Haig and the
Reagan transition organization would very likely hire a special counsel for Mr.
Haig at the confirmation proceedings, which are expected to start in early
January.

By all accounts, Mr. Reagan's decision to pick Mr. Haig came more than a week
ago - after he had won assurances from Republicans in the Senate that he could
be confirmed. But one of those who reportedly assured the President-elect,
Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., of Tennessee, who will serve as Senate majority
leader, acknowledged today that the battle might be hard-fought.

Baker Expects Confirmation

''It is going to be a controversial nomination because of Watergate and Vietnam,
and one of the most picked over, looked at, and examined private lives to come
before the Senate as a Presidential nominee in a long time,'' Senator Baker
said. ''But I can assure you Al Haig will get a fair shake and the hearings will
not be Watergate II. I think Haig will fare well, the committee will report out
the recommendation and the Senate will confirm him.''

In contrast to Mr. Haig, Mr. Donovan received praise from a broad range of
interested parties for his selection as Secretary of Labor.  Mr. Donovan is
executive vice president of the Schiavone Construction Company of Secaucus,
N.J., a union concern at which he has had primary responsibility for labor
relations.

He had been supported for the Cabinet post by the National Right to Work
Committee and other conservative groups, although the International Brotherhood
of Teamsters, the biggest union that supported Mr. Reagan in the election, had
supported Betty S. Murphy, a member of the National Labor Relations Board.

Broad Praise for Donovan

Today Mr. Donovan's selection drew praise from the teamsters, and from leaders
of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations.
Mr. Donovan was also chairman of the Reagan-Bush campaign in New Jersey, where
he waged an aggressive campaign for blue-collar support.

The announcement of the selections of Mr. Donovan and Mr. Haig was made simply
with the release of Mr. Reagan's statement here and in Los Angeles. According to
James Brady, the transition team spokesman, neither appeared formally for
questions because Mr. Haig has been home ill with the flu, and it was deemed
preferable to have a news conference later on.

The selection of two more Cabinet members leaves five Cabinet positions unfilled
amid signs that Mr. Reagan was continuing to encounter difficulties in pleasing
groups that had made clear their wish to be represented in the Cabinet.

Mr. Reagan's supporters from the South, for example, were reportedly upset that
he had not appointed anyone from that region.  As a result, James Edwards,
former Republican Governor of South Carolina, was described today as almost
certain to become Energy Secretary.

The other unfilled posts are the Secretaries of Housing and Urban Development,
Agriculture, Interior and Education.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Sen. Alan Cranston (Page A32)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 17, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CHOICE OF HAIG SETS STAGE FOR DISPUTE;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 32, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 16


With his two new Cabinet selections, President-elect Ronald Reagan has signaled
his determination to stand firm in the face of a Congressional challenge and has
set the stage for a partisan test of strength over his choice for Secretary of
State.

In the Presidential campaign, some contended that Mr. Reagan sometimes shied
away from political confrontations, but his associates said that criticism from
Senator Robert C. Byrd, the majority leader, had helped firm up his selection of
Alexander M.  Haig Jr. as Secretary of State.

''It's a terrible precedent to set if you jump when someone in the other body
raises an eyebrow,'' asserted Representative Tom Evans of Delaware, the top
Reagan liaison aide with the House of Representatives, referring to the Senate.
''I think the Haig appointment shows decisiveness on Governor Reagan's part. If
the Democrats want to attack it, let them. He's an outstanding gentleman and an
excellent choice.''

By sticking with Raymond J. Donovan, a New Jersey construction executive, as
Secretary of Labor, Mr. Reagan also brooked the disfavor of some unions and
bucked Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, the rising Republican chairman of the
Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee, who backed a rival candidate
preferred by much of organized labor.

Response From A.F.L.-C.I.O.

The Donovan appointment was widely praised by business groups.  Meanwhile, Lane
Kirkland, president of the A.F.L-C.I.O., issued a careful statement, remarking
that he looked forward ''to meeting Mr.  Donovan'' and noting that the Labor
Department's legal mandate was ''to foster, promote and develop the welfare of
the wage earners of the United States.''

Controversies were swirling around two other choices, Donald T.  Regan, the
chairman of Merrill Lynch and Company Inc., tapped as Secretary of the Treasury,
and James G. Watt, a Wyoming lawyer, reportedly slated to be named Secretary of
the Interior.

Ideological conservatives, unhappy with the choice, contend that Mr. Regan faces
potential conficts of interest because his firm has been sued by stockholders
and bondholders for its role in underwriting New York City bonds and a Chrysler
Corporation stock offering. Congressional Republicans are concerned that the
selection of Mr. Watt, an ardent advocate of unfettered private enterprise and
an opponent of many governmental controls, could set off a furor among
environmentalists.

''If that decision has been made, it ought to be unmade,'' commented one
influential Reagan backer in Congress.  But the Haig appointment has touched off
the most persistent criticism, foreshadowing what Senator Howard H. Baker Jr.,
the new majority leader, predicted would be ''one of the early challenges to the
Republican majority in the Senate and the Republican administration.''

Haig Choice Praised Abroad

Abroad and among Republicans, the selection of the former White House Chief of
Staff and Supreme Commander of NATO forces as Secretary of State was praised as
a signal of Mr. Reagan's determination to restore American strength and standing
in the world and to revitalize the Atlantic Alliance.

''Haig is a symbol of a strong America,'' commented Richard V.  Allen, the
principal foreign policy adviser of the Reagan transition. ''Europeans think he
is strong and reliable, His strategic views fit Ronald Reagan's.''

The career Army officer who once was deputy to Henry A. Kissinger when he was
President Nixon's national security adviser brings more foreign policy
experience to the new administration than anyone else chosen for a top-level
job.

But it is precisely his past links to the Nixon White House, to the Watergate
period, to American involvement in Vietnam and the secret bombing of Cambodia,
to the wiretapping of former officials and reporters, and possibly to President
Ford's pardon of Mr. Nixon, which have stirred strong Democratic opposition to
Mr. Haig.

Threat to Harmony Alleged

Senator Alan Cranston of California, the Democratic whip, asserted today that
the Haig nomination ''should not have been made'' and warned that it threatened
the harmony Mr. Reagan has been nurturing in Congress.

The Democrats on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee served notice today that
this was more than rhetoric, by hiring Terry Lenzner, former assistant counsel
on the Senate committee that investigated Watergate, to work on Mr. Haig's
confirmation.

Mr. Byrd's outspoken challenge gave Mr. Reagan pause about Mr. Haig and then
ultimately made him feel compelled to go ahead, Reagan aides said. Senator Baker
began privately checking the Haig record for Mr.  Reagan after a critical column
by Anthony Lewis appeared in The New York Times on Dec. 4, Reagan associates
said.

In an initial report on Dec. 5, Mr. Baker reportedly forecast a controversy over
Mr. Haig but said he knew of nothing to block confirmation. Later, after Mr.
Byrd spoke, the Senator called Mr.  Haig personally to pose some blunt questins,
aides said, and reported afterward to Mr. Reagan that he felt the retired
general could survive the confirmation hearing.

With that assessment in hand, Mr. Reagan decided to go ahead. ''We don't give a
damn what Bobby Byrd and the Democrats say,'' one top Reagan lieutenant said at
the time. ''We think Haig will make it and we're not going to back down under
fire.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 17, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Vague General Haig

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 789 words


The friends who sponsored Alexander Haig for Secretary of State speak of him the
same way his opponents do: ruthless, devious, shrewdly flexible, unquestioningly
loyal to the powerful. He is the ultimate bureaucrat, formed in the military but
turned into an international star by civilians who valued his devotion. Vietnam
and Watergate shaped his career, yet he has never spoken of either with any
intellectual rigor.

Rehearsing a run for President this year, General Haig always called Vietnam the
''sterile'' war, letting hawks and doves impute their own views to him. And he
defended his silence about Watergate - his help to Richard Nixon in stonewalling
the law before finally accepting defeat - as ''a restraining influence on the
hemorrhaging of these things.''

He has advanced by vagueness. General Haig has been murky about his role in
tapping telephones and other White House horrors. He is still suspected of
having bargained for a pardon for Mr. Nixon before yielding the Presidency to
Gerald Ford. His recent speeches were memorized hunks of rhetoric about the
Soviet menace and the erosion of American will, but contained no reliable policy
clues. To the arms treaty with Moscow, his response was: Yes, but.

And that is the most one can say about Alexander Haig's elevation to the top of
Ronald Reagan's Cabinet.

A man of General Haig's intelligence and temperament will surely establish
himself as the center of power in foreign policy making. He will discipline the
State Department and use its talents well. He will prevent the rise of any rival
Kissinger or Haig in the White House, and brook no challenge from the Pentagon.
He will hit the ground running, familiar with many issues - notably the military
balance, the NATO alliance, the Arab-Israeli conflict, the opening to China. He
already knows some of the best policy analysts, diplomats and military
commanders.

Yet General Haig brings only a second-hand knowledge of the poorer nations and a
prejudice that they matter most for their role in the competition against
Moscow. And he has revealed little understanding of international economic
forces. At best, he will practice some of the agility of his former tutor, Henry
Kissinger. But he could also end up propounding grand strategies that aspire to
an imperial American mission and misjudge the opportunities for accommodations.

Given a strong leader, with wise political concepts, Al Haig could be an
effective operator at State. Given Ronald Reagan, who more than any recent
President will depend on his Secretary to shape his course in the world, General
Haig is a high-risk choice.

One can admire Mr. Reagan for recognizing his own limitations and choosing an
expert rather than an amateur. But confessing dependency on an expert who
carries such burdens begins to appear desperate. And this deference will mean
yielding to General Haig's least known qualities - as a global strategist.

Some Senators have vowed a close look at the general's record; his Watergate
role ought to be cleared up once and for all. But this confirmation should turn
on more than history. Americans deserve to know more than anyone yet knows - and
more than he has ever said - about where General Haig would lead them and by
what means.

Raymond Donovan, designated yesterday as the next Secretary of Labor, has none
of the familiar skills of prior secretaries. He's not a union leader, a renowned
labor arbitrator or an academician versed in labor law or economics. He comes
out of the tough construction business in northern New Jersey, where he has made
a fortune. He also demonstrated a talent for money-raising and campaign strategy
during Mr. Reagan's run for the Presidency.

These skills will not help much at Labor, with its complex array of social
programs and national labor relations policy efforts. Mr.  Donovan is new to
Washington, new to any government office. He is said to be a skilled labor
negotiator but has operated in the relatively specialized atmosphere of north
Jersey construction. He has not even met the national union leaders, whose
cooperation will be essential to labor peace.

There is an old Navy term for the truly imponderable: UNK-UNK for
unknown-unknown. Of the ten men Mr. Reagan has nominated so far, Mr.  Donovan
stands out as the ''UNK-UNK'' of the team. This is not to say that he cannot do
a good job - only that he lacks evident qualifications. Then why, beyond
gratitude to a campaign stalwart, did Mr. Reagan appoint him? At the moment,
that remains another UNK.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 17, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
Haig Makes It At Last

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 896 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 16


Ronald Reagan may have the right idea about how to pick his Cabinet - slow and
easy - but he makes it tough on the guys he picks. He seems to think that the
way to stay out of mischief in the next few weeks is to stay out of Washington,
and spend the year-end holidays at home.

Who can blame him? He wants one last look around the California mountains and
the Pacific Ocean before he has to consider the less happy aspects of the rest
of the world.

Leave the Polish question, the hostage question in Iran, and the economic
question at home to Jimmy Carter, he says, for he'll have to struggle with these
devilish problems soon enough. Also, let somebody else explain the Reagan
Cabinet, for every appointment that makes somebody happy infuriates many others,
and he'll be out to lunch when they call to complain.

But there are some problems. Mr. Reagan fiddled with his decision about his
Secretary of State. Maybe George Shultz, who had been in Washington before,
would want the job but he said thanks, but no thanks. Maybe Gen. Al Haig would
be his man, but maybe no, since Haig was involved with Nixon on Watergate,
Kissinger on Vietnam and Cambodia. And then, after an interminable delay,
Governor Reagan said yes.

Haig was his choice, he said on the way to his tailor, and Haig it was, though
Haig did not appear for the announcement. Reagan does these things in peculiar
ways. Bill Simon was supposed to be his first choice as Secretary of the
Treasury, but suddenly drew out or was thrown out - nobody ever learned which or
why.

Then Walter Wriston, the head of Citibank was touted for the Treasury, followed
by reports that he was ''slipping'' because he had some undefined ''conflict of
interest,'' and finally that he was absolutely out of the running because of
some philosophical difference with Reagan. All this came out of Reagan's
headquarters but nobody ever explained quite why. What was odd about all this is
that Wriston never heard a word about any of it from Reagan, who scarcely
recognized him at a party in New York, and Wriston hasn't heard to this day from
Reagan or anybody else in Reagan's transition team what this was all about.

The Reagan transition has been proclaimed by some as the best there ever was -
very canny, very forehanded, very sensible in defining Reagan's philosophy and
then choosing people very carefully. And as usual in this city, there is a
totally different view: that the Reagan transition has been the most expensive
and incoherent transition in memory - occupying a 10-story building with people
who were vague at best about what they were supposed to be doing, and in the
name of a conservative and penny-pinching Administration, spending not only
their $2-million budget, but exceeding it by at least another million.

President Carter has almost disappeared from the scene in Washington these last
few weeks, but in fairness, he has been working night and day to liberate the
American hostages and relieve his successor of this agony.

Nothing could be more untrue than the charge out of Teheran that Jimmy Carter,
having lost the election, has lost interest in the plight of the American
prisoners. In fact, he has been insisting privately that this may be the last
thing he may be able to do before he goes home, even if he has to take
responsibility for a questionable compromise.

The transfer of power from one party to another in the United States is in this
respect both admirable and exceptional. Despite all the vicious charges of the
campaign, all the party battles and predictions of disaster if the other
candidate wins, the vote of the majority has clearly been accepted here, and
every effort is now being made on both sides to act in the national interest.

The officials in Teheran have put what they called their ''final offer'' to
Washington, and have said that the hostages can be released whenever that offer
is accepted. We do not yet know precisely what that ''offer'' is, but we do know
- or so we are told -that Carter has not merely passed it on to Reagan for
decision, but has advised the Reagan people of its contents, and accepted
personal responsibility for trying to get the hostages home, even if he's blamed
for the compromise.

A few critical weeks have been lost while Reagan was trying to make up his mind
about selecting a Secretary of State, but now that General Haig has been chosen,
it will be possible, even before he is confirmed, for him to study the
intelligence reports and provide some guidance to Reagan about how to respond to
the developing crises in Poland, the Middle East and Latin America.

There is little doubt here that Haig will be confirmed as Secretary of State.
Washington is sick of the old arguments over Watergate and Vietnam and would
welcome a moratorium on the vicious debates of the past, including Haig's part
in them.

Reagan has diddled with this appointment to the first Secretary of his Cabinet,
but the 96th Congress has finally gone away, without many regrets here, and Haig
will now have a chance to study the problems he will have to face in the coming
years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 17, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
'Supply-Side' Tax Reductions

BYLINE: By Walter W. Heller

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 937 words


THE new password of the day on the Potomac is ''supply-side economics.'' But
close inspection of its policy prescription - especially on tax cuts - reveals,
first, that most of it is not all that new.

Second, much of what is new - truly new - is simply wrong-headed.  Third, for
all that, a right-headed supply-side program is even more important in the
1980's, when we are trying to subdue 12 percent annual inflation, than it was in
the 1960's, when President Kennedy was using supply-side initiative to try to
preserve price stability (1.2 percent annual inflation) while promoting vigorous
expansion.

Under the catch-all heading of supply-side economics, a great deal of useful
analytical work is going on to develop a new working theory of inflation, to
disentangle the industry-by-industry impact of Government policies, and to
explore the roots of productivity advances and capital formation. A rounded
supply-side policy must embrace all of these areas, and more.

But let's face it - that's not where the action is in supply-side economics.
Most of the furor today is over tax cuts and their impacts on work effort,
savings and investment. And the point of departure of the far-out supply-siders
is the Kennedy tax cut of 1964. It serves as ''proof'' of the otherwise
unsupportable notion that huge personal income tax cuts will generate such a
flow of work, savings and investment that the resulting growth in the economy's
productive potential will more than make up for the initial loss of revenue. In
this connection, the 1964 tax cut is represented as a supply-side spectacular
that paid for itself by expanding the economy's productive capacity.

But the supply-side advocates have it wrong. The Kennedy supplyside initiatives
came primarily in a series of sharply focused measures to stimulate investment
and curb costs in 1961-62. The great tax cut of 1964 was the demand-side
follow-through.

Though we did not have the wit to use that catch phrase, ''supplyside,'' these
early Kennedy measures were vintage supply-side economics:

- Introduction of the investment credit, to this day the backbone of tax
incentives for growth through business capital formation.

- Liberalization of tax depreciation guidelines.

- The monetary ''twist'' designed to make funds available for investment and
reduce long-term interest rates, while holding up short-term rates to cut the
flow of funds overseas.

- The development and introduction of the wage-price guideposts to help insure
that stimulated measures would not run off into wage and price inflation.

With respect to the investment tax credit, President Kennedy noted in his
January 1962 Economic Report that ''it will stimulate investment in capacity
expansion and modernization, contribute to the growth of our productivity and
output, and increase the competitiveness of American exports in world markets.''
Supply-side incarnate.

The shift to demand-side economics came in 1962 when it became painfully evident
that the overburden of taxes was so heavy that the economy could not achieve
prosperity under its yoke. The economy was still running well below its output
potential, and a $12 billion tax cut - in a $600 billion economy - was our
prescription for raising aggregate demand. The tax cuts succeeded, not by
miraculously evoking new supplies of work effort and savings, but by stimulating
demand for goods and services in a slack economy and thereby putting idle
workers and excess factory capacity back to work.

That stimulus, combined with the cyclical recovery already under way, generated
enough revenues to bring the budget briefly into balance in 1965, just before
escalation in Vietnam. But the notion that a tax cut's prompt demand stimulus -
let alone its long-delayed supply stimulus - could generate enough revenue to
pay for itself unfortunately finds no support in the available statistical
evidence.

True, in an unguarded response to a leading question by an exuberant Hubert
Humphrey during a Congressional hearing years ago, I suggested that the tax cut
had indeed paid for itself. But on careful inspection of the hard evidence, I
publicly recanted later. Though well aware of this, the super supply-siders
delight in quoting that earlier slip of the tongue.

Quite apart from misrepresentations of the 1964 tax cut, a fair appraisal of
supply-side tax cuts has to examine their impacts on the supply of work, savings
and investment. In capsule form, one can characterize careful research findings
as follows: the evidence shows an impressive investment response to carefully
targeted investment tax incentives; on work response, research has not yet
established even a sign of the work response - plus or minus - let alone its
magnitude.

Much the same is true of savings: some people are stimulated to save more,
others less, by reductions of tax rates. What we know for sure is that reducing
deficits or increasing surpluses will increase net savings and put funds at the
disposal of the capital markets.

The policy implications of supply-side economics will be examined in a second
article.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Walter W. Heller, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers in the Kennedy
and Johnson Administrations, is a professor of economics at the University of
Minnesota.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CASTRO SAYS REAGAN FOREIGN POLICY WILL POSE A THREAT TO WORLD PEACE

BYLINE: By JO THOMAS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: HAVANA, Dec. 17


Fidel Castro, the Cuban President, said today that he was ready to accept ''the
olive branch'' from the United States, but expressed deep concern that Ronald
Reagan's foreign policy as President would be a threat to Latin America and
world peace.

''If you give us the olive branch, we won't reject it,'' he told 1,800 cheering
guests and delegates from around the world at the Second Communist Party
Congress. But he also warned, ''If you continue the hostility and make
aggression we will respond energetically.''

He said that any military intervention by the United States in Central America
could lead to a ''defeat greater than Vietnam'' for the United States.

''Those who go to kill people in Central America will have to be ready to die,''
he said, adding that ''no one is threatening the United States,'' but no onewill
accept ''the threats of the United States against our lives.''

In a speech that began at 10 in the morning and continued until 10:15 P.M. with
breaks for lunch and dinner, Mr. Castro, for the first time, reviewed Mr.
Reagan's campaign pronouncements about a Western Hemisphere fraught with
uncertainty and danger.

He reaffirmed Cuba's commitment to Communism and said Cuba was ready to work
toward a ''reasonable and constructive agreement'' on Cuban emigration to the
United States.

Mr. Castro warned that Cuba would authorize visas for Cubans to leave the
country any way they could if progress was not made toward resolving several
issues, including the reunion of families, and if the United States continued to
follow what he described as a policy of stimulating illegal immigration.

''Mariel is not resolved, Mariel is simply suspended,'' he said.  ''The United
States created this problem. It is up to them to solve it.''

Mr. Castro said that Cuba has been trying to figure out Mr.  Reagan's views on
world affairs by examining the Republican platform, Mr. Reagan's speeches and
statements by his advisers, but the Cuban President concluded that nobody knows
what Mr. Reagan's plans are.

He ridiculed Mr. Reagan's avowed interest in more armaments for the United
States and a buildup of armed forces as ''simply absurd'' and said it was a
policy that could not be justified in the nuclear age.

After warning against military intervention elsewhere in Central America, Mr.
Castro recalled that Mr. Reagan had talked about the possibility of a new
blocade against Cuba, or the possibility that Cuba might be blockaded in
retaliation against the Soviet Union. He called this view ''repugnant.''

His lengthly speech, given in the auditorium of the Palace of the Convention,
was greeted with tremendous enthusiasm. There were standing ovations in response
to his warnings and statements directed at the United States.

Wearing a dress army uniform of olive green, tie and white shirt rather than his
customary fatigues, Mr. Castro spoke on a stage hung with a red curtain where
protraits of Lenin, Marx, and Jose Marti, the George Washington, of the Cuban
Revolution, were displayed.

He said that during the early months of the Carter Administration it looked as
if some normalization of relations between the two countries might be possible,
but then relations deteriorated.

Mr. Castro attributed Mr. Reagan's victory at the polls to inflation and
unemployment in the United States ''in particular among blacks and young
people'' and a ''feeling of frustration and skepticism among the people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Fidel Castro (Page A1)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PSYCHIATRIST SAYS THAT GARWOOD WAS DRIVEN INSANE BY VIETCONG

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 446 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Dec. 17


A criminal psychiatrist said today that Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marine
Corps was driven insane by torture at the hands of the Vietcong and reduced to
''a child-like, animal-like state'' in which his only concern was survival.

Dr. Emmanuel Tanay of Detroit testified as the first defense witness in the
court-martial of Private Garwood on charges of desertion and collaboration with
the enemy in Vietnam. The psychiatrist said that he believed Private Garwood's
story that he was captured by the Vietcong and tortured.

Dr. Tanay was the first of several psychiatrists the defense planned to call in
an attempt to prove that Private Garwood, who spent nearly 14 years in Vietnam,
cannot be held criminally liable for his conduct in prisoner of war camps in
South Vietnam in the mid@ and late-1960's.

Eight former prisoners of war from those camps have testified that Private
Garwood lived with the camp guards as a comrade, carried a weapon and helped
indoctrinate, interrogate and stand guard over American prisoners.

'Conscience No Longer Functions'

''Mr. Garwood was reduced to a child-like, animal-like existence where your only
concern is your immediate needs,'' said Dr. Tanay, who has worked extensively
with Vietnam War veterans and is himself a survivor of a World War II German
concentration camp.

''The conscience no longer functions. No matter how strong, it ceases to
function,'' he said.  Dr. Tanay said that Private Garwood's insanity led the
soldier to identify both physically and mentally with his captors.  ''It was a
protective device,'' the psychiatrist said. ''To be a Vietnamese, he was not in
danger of being killed.'' Dr. Tanay said that the emotional intensity Mr.
Garwood displayed while relating his Vietnam experiences, as well as the
details, convinced him that the soldier was telling the truth.

Not Making It Up

''I think it would take a novelist to make it up,'' Dr. Tanay said. ''I don't
think he has the intellect or the talent.'' The psychiatrist also told the
military court that at one point he feared Private Garwood might commit suicide.
Dr. Tanay said that Private Garwood appeared highly suicidal in a recent
interview.  ''He said it wouldn't mean dying to him,'' Dr. Tanay said. ''He felt
killing himself wouldn't mean death but meant he would be at peace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WINGING IT IN POLITICS

BYLINE: By Michael Parenti

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 875 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Accounts of ''extremist'' activities abroad and at home are in the news media
daily. In El Salvador, the violent repression perpetrated by rightist
assassination squads and the military against the clergy, trade unionists, and
peasants is depicted in as a struggle between left and right ''extremists,''
while ''moderates'' at the political center supposedly try to maintain peace. In
Greensboro, N.C., Nazis and Klansmen kill Communist Workers Party organizers,
and the episode is reported as an encounter between ''extremists on the left and
right.''

There is a hidden centrist bias in such accounts that is evident not only in the
way facts are reported but also in the concepts used to define facts.

Labels such ''left,'' ''center,'' and ''right'' refer to the political spectrum:
spatial terms used to signify one's position on social, political, and economic
questions. Because of its linear nature, this spectrum can be extended at both
ends to allow for limitless left-wing and right-wing extremes. The extreme, by
definition, is the ''utmost part, utmost limit''; hence, an ''extreme center''
is a contradiction in terms, the extremes of the center being nothing more than
the beginnings of the moderate left and moderate right.

But ''extreme'' has another meaning, one that evokes an image of intransigence
and violence. In news reports and common parlance, this second meaning is
blended with the first and then ascribed to the left and right, but never to the
center.

Similarly, ''moderate'' has a purely quantitative meaning, as in a ''moderate
amount.'' But ''moderate'' also connotes ''fairmindedness'' and ''not given to
excess.'' Again, the two meanings are blended into one, and the political center
is said to be occupied by ''moderates'' who, by definition, cannot be excessive
or immoderate.

Other laudable concepts are associated with centrist ''moderation.''
''Moderates'' in various countries are described as defenders of ''stability.''
But whose stability? For whose benefit?  At whose expense? Centrist moderates
are ''pragmatic,'' ''undogmatic,'' and ''free of ideology'' (a judgment made by
ignoring, say, Chile, where the Christian Democratic centrists supported the
fascist overthrow of a democratic Government). As our unexamined political
vocabulary would have it, the centrists can do no evil, while the immoderate
extremists can do no good.

In truth, those who occupy the extremes of a political spectrum (in accordance
with beliefs about changing the politico-economic order) are not necessarily
extremists in the pejorative sense. And those who occupy the mainstream center
are capable of immoderate, brutal actions.

It wasn't fascists who pursued a genocidal war in Indochina. It was the ''best
and the brightest'' of the political center. These same ''moderates'' supported
the overthrow of popular governments in Guatemala, Indonesia, Iran, and Chile,
and helped install fascist military regimes in their stead.

We might ask what is so extremist about landless peasants and destitute laborers
in countries such as El Salvador taking up arms against repressive economic and
political conditions? What is so moderate about governments that maintain such
conditions for the benefits of big landowners and rich investors?

A glance at much of the third world should tell us that extremism, in the worst
sense of the word, predominates in the status quo, not among those who challenge
the existing stability. Likewise, we can see that the Greensboro murders were
something more than a clash of extremists. Klansmen and Nazis are extreme in
every sense. Racism and repression, violence and murder are their operational
code. The Communist Workers Party victims were union and community organizers
who devoted their efforts to organizing low-income people. The militancy of
their rhetoric hardly places them in the same category of extremism as the
racist, sexist, anti-Semitic Nazis and Klansmen.

Surely our understanding of politics should allow us to distinguish between
racists and antiracists, between those who work with poor blacks and those who
want to exterminate all blacks. But the presumptive label of ''extremism''
imposed by centrists is designed to blur such essential distinctions.

The question of who is and who isn't extremist, then, is far from settled.  The
extremists have long been in power. They have given us Vietnam, Watergate, cold
war II, global counterinsurgency, bloated military budgets, a regressive tax
burden, huge corporate subsidies, and the promise of a rigorous repression of
dissent - all in the name of ''moderation'' and ''stability.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Michael Parenti, a Visiting Fellow at the Institute for Policy Studies, an
independent research organization, is author of ''Power and the Powerless'' and
''Democracy for the Few.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Jets Will Finish on a Silent Note

BYLINE: By GERALD ESKENAZI

SECTION: Section B; Page 22, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 861 words


Jet fans who have been frustrated enough to scream at their television sets will
get no backtalk on Saturday.  That is the day of the no-announcer experiment on
NBC-TV, which will televise the Jet-Dolphin season finale from Miami with
neither a play-by-play announcer nor an instant-analysis color commentator.

Instead, the sounds of football - helmets striking, men grunting, sideline
watchers screaming and the thuds of kicks - will be dominant.

The program will start as a camera, in the role of a fan, moves through the
turnstile to enter the Orange Bowl. It will buy a program. It will walk through
the stands and take a seat.

Hopes for Continuity

''The worst thing is going to be an 80-yard run on the first play from
scrimmage,'' says Don Ohlmeyer, executive producer of NBC Sports. ''The best
thing is three downs and punt, three downs and punt, the first couple of
possessions, so we can establish some continuity.''

In some circles, the telecast has been derided as a gimmick. But to Mr.
Ohlmeyer, it is serious business. He will have 80 staff members at the game,
about 20 more than usual.

''I think that at times announcers are a crutch,'' Mr. Ohlmeyer says.
''Directors let announcers say things that television should be doing visually.
But we'll be doing things in Saturday's game that we should be doing, whether we
have announcers or not.''

Extensive Use of 'Graphics'

That will include an extraordinary amount of ''graphics'' - printed information.
Directors will have to be quick. As soon as a runner gains yardage, for example,
he will have to be identified by a graphic, which will also include the sort of
information an announcer usually gives - how many yards the rusher has picked up
during the game.

Bryant Gumbel, an announcer, will be on hand to help the transition from
commercials to live action. But the rest of the time the only words will be from
the players, on prerecorded cassetes, and from officials, when penalties are
explained.

''Once the ball is snapped, there's no problem,'' says a coproducer, Michael
Weisman. ''But other times will be deadly.'' Mr. Weisman says he has gathered
more than 200 cassettes of players' comments on specific situations. If the
Dolphins' rookie quarterback, David Woodley, completes a touchdown pass to Nat
Moore, Mr. Weisman will play a tape of Woodley's talking about throwing to
Moore.

The sounds of the field will be picked up by four sideline microphones. Regional
telecasts usually have only one, and network games two. A pair of microphones
has also been attached to the goal posts.

NBC says it attempted to go further, trying to get ''space dust'' from the Army.
These acoustical particles were sprinkled on the ground in Vietnam to pick up
sounds of intruders. But the Army did not have time to deliver the dust, which
would have been sprinkled on the grass field.

Meanwhile, the N.F.L. turned down the network's request for buttonsized
microphones that players could wear in their helmets.  That gimmick, however,
will be employed by the defensive captains of Florida State and Oklahoma when
NBC televises the Orange Bowl game Jan. 1

''I don't think this would work on a regular basis,'' says Don Criqui, an NBC
announcer who will not be working at Miami Saturday.  ''People are accustomed to
hearing announcers. One thing I think announcers can do is convey the excitement
of the game.''

The game will, as usual, be broadcast over WCBS radio in New York, with Spencer
Ross doing the play-by-play.  ''I'll have a TV monitor in the radio booth,''
says Ross. ''But really, you've got to talk just as much. It's still radio that
I'm doing. Maybe I'll be aware that some fans have turned on the radio and are
listening to me. So if I see the camera showing the sidelines, I might refer to
the players. But I don't know what's proper in infringing on someone else's
network.''

Acording to one NBC official. production costs for the game will be about
$200,000. Mr. Ohlmeyer says only that NBC will spend more money for this game
''than has been spent for any other football game, except for the Super Bowl.''
And, reflecting on the $5.8 million a year each team in the league receives from
the combined revenue of the three TV networks, he adds, ''We have bought our
independence.''

----

Powell Makes Pro Bowl

Marvin Powell of the Jets was voted to the Pro Bowl squad yesterday. The
offensive tackle was the only player from a losing team to make the offense.

Bruce Harper, meanwhile, was voted the Jets' most valuable player by his
teammates, the first time a specialist had received the honor. The running
back-kick returner leads the league in all-purpose yardage ... Ed Wisneski, the
club's assistant public relations director, is leaving to take a job with a
league publication in Los Angeles.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CAPT. ARCHIE C. KUNTZE, VETERAN OF TWO WARS, DIES IN WISCONSIN

BYLINE: By THOMAS W. ENNIS

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 465 words


Capt. Archie C. Kuntze, who retired from the Navy in 1966 after being accused at
a general court-martial of running a black-market operation while commanding an
American military supply network in Vietnam, died Sunday of a heart ailment at
St. Nicholas Hospital in Sheboygan, Wis.

Captain Kuntze was 60 years old and had lived in Sheboygan, his native city,
since his retirement. He was a member of the Sheboygan Common Council from 1970
until 1978.

Captain Kuntze pleaded not guilty to all charges at the courtmartial. He was
cleared of 15 allegations at the trial in California but he was found guilty on
three specificiations of conduct in Saigon ''unbecoming of an officer and
gentleman.''

His Navy career began in World War II after his graduation in 1942 from the
United States Naval Academy at Annapolis. He also served in the Korean War. He
received 22 decorations.

Key Role in Vietnam

After completing a management course at the Harvard Business School in 1964, he
was put in charge of the Navy's largest overseas command, the Navy Headquarters
Supply Activity in Saigon. He served there from June 1964 until May 1966, the
period of the United States buildup in Vietnam.

In the two-year period, Captain Kuntze became one of the best-known Americans in
Vietnam; he called himself the Mayor of Saigon. As logistics commander, he
controlled the operation of hospitals and ports, operated the post exchanges,
supervised the feeding and housing arriving soldiers and the spending of more
than $100 million in Government funds.

At the top of his career when he seemed to be heading for flag rank, a board of
inquiry recommended a court-martial for Captain Kuntze. He was accused, among
other things, of currency violations, misappropriation of Government funds and
personal indiscretions. He was relieved of command of the Saigon post, which was
disbanded, and he was transferred to San Francisco.

After the court-martial, conducted by three admirals and six senior captains,
Captain Kuntze was dropped 100 numbers on the promotion list.

Served on Sheboygan Council

When he returned to Sheboygan, he did no work other than on the local council,
where he was instrumental in a multimillion-dollar upgrading of city streets and
development of a regional treatment plant for waste water, now under
construction.

Mayor Richard Suscha of Sheboygan said that Captain Kuntze was the ''most
dedicated and hard-working alderman Sheboygan ever had.'' Captain Kuntze is
survived by his wife, the former Mary Ann Steil Baumann, whom he married in
1968, and his mother, Alma Kuntze, and brother, Lon, both of Sheboygan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Capt. Archie C. Kuntze

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
Aircraft Carrier Plan Cleared for Bonding

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 119 words


A three-year effort to make a naval museum out of the Intrepid, a decommissioned
aircraft carrier, advanced yesterday when the Board of Estimate decided the
project would create jobs and tourist revenues for New York City.

Recognition by the board allows the Intrepid Museum Foundation to issue $13.2
million in tax-exempt bonds to finance the 1,000-foot carrier as a museum that
would highlight the ship's role in the development of sea and air power and the
exploration of space.

The foundation hopes to berth the ship at Pier 86, at West 46th Street. The
carrier, which served in World War II, and the Korean and Vietnam Wars, is now
berthed at the Philadelphia Navy Yard.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE

BYLINE: By David Bird and Robert McG. Thomas Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 245 words


Jaycees Name Top 10 Outstanding Young Men for

Year

More top tens. The United States Jaycees have announced their 10 Outstanding
Young Men of America for 1981. In alphabetical order, the winners, all 35 years
old or younger, are: Dr. Thomas Carey, 35, a cancer researcher at the University
of Michigan; Representative Thomas A. Daschle, 34, of South Dakota cited for his
legislative efforts for Vietnam veterans; Sheriff Ronald Donell, 35, of Hancock
County, W. Va., who worked undercover in a successful drive against organized
crime and political corruption; Capt. Johnathan Scott Gration, 29, an Air Force
flying instructor who used a month's leave to help rebuild a hospital in Uganda;
Alan Page, 35, the Chicago Bears defensive back and lawyer, who works to keep
minority youths in school.

Also, Roger Blaine Porter, 34, assistant professor of public policy at Harvard;
Christopher Reeve, 28, the actor best known for his role as Superman who helps
children deal with the stress of broken homes; Maj. Willie Caiaphas Register,
34, an Air Force navigator who founded a council to help orphans in Korea;
Darryl Stingley, 29, the crippled former New England Patriots receiver, who
raises funds to combat crippling injuries, and Brandon Tartikoff, 31, the
president of NBC Entertainment and the youngest division president in the
network's history.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV WEEKEND;
BOXING WITH COMMENT AND FOOTBALL WITHOUT

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 34, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 932 words


AS television gears up for a week of holiday fare, heavily inspirational and
mostly reruns, several offbeat items are on tap.  Tonight at 9, ABC Sports will
carry a tape of the startling Nov. 25 welterweight championship match in which
Roberto Duran suddenly threw up his arms and Sugar Ray Leonard walked off with
the Panamanian's title. The puzzle will be discussed in interviews that Howard
Cosell is scheduled to have with each fighter.

Tomorrow at 12:30 P.M., NBC Sports will offer a football broadcast without the
usual broadcasters. Except for periodic score updates from Bryant Gumble, the
game in Miami between the Dolphins and the New York Jets will rely not on
announcers but on the roar of the crowd and on the scrawl of graphics to keep
the viewer informed of progress on the field. Don Ohlmeyer, the executive
producer, stresses that it is only an experiment - but it's a fascinating one.
Mr.  Cosell and colleagues are reportedly not amused.

Going from rowdy sports to sexy culture, the ''Live at the Met'' series will
feature the complete version of Alban Berg's ''Lulu,'' one of opera's most
incessantly seductive heroines, tomorrow at 8 on Channel 13. Sung in German,
with subtitles for the television audience, the four-hour production features
Teresa Stratas as Lulu and Evelyn Lear as the countess.

Sunday evening brings two made-for-television movies. Getting back into the
inspirational mode, ABC's 9 o'clock presentation is ''A Time for Miracles.''
Written by Henry Denker with the standard ''composite characters and time
compression'' termed necessary for dramatic purposes, this film chronicles the
life of Elizabeth Ann Seton, the first native-born American saint, canonized by
Pope Paul VI in 1975.

The biography begins in 1964 when proponents are arguing the case for Mother
Seton's sainthood before the College of Cardinals in Rome. Three miracles had
been ascribed to her intervention. A fourth instance is requested. The film
flashes back to the New York City of 1802, when she was about 28 years old.
Raised in comfort, she was the happily married mother of five children and an
active member of the Church of England in New York. Suddenly her life began
falling apart. Her husband's business soured and the family was forced to move
to more humble quarters. The husband, suffering from consumption, died on a
voyage of cure to Italy. Mrs. Seaton was left impoverished.  Influenced by her
Italian visit, she decided to become a Catholic at a time when many people like
those in her family regarded ''Romanism'' as the religion of servants.

After her conversion in 1805, she was persuaded to move to Baltimore where,
under the guidance of Bishop John Carroll, she became a teacher. Moving to
Emmitsburg, Md., she founded the American Sisters of Charity, dedicated to
helping the needy, and set up the first free American Catholic day school.

By the time of her death at 46, Mother Seton had experienced public triumphs and
personal tragedy. Her fame and ideas had spread to many cities. But two of her
daughters died of tuberculosis. She faltered, both spiritually and physically,
but her faith survived.

This, needless to say, is the stuff of inspiration. Unfortunately, the film
can't resist some of the genre's more tired conventions.  Each stirring
vignette, for instance, has to be accompanied by stirring music. The result is
considerably less ethereal than ''The Song of Bernadette.'' Mother Seton was a
complex woman, not an innocent girl. But the cliches do have a way of getting
sticky.

As Mother Seton, Kate Mulgrew is too square-jawed and attractively robust to
resemble the delicate, petite original. But Miss Mulgrew exudes a determination
and devotion that are utterly convincing.  Lorne Greene is surprisingly strong
as Bishop Carroll, bringing to his performance something more than his
mellifluous voice. Others in the capable supporting cast are Jean-Pierre Aumont,
Rossano Brazzi, John Forsythe, William Prince and Leonard Mann.

Over on NBC, also at 9 o'clock Sunday, is ''Coach of the Year,'' starring and
produced by Robert Conrad. At various points, the movie was called ''The Boys
From Charley Town'' and ''Fourth Down Behind Bars.'' It could just as well have
been dubbed ''East Side Kids, 1980 Style.''

Mr. Conrad plays Jim Brandon, a former football player who was crippled by a
Vietnam war injury. Not wanting handouts from his business contacts, Brandon
winds up coaching football at a youth correctional facility outside Chicago. ''
The kids, mostly black and Hispanic, are tough and distrustful. Brandon has to
win their respect and give them a sense of pride. Remember, if you will, Pat
O'Brien reforming Leo Gorcey and the gang in ''Angels With Dirty Faces.''

Will Brandon be able to prove that ''they've got a chance, that they don't have
to be in institutions for the rest of their lives''?  It won't be easy. As one
youth explains, ''I started out a long time ago as a loser - I'm a seven-letter
word.''

But we all know Robert Conrad is a tough guy oozing sensitivity.  And the kids,
underneath all that hostility, are as cute as can be.  The leaders are played by
David Hubbard, Alex Paez, Ricky Paul and Radmus Torres. It all ends up with the
tough guys playing a game against the well-heeled students of a stuffy private
school. In its own romantic way, ''Coach of the Year'' is rather shameless.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Kate Mulgrew

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

7 A.F.C. TEAMS VIW FOR 56 BERTHS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM N. WALLACE

SECTION: Section D; Page 17, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1507 words


Seven teams remain in contention for the five unfilled playoff berths in the
American Conference as the National Football League's regular season comes to an
end this weekend. In the National Conference the five playoff nominees are known
and the close of the 16-game season will serve to sort out sites of games in the
postseason tournament that begins Dec. 28.

The A.F.C. situation is complex enough among the seven contenders so that there
are dozens of variables as to who will make the playoffs. Buffalo, Houston and
Oakland are in the most favorable positions to win division titles, New England
and San Diego to capture the two wild-card places. That leaves Pittsburgh, the
defending Super Bowl champion, and Cleveland on the edge of elimination.

In the Eastern Division of the American Conference, the Bills can win the title
if they beat the 49ers in San Francisco. The Patriots can be the division
champions if they beat the Saints in New Orleans and Buffalo loses. If both
lose, the Bills are division winners.

The Bills will have the questionable advantage in the final quarter at
Candlestick Park of knowing how the Patriots made out, because the game in the
Lousiana Superdome will have begun one hour earlier. Houston and Cleveland, tied
for first in the A.F.C. Central Division, will be playing at the same time, the
Oilers against Minnesota in the Astrodome and the Browns against the Bengals in
Cincinnati.

Cleveland teams have won only three of 10 games played there since 1970. If the
Browns are beaten, the Oilers become the division champions, win or lose against
the Vikings. Similarly, should the Browns win, they are division champions
regardless of the outcome in Houston.

In the A.F.C. Western Division, the Raiders can clinch at least a wild-card
playoff berth by beating the Giants Sunday at Giants Stadium. But the Oakland
players must await the results from San Diego on Monday night to learn of their
final playoff destiny.

Determination of the two wild-card places in the A.F.C. is going to be complex,
and the steps in the N.F.L. tie-breaking formula seem certain to be utilized.
The many possibilities for the wild-card berth include these:

- If the Patriots lose in New Orleans, they are eliminated from the playoffs.

- The Oilers are in the playoffs, as division winner or wild-card qualifier, if
they beat Minnesota. Both the Browns and Oilers will qualify if New England
loses.

- Pittsburgh has a chance to make the playoffs as a wild-card team with these
requirements - the Steelers must beat the Chargers after New England loses, and
the Oilers and Browns must win to set up the right tiebreaking sequence.

- If the Chargers lose, they can become a wild-card team provided Houston or
Cleveland lose.

- The only way the Raiders can miss the playoffs is if they lose to the Giants
and Cleveland, Houston, New England and San Diego all win and Buffalo also
loses.

The big four of the National Conference will be playing for homesite advantage
in later playoff games. Sunday's matches, to be contested in the same time
period, are Atlanta at Los Angeles and Philadelphia at Dallas. Losers become
wild-card teams when the playoffs commence, and winners will be at home in
divisional playoff games on the weekend of Jan. 3-4. The Vikings, Central
Division winners, are the fifth N.F.C. playoff qualifier.

Is there is a home-field advantage in the playoff games leading to the Super
Bowl? Yes, history says. Of 64 played since the league took its present
structure in 1970, two-thirds were won by home teams.

The weekend television package begins with two games tomorrow, the Jets at Miami
(Channel 4, 12:30 P.M.) and Chicago at Tampa Bay (Channel 2, 4 P.M.). Sunday
will bring Oakland at the Giants (Channel 4, 1 P.M.) and Philadelphia at Dallas
(Channel 2, 4 P.M.), and on Monday night Pittsburgh is at San Diego (Channel 7,
9 P.M.).

Previews of games (records in parentheses; points spreads from Nevada sources):

Local Teams

Jets (3-12) at Miami (8-7) - A year ago, before their finale against Miami,
which they won, the Jets had four more victories than they have this season; the
offense had scored 52 more points, and the defense had given up 2 less. In terms
of expectations, this season was the most disastrous in the history of the
franchise. Miami teams coached by Don Shula usually make the playoffs. This one
is the fourth (of 11) that did not. Betting choice: Miami by 6 points.

Oakland (10-5) at Giants (4-11) - If the weather is poor, the noshow total could
exceed 20,000. The Raiders have the league's interception leader in Lester
Hayes, a cornerback once a favorite target of quarterbacks. Giants have the
punting leader, Dave Jennings. Both are on Pro Bowl squads. Betting choice:
Oakland by 7 1/2.

American Conference

Cleveland (10-5) at Cincinnati (6-9) - With Pete Johnson gaining more than 100
yards each time, the Bengals have won their last three games and will be
troublesome at home against a rival they love to beat. The Browns' loss on the
last play at Minnesota had to be a shattering experience. Betting choice:
Cleveland by 4.

Denver (7-8) at Seattle (4-11) - The Seahawks' last chance to win a home game
this year. They went way down from last season's 9-7 record. The Broncos a year
ago finished 10-6 and made the playoffs.  Betting choice: Seattle by 2.

Kansas City (7-8) at Baltimore (7-8) - In this kind of game coaches grope for
goals, like a nonlosing season. The Chiefs won seven games last season, the
Colts five and both finished last. They have moved up. Betting choice: Baltimore
by 3 1/2.

National Conference

Chicago (6-9) at Tampa Bay (5-9-1) - The Buccaneers, the defending division
champions, have lost five of their last six games. The Bears, who made the
playoffs last year, are not proud of their season, either. Betting choice: even.

Atlanta (12-3) at Los Angeles (10-5) - If the Falcons win, they will have the
league's best record, assuring them of being at home for all playoff games. The
Rams' replacements for injured starters have held up, notably Jewerl Thomas at
halfback. In their earlier game, the Falcons won, 13-10, on a long pass near the
game's end that Rams viewed as a stroke of luck. Betting choice: Los Angeles by
4.

Philadelphia (12-3) at Dallas (11-4) - The only way the Cowboys can take the
division title away from the Eagles is by beating them by 25 points or more, the
latter being the requirement at the fifth level of the tie-breaking formula. The
Eagles have been soft in their last three games and their offense is struggling.
The Cowboy defense was out to dinner against the Rams. Betting choice: Dallas by
3.

Green Bay (5-9-1) at Detroit (8-7) -After a November resurgence, the Packers
have expired and have many injuries. The Lions let an early two-game division
lead get away. Betting choice: Detroit by 7.

Washington (5-10) at St. Louis (5-10) - Will this be Jack Pardee's last game as
the Redskins' coach? He wants to quit because of owner interference by Jack Kent
Cooke. It's definitely the last game for retiring Ken Houston, a safety headed
for the Hall of Fame. The Cardinals, who had many injuries, played to their
potential. Betting choice: St. Louis by 2.

Interdivision

Buffalo (10-5) at San Francisco (6-9) - Joe Ferguson, the Bills' quarterback,
has a sprained ankle but will start. The reserves, Dan Manucci and David Humm,
have played very little. The 49ers have made significant progress. They won only
twice last year. Betting choice: Buffalo by 6 1/2.

New England (9-6) at New Orleans (1-15) - Matt Cavanaugh starts again at
quarterback for the Patriots, whose offense now stresses running rather than
passing to wide receivers, Stanley Morgan and Harold Jackson. They have caught
only two touchdown passes in last nine games. The Saints no longer are the
Aints. Betting choice: New England by 9.

Minnesota (9-6) at Houston (10-5) -Expect Earl Campbell to have a field day
running through the Viking defense that allows 4.49 yards a carry, second
poorest in the league. The Vikes are pleased to be in the playoffs but they
can't compare to rough, tough Oilers. Betting choice: Houston by 9.

Monday Night

Pittsburgh (9-6) at San Diego (10-5) - What happens Sunday will dictate mood of
this game. The Chargers, who have the most Pro Bowl players, should have had a
better record. They have won only two games from teams with winning records.
Retiring Rocky Bleier may be bowing out for the Steelers. In the club's first
Monday night game 10 years ago, he was a reserve running back just home from
Vietnam.  Betting choice: San Diego by 3 1/2.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
New Hanoi Constitution Sets Up a Joint Presidency

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 113 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 19


Vietnam's National Assembly has adopted a new Constitution giving the country a
collective presidency, the Vietnam News Agency said today.

The collective leadership - a Council of State headed by a Chairman - will
replace the head of state provided for in vietnam's old constitution.

The press agency said that the Council of State would ''decide on important
matters concerning the building of socialism and national defense,'' and
''supervise the implementation of the laws, decrees and resolutions.''

The National Assembly will decide on the size of the Council of State, according
to the new Constitution.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BLAZE ENDS HOPE FOR 12 WHO FLED VIETNAM

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 942 words

DATELINE: SALT LAKE CITY, Dec. 19


It was one year ago yesterday that Hon Van Huynh arrived here, with his wife and
four children, from a refugee camp in Hong Kong. Thus there was cause for
celebration.  Yesterday he became a permanent resident of the United States, the
first milestone toward citizenship.

On Wednesday, the seven members of the Thong Van Nguyen family, cousins of Mr.
Huynh, arrived from the camp, and the 13 Vietnamese refugees gathered in Mr.
Huynh's small apartment to review the hardships they had endured, at home in Da
Nang and in escape at sea.  They could not, however, endure the savage fire that
ended the celebration and killed 12 of them. One man managed to jump to safety.

Today Dr. Wallace Graham, the state medical examiner, performed autopsies on the
bodies of eight children and four adults, victims of the worst fire in Salt Lake
City history.

Residents of the 37 other units of the Avalon Towne Apartments, situated a block
from the central business district here, had managed to escape. The refugees
might well have escaped, too, had not Mr. Huynh recently nailed shut the back
door on his third-floor unit. He had been burglarized a month before, explained
Christine Jones, the assistant manager, and an intruder had taken a television
set.

Late today investigators were still trying to determine the cause of the
four-alarm fire, but its origins have been traced to a secondfloor unit directly
below the Huynh apartment in the three-story building.

Flames in Television Set

This was occupied by Anh Quang Hoang, 34 years old, his wife and their year-old
daughter. Mr. Hoang said that he had seen flames in his television set and
closet, had attempted to put them out and then had fled.

Mrs. Jones said she had heard someone shout, ''Fire, fire.'' ''My husband and I
both ran upstairs and the whole second floor was on fire,'' she continued. ''I
pounded on all the doors I could and managed to get two elderly ladies out
safely. We couldn't get to the third floor because it was engulfed in flames.''
''If the Vietnamese hadn't nailed their door shut, they would have been able to
get out,'' she observed. ''We thought they were out.''

The Thong Van Nguyen family had planned to stay with relatives until they could
be placed in housing made possible by sponsors. They arrived here through the
assistance of the New York-based Tolstoy Foundation Inc. Julie Csere, a refugee
placement worker for the foundation, said that yesterday she took the newcomers
to apply for refugee benefits.

''They were just so excited,'' said Mrs. Csere. ''I took them to the apartment,
and they were so excited and happy. And now this.'' Meanwhile, the apartment
building could be forced to close because it has not met requirements of a tough
new Salt Lake City fire code that becomes effective Jan. 1. Mrs. Jones said
there were alarms, but that they did not function.

The 12 bodies were found huddled together in the kitchen of the third-floor
unit, the small children in the arms of mothers.  The man who jumped to safety,
Dong Thai, is a veteran of the South Vietnamese Army. He broke both legs in the
jump and was reported in serious condition at a hospital.

Worked on Assembly Line

Mr. Huynh would have been able to apply for United States citizenship within
five years. As of yesterday, he had resided here exactly one year as a
productive worker and without committing a crime; this is akin to a probation
period toward citizenship. He worked on an assembly line at the Deseret
Pharmaceutical Company south of Salt Lake City. Mr. Van Nguyen was to have
reported to work at the same company when he and his family were settled.

''They wanted to stay and chat, at the apartment, for awhile until housing could
be found,'' said Thinh Van Dinh, a state refugee program aide. Utah has,
proportionately, a large number of refugees, from Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. Of
the 6,000 refugees in the state, there are 2,700 in Salt Lake City.

There were 18 other Vietnamese living in the apartment building.  ''If I had my
way, I would have nothing but Vietnamese in here,'' said Mrs. Jones. ''They
don't cause any trouble. They are just the sweetest people there are.''

The blaze destroyed 16 of the building's 38 units. The displaced persons were
taken to a Mormon Chapel while the Red Cross, the Mormon Church, Catholic
Charities, state and city agencies and others attempted to find temporary
lodging, food and clothing.

The 100-year-old building had no sprinkler system and the stairwells needed to
be closed off, both requirements of the new fire code. The code also requires
smoke detectors, solid-core fire doors and restructuring of fire escapes. There
are 57 apartment buildings in Salt Lake City that, as of today, could not meet
code requirements, said Eldon Marshall, the city fire marshal.

Assistant Fire Chief Marvin Kimball said the fire ''would have been stopped with
sprinklers.'' Mayor Ted L. Wilson said that if there any good was to come out of
the tragedy, it would be that apartment owners would now move quickly to make
necessary improvements.

''The word is out now loud and clear,'' said Mayor Wilson. ''We'll be very tough
on this code. We're going to be working with the owners and get them under code
or I guess we'll have to shut them down.  Still, I don't like to see people in
the streets.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of fire damage and police removing body of fire
victim

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GARWOOD IS CALLED MENTALLY DAMAGED

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 217 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Dec. 19


A defense psychiatrist testified today that Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marine
Corps had never ''joined the enemy'' but had become so mentally destroyed by his
14-year imprisonment by the Vietcong that he acted like their ''pet monkey.''

After defense attorneys and prosecutors questioned Dr. Emmanuel Tanay, a
psychiatrist from Grosse Point, Mich., the court-martial of Private Garwood, who
is charged with desertion and collaborating with the enemy after his 1965
capture, was recessed until Jan. 5.

Dr. Tanay maintained that Private Garwood had not joined the enemy, saying, ''He
perceived them now and then as the enemy.'' While Private Garwood squirmed in
his chair, Dr. Tanay was repeatedly asked by prosecutors when he thought the
trauma that Private Garwood suffered in Vietnam would end. Dr. Tanay said: ''It
didn't and never will. He will suffer for the rest of his life.''

Describing the effect of Private Garwood's captivity in Vietnam, Dr. Tanay said,
''He was kept in a cage and maybe he was their pet monkey.''

Dr. Tanay also said that Private Garwood had had personality problems since
childhood that made him more susceptible to the persuasion and torture of the
North Vietnamese.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Veterans to Be Offered Bonus to Join Reserves

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 213 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 19


The armed services will offer veterans a $600 bonus to enlist for three years in
the reserve manpower pool after they have finished their military service
obligations, the Pentagon announced today.

The new bonus program will go into effect Jan. 2 and is designed to help rebuild
the Individual Ready Reserve and the Inactive National Guard. These are the main
sources of trained manpower that can be called up on an individual basis in the
event of mobilization to fill out regular and reserve units that are under
strength, and to replace battle casualties early in a war.

The biggest element of the manpower pool is the Individual Ready Reserve, made
up of Army, Navy, Marine and Air Force veterans. The Pentagon said that men and
women applying for the new bonus must have mastered certain skills needed by the
individual armed forces and have under 10 years of total military service.

The reserve manpower pool declined drastically with the end of the Vietnam War,
the reduction in total regular armed strength and the end of the draft.  As of
the end of the 1980 fiscal year last Sept.  30, there were 405,000 men and women
in the Individual Ready Reserve compared with the Vietnam War peak of well over
a million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1069 words


Linowitz sees 5 ''crucial'' Pales- tinian issues 2
Palestinians expelled by Israel begin hunger strike at U.N.  3
British statement on Irish hunger strike 3
Two quakes reported to kill 26 peo- ple in Iran 4
Iran pressing attack on Iraqi oil- fields 4
Around the World 7
Madrid conference on Helsinki ac- cords recesses for holidays 23

Government/Politics
For Harvard, seminar for Con- gressmen is a two-way street 10
Kelly's defence of $25000 Abscam payment begins 26
Senator Williams moves for dis- missal of Abscam indictment 28

General
Around the Nation 8
The talk of San Antonio: Pulsing river of life at Christmas 8
Blaze ends hopes for 12 who fled Vietnam 8
Two Church of Scientology offi- cials sentenced 8
''Barroom cowboys'' buy up west- ern hats 9
Christmas shoppers chagrined by the prices 27
The convicted felon, the gun and the Customs Service 27
The Region 28
Ballistics expert testifies at Tar- nower trial 28
Union leader's murder related to organized-crime rivalries 28
Tramway company won mainte- nance job without bidding 29
Washington mechanics ready old buses for New York 29
The City 30

49

Health/Science
The space shuttle completes a series of successful tests 10

Arts/Entertainment
''Ordinary People'' voted best pic- ture 14
Poulenc's ''Dialogues des Carmelites at the Met 16
Joseph Papp and Sam Shepard ex- plain dispute about a play 16
National Endowment for the Arts awards challenge grants 17
Feinstein resigns as president of National Symphony 17
Carlene Carter, singer, leads all- British tour band 18
''After the Wake,'' an essay on art, is reviewed 23
Four public-TV stations to cooper- ate in drama series 51

Style
Consumer Saturday: Pitfalls of credit buying 52
Rating the just-arrived Beaujolais Nouveau 52
Buying shoes no small matter for men with big feet 52
De Gustibus: Many ice cubes now turn out to be clinkers 52

Obituaries
Hector J. Campora, former Presi- dent of Argentina 49
Max M. Turshen, former New York State assemblyman 49
Frances Fuller, actress and ex- president of drama academy 49

Sports
Knicks top Bullets, 102-96 19
Nets bow to 76ers, 122-107 19
Staub: Typical New Yorker with a million dollars and 2,547 hits 19
Owners of Jets divided on retain- ing Michaels as coach 19
Miss Woodard, Kansas star, has disappointing day at Garden 20
Mets sign Cubbage, third base- man, to $1 million, 3-year pact 21
Clemson beats Illinois State and stays undefeated 21
Celtics rout Rockets 21
George Vecsey on Jewerl Thomas, new star in L.A.  22
Ticket-scalping controversy swirls around Rams 22

Features/Notes
Saturday News Quiz 23
Issue and Debate: Are N.Y. State welfare payments adequate?  30
About New York 30
Notes on People 30

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials 24

The Storm King compromise Reprieve in Northern Ireland What state owes mental
cases Letters 24
Russell Baker: the zero solution is better than nothing 25
Maxwell Lehman: street scenes and one for the bar 25
Michael Jahn: a passion for TV gizmos 25
David Saxe: protection against going co-op 25
Adrienne Strelzin: Bophuthat- swana 25

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AUTO UNION WARNS REAGAN BAD TIMES MAY GET WORSE

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1031 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, Dec. 20


The United Automobile Workers, reeling from thousands of layoffs and an
uncertain future, called on Presidentelect Ronald Reagan today to help bring
down high interest rates and, by that and other means, improve the economy.

Saying that current conditions have left the country facing the ''literal
collapse'' of the automobile industry, Douglas A. Fraser, president of the
union, read at a news conference a telegram sent by the U.A.W. leadership to Mr.
Reagan calling for an ''emergency summit meeting on the crisis.''

''We are not facing a cyclical downturn from which there will be an inevitable
and automatic recovery,'' the union said. ''Unless the Reagan administration
acts affirmatively to establish an auto policy for this country, the devastation
affecting hundreds of auto-based communities will spread to thousands of other
towns and cities as this crisis ripples through the economy.''

A Very Difficult Year

Today's action comes as the auto industry and its hard-pressed union have seen
none of the recovery in car sales that had been predicted for the last three
months of 1980, a prediction that seemed to be coming true until high interest
rates charged to consumers began to increase again, dampening sales.

For the automakers, this has meant a loss of profits. For Mr.  Fraser's union
and its membership, it has meant layoffs and a catalogue of other setbacks that
have made 1980 a very difficult year.

More than 300,000 members are out of work. Since last year the union's general
membership has shrunk by another 300,000, to 1.2 million. With the layoffs, that
means that only 900,000 members now have jobs in the automobile, farm-implement
and aerospace industries. And the union concedes that it will probably never
regain the size it once had.

Its candidates for President, first Senator Edward M. Kennedy and then President
Carter, were rejected by the voters, leaving the union politically more isolated
than it has been in years.

'Tough Is Hardly the Word'

Its effort to restrict the imports of Japanese automobiles by law failed, and
although the leadership thinks it is neither accurate nor funny, some Detroiters
are joking that the union's only effective attack on foreign cars has been to
ban them from its headquarters parking lot.

Once a matter of pride and proof of the union's power, its members' relatively
high wages are being partly blamed for the auto industry's problems, and the
union is being forced to give up increases and even to accept some wage cuts.

''Tough is hardly the word for it,'' Mr. Fraser said in an interview. ''This has
been the toughest year of them all.'' Other industrial unions elsewhere in the
country are losing jobs and membership to automation and foreign competition,
but changes in the automotive industry prompted by rising energy costs pose a
particular threat to the auto union: As cars get smaller, they require fewer men
and women to make them.

Accordingly, some analysts believe that as many as a third of the auto industry
jobs currently on laid-off status will never be refilled. Mr. Fraser says this
number is probably too high, and notes that much depends on the size of auto
market and what share the imports continue to take.

The End of an Era

But he agrees that the time when unskilled men and women could confidently look
forward to $20,000-a-year jobs on the assembly line is ending.

''The ones who are laid off will eventually get back through attritional
replacements and a little expansion,'' he said, ''but new job opportunities for
young people graduating from high school will not be there in the numbers they
used to. And I really question whether we'll ever be back to the levels of
1977-78.''

Limiting imports, which earlier this year reached a record level of 27 percent
of car sales in this country, was one of the U.A.W.'s principal political goals
of 1980, but it lost a key test when the International Trade Commission in
Washington rejected its argument that foreign cars were the principal cause of
the industry's ills.

The union regrouped behind a drive to have Congress pass a resolution granting
the President the power to enter into talks with the Japanese to limit imports,
even though Mr. Carter had already rejected the idea of doing so.

'I Think It Helped'

The resolution was approved by the House but did not come to a vote in the
Senate. Nevertheless, Mr. Fraser thinks that House passage helped put pressure
on the Japanese to restrain their exports voluntarily.

''I can't prove it,'' he said, ''but I think it helped.'' Japanese car sales
have slipped to about 21 percent of the domestic market since the summer.

Now the union is embarking on a new effort, marked by its decision last week to
consider re-joining the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial
Organizations. The split occurred in 1968 when the auto union's liberal and
internationalist president, Walter Reuther, broke with the conservative George
Meany, president of the umbrella organization, over Mr. Meany's support for the
war in Vietnam.

The move toward re-affiliation, which appears likely to take place, has come
about partly because Mr. Meany is now gone from the A.F.L.- C.I.O. - he died
this year. But Mr. Fraser conceded that it is also partly because the auto union
recognizes its growing vulnerability as an independent union.

A even larger reason, he added, lies in the labor movement's need for ''unity
and solidarity'' in its approach to the coming administration of the
conservative Mr. Reagan.

''I don't know what kind of contact we're going to have with this
administration,'' Mr. Fraser said. ''Maybe the only contact we can have is
through the A.F.L.-C.I.O.''

He chuckled. ''I know nobody's called me about Cabinet appointments, not like
they did four years ago. I haven't had one call.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Douglas A. Fraser

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KOSYGIN: A PRAGMATIC LEADER IN A WORLD OF INTRIGUE AND IDEOLOGY

BYLINE: By RAYMOND H. ANDERSON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 43, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3961 words


Aleksei N. Kosygin had hovered near the center of Soviet power for a
quarter-century before he moved, in a swift Politburo coup in October 1964, into
the post of Prime Minister, deposing Nikita S.  Khrushchev.

Mr. Kosygin was such a gray and reticent man that the average Soviet citizen
knew little or nothing about him. To most people, he had merely been another
rigid and expressionless background figure in photographs of Kremlin ceremonies.

The new Prime Minister, with the sad face of a droopy-eyed beagle, lacked
Stalin's aura of myth and ruthless power and Mr. Khrushchev's aggressive
exuberance. But within a year he won genuine, if restrained, popularity and
trust from the Soviet people for his businesslike ways, emphasis on economic
efficiency and efforts to improve living standards.

Mr. Kosygin was a trim, neat dresser who always wore highly polished shoes, a
trait rarely sustained by Russians in the mud and dust common on their paths and
streets. Before the infirmities of age began to appear, he liked to ski,
ice-skate, walk in the country and play volleyball. He loved music, including
jazz, and had many records.

Levelheaded and Fair-Minded

Over the years, occasional rumors that he was about to retire because of bad
health or that he might be ousted in a power struggle caused uneasiness among
Soviet citizens, who by and large regarded Mr. Kosygin as a levelheaded and
fair-minded influence in the Kremlin.

His role in the Kremlin leadership ended on Oct. 23, 1980, when a protracted
heart ailment finally forced his resignation as Prime Minister.

Mr. Kosygin was noted for administrative skill and economic knowledge, combined
with a pragmatism that usually put management efficiency and production ahead of
the ideological fetishism widespread in the Soviet system.

What Mr. Kosygin lacked was a sense of humor. Former Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger, describing the Russian as ''glacial,'' related an incident when the
engines of a Soviet airliner they were aboard refused to start. Seeking to ease
the embarrassment, Mr.  Kissinger noted in jest that in life things always seem
to go wrong, citing as an example that when one drops a coin it always rolls
away. Mr. Kissinger recounted the Soviet leader's reply: '''This is not my
experience,' he said, fixing me with a baleful glance. 'I have dropped coins
which rolled toward me.'''

Mr. Kosygin was withdrawn and diffident much of the time but on occasion he
would startle or even offend foreign visitors by blunt and violent talk. Dr.
Andrei D. Sakharov, the dissident physicist and human rights activist, once
remarked that Mr. Kosygin was the most intelligent and toughest member of the
Communist Party's Politburo.

Economy Was in Disarray

When Mr. Kosgyin moved into the Prime Minister's paneled office behind the
Kremlin's old red walls, the Soviet economy was, once again, in serious
disarray. The growth rate had been falling for several years and rational
management and investment had been disrupted by Mr. Khrushchev's quixotic search
for easy solutions to hard problems.

The country's long-ailing agriculture was in a severe crisis as a consequence of
decades of inadequate investment and Mr. Khrushchev's abrupt curbs on private
garden plots and livestock, including a widely resented ban on privately owned
cows. A disastrous harvest in 1963 had forced the Government to draw from its
emergency grain reserves, set aside mainly for wartime use, and to divert large
amounts of hard currency and gold to buy grain in the West.

Because of Mr. Khrushchev's campaign against private farm plots and livestock on
the ground that they eroded collective farmers' ''socialist consciousness,''
meat, eggs, milk and vegetables had become scarce in city markets. Grumbling was
widespread and there were outbursts of violent protest.

Mr. Kosygin, functioning in a collective leadership with Leonid I.  Brezhnev,
the new Communist Party chief, and Nikolai V. Podgorny, chief of state, acted
swiftly in an effort to undo the damages.

Curbs on Private Plots Eased

The first step was to expand the limits on private plots and numbers of animals
that could be held by collective farmers. This was soon reflected in more food
in the markets and a better mood in the country. Other important agricultural
changes were to follow.

But in the long run, backward techniques, periodic bad weather and ideological
restraints that hampered efficiency continued to plague the Soviet farm scene,
leading to one harvest failure after another.

Soon after the 1964 coup, the new leadership abolished Mr.  Khrushchev's system
of regional economic management and returned control to centralized ministries.
A controversial division of the Communist Party into agricultural and industrial
organizations was also eliminated.

In September 1965, 11 months after taking his post, Mr. Kosygin put forth a bold
plan of economic reform to make profits - a controversial and distasteful
concept for traditional Marxists - a primary guide and index of economic
efficiency.

The reforms, which had their beginnings under Mr. Khrushchev, were designed to
cope with an economy that had become too large and complex to operate
efficiently under the former command system, with planners in Moscow passing
down excruciatingly detailed orders to factories on what to produce, how much
and by what method.

The plan pushed through by Mr. Kosygin reduced centralized controls over factory
managers and encouraged them to use their increased autonomy by rewarding them
and their workers with bonus benefits from profits.

Kosygin Changes Met Skepticism

Some economic observers considered the plan the most radical change in the
economy since the early 1920's, when hunger and rebellion had forced a retreat
from War Communism to a briefly relaxed period of renewed private trade and
small-scale private production. Mr. Kosygin fought for his economic reforms
against skeptics and spoke harshly about the inability of ''conservative''
Soviet officials to grasp the spirit of the system.

The Prime Minister was 61 years old and in far from robust health when he raised
the banner of economic reform. He clearly regarded the ambitious undertaking of
putting the economy on a sound, efficient basis as the major challenge of his
lifelong work in management.

The reform did not achieve its proclaimed goals, partly because of the economy's
rigid control structure and, to some extent, opposition from entrenched
interests.

In the 1970's, under Mr. Kosygin's guidance, Soviet industry was to get
important stimulus from infusions of Western technology and managerial methods.

Mr. Kosygin was a diplomatic trouble-shooter as well as an economic specialist.
He made frequent trips abroad during his years as Prime Minister, visiting
Afghanistan, Britain, Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, France, India, Iraq, Syria,
Turkey, Southern Yemen and other countries.

In September 1969 he journeyed to Peking, where he met with Prime Minister Zhou
Enlai to discuss dangerous Soviet-Chinese border clashes.

In 1973, Mr. Kosygin went to Yugoslavia, and annoyed President Tito with what
Yugoslavs felt was a condescending attitude toward the country's free-market
Marxism. In the same year, he stood alongside as the Shah of Iran announced
total control over oil operations, ending dominance by Western oil companies.
Also in 1973, Mr. Kosygin flew to the Middle East, after the outbreak of the
Arab-Israeli war, to discuss Arab setbacks, cease-fire moves and weapons aid.

Favored Closer Ties to U.S.

In the first months after becoming Prime Minister in 1964, Mr.  Kosygin spoke in
favor of improving relations and expanding trade with the United States, but the
intensifying war in Vietnam changed his attitude. In February 1965, Mr. Kosygin
was infuriated when President Lyndon B. Johnson ordered bombing raids against
North Vietnam while the Russian was there on a visit.

For nearly two years after the start of the bombing, Mr. Kosygin refused even to
discuss possible Vietnam solutions, insisting that Moscow could not act without
authorization from Hanoi. Early in 1967 he put his prestige and authority behind
a Hanoi maneuver that raised a possibility of negotiations if the United States
would unconditionally halt its bombing raids against North Vietnam.

Mr. Kosygin pressed this offer during a visit to Britain, but the peace effort
collapsed when Hanoi declined to give assurances that a bombing halt would be
recip@rocated by a curtailment of infiltration into South Vietnam.

Outraged by Vietnam War

The Vietnam War outraged the normally stolid Mr. Kosygin. In meetings with
Americans, he startled them with the vehemence of his criticism of Washington's
policy in Southeast Asia. On one occasion he called it ''Hitlerite,'' the
strongest possible term by a Russian who lived through the 1941-45 war with
Germany.

''In the light of the American aggression, we cannot have normal relations with
the United States as long as it continues the war,'' he declared in 1968 in an
interview with George Hunt, managing editor of Life, and Hedley Donovan, editor
in chief of Time Inc. ''The Soviet people cannot approve of a policy developing
friendship with the United States while American troops kill absolutely innocent
people, conduct an illegal war and seize foreign territories.''

This hard attitude had blocked Mr. Kosygin from accepting an invitation from
President Johnson to visit the United States. But an opportunity for such a trip
came in 1967 during a meeting of the United Nations General Assembly on the
Israeli-Arab war.

Despite tensions over the wars in Vietnam and in the Middle East, the visit
passed in a friendly spirit, culminating in two meetings between Mr. Kosygin and
Mr. Johnson at a college in Glassboro, N.J.  Smiles and waves from American
crowds drew warm responses from the usually dour Soviet leader.

Little progress in settling substantive differences was achieved at the
Glassboro meetings but the talks opened the way to important personal contact.

During a break, Mr. Kosygin accepted Mr. Johnson's offer of an official airliner
to make a trip, and he chose, to everyone's surprise, to go to Niagara Falls. He
made the customary tourist boat ride but his interest was focused on the
electric power plant that formed, with a sister plant across the gorge in
Canada, the largest hydroelectric power project in the West.

Mr. Kosygin was accompanied on the trip to the United States by his daughter,
Lyudmila, the wife of Dzherman M. Gvishiani, deputy chairman of the State
Committee for Science and Technology.

Born in City of Aristocrats

Aleksei Nikolayevich Kosygin was born on Feb. 20, 1904, in St.  Petersburg,
later called Petrograd and then renamed Leningrad in 1924. Although his father
was a lathe operator, some of the old city's aristocratic and intellectual
qualities rubbed off on the youngster, giving him a manner and dignity that set
him apart from some of his rougher Kremlin colleagues.

In 1919, two years after the Bolsheviks seized power, Russia was in the torment
of a savage civil war. Mr. Kosygin, although only 15 years old, volunteered for
the Red Army. He attracted the attention of his commanders by devotion to duty
and dedication to Communist revolution.

He served two years in the ranks and, at the age of 17, was released after the
defeat of the anti-Bolshevik forces. Mr. Kosygin entered a training school for
cooperatives, studying for three years to become an instructor and organizer in
the then-active cooperative movement.

After graduation in 1924, he was sent to Siberia to take part in integrating the
cooperative groups into the state-controlled economy.  During his five years in
Siberia Mr. Kosygin served as an instructor in Irkutsk cooperatives and later as
head of the planning section of the Siberian Association of Consumer
Cooperatives.

While in Siberia he met his future wife, Klavdiya, a teacher. She died on May 1,
1967, while he was on the Lenin Mausoleum in Red Square dutifully reviewing the
Labor Day parade. Typically, he stayed to the end, but was deeply affected by
her death.

In 1927, in Siberia, Mr. Kosygin joined the Communist Party and remained an
activist for more than half a century. Ideology as such was not the attraction.
He rarely referred to theory in his speeches and never attempted to make
contributions to Marxist philosophy.

Turning Point in His Life

In 1929 he returned to Leningrad to enroll in an engineering course at the
Leningrad Textile Institute - a move that proved to be a turning point for him.

In 1934, shortly before graduation from the institute, the nation was jolted by
the assassination of Sergei M. Kirov, the Leningard party chief, in a suspicious
affair apparently instigated by Stalin.  Mr. Kirov was succeeded by Andrei A.
Zhdanov, who carried out cruel purges that opened the way to swift advancement
by ambitious young men.

Mr. Kosygin rose quickly in factory administration. After less than two years as
a textile plant foreman he was named director of the Oktyabr spinning plant.

During the Leningard purges, Mr. Kosygin was active in party activities, serving
on the committee of the city's Vyborg Borough. He caught Mr. Zhdanov's eye and
was taken into the hierarchy.

In June 1938, Mr. Kosygin was appointed head of the Industrial Transport
Department of the Leningrad Region's Party Committee. Four months later, he was
designated Mayor of Leningrad, making him a partner of Mr. Zhdanov.

His election the same year as a Deputy to the Supreme Soviet, the country's
legislative body, was a signal that Mr. Kosygin was on the Kremlin's list of
favorites.

Named a Commissar in Moscow

The rewards were quick to follow. Only three months after being named Mayor, Mr.
Kosygin moved into the Cabinet to head the nation's textile industry as a
people's commissar, as Soviet ministers were then known.

As a delegate to the party's 18th Congress in March 1939, he made a speech,
sponsored by Stalin, in which he startled the gathering with an attack on other
commissars, charging that their policies were responsible for the backwardness
of the textile industry. He proposed a 15-point modernization program along the
lines of American production techniques.

Mr. Kosygin's star was rising fast. Only 35 years old, he was elected at the
congress to the party's 71-member Central Committee.  In April 1940 he was
promoted to the post of Deputy Prime Minister, serving initially under
Vyacheslav M. Molotov, who was Prime Minister from 1930 until May 1941.

After the Germans invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, Mr.  Kosygin's
organizational and management skills were given free rein and full test. He was
put in charge of a desperate evacuation in January 1942 of half a million people
from Leningrad across frozen Lake Ladoga to escape a German and Finnish siege.
He stayed in the starving city half a year.

Mr. Kosygin was to play an important role in pushing Soviet industry to maximum
output under conditions of battlefield rout, bombing raids, hunger and shortages
of material and labor.

Head of Russian Republic

In 1943, he was appointed Prime Minister of the Russian Republic, the largest in
the Soviet Union. As the Germans retreated, after the Battle of Stalingrad, he
was active in reconstruction of ruined cities and industry.

The esteem with which Stalin regarded Mr. Kosygin was demonstrated in March
1946, when he was chosen as a candidate, or nonvoting, member of the ruling
Politburo. In February 1948, about the time of his 44th birthday, he was raised
to full membership and was made Finance Minister.

The appointment followed a drastic currency devaluation that had provoked panic
and disorder. After restoring financial calm Mr.  Kosygin was named Minister of
Light Industry in December 1948.

Somehow, Mr. Kosygin managed to survive the deadly rivalries that broke out
among Stalin's subordinates.

A Purge Sweeps Leningrad

Mr. Zhdanov, the Leningrad party leader and Mr. Kosygin's mentor, died in
mysterious circumstances in 1948. The next year, a purge took the lives of many
leading Leningrad figures, including Nikolai A.  Voznesensky, a Politburo member
and economic specialist. The manipulator behind the purge was Georgi M.
Malenkov, Stalin's closest aide, who was widely expected to succeed to power.

Mr. Kosygin came through the purge unscathed. But a dark shadow was on him. In
the fall of 1952, Stalin convened a party congress, the first since 1939, and
reorganized the leadership in what was believed to be preparation for a new wave
of purges. In an ominous indication of trouble, Mr. Kosygin was reduced to
alternate member in the Politburo.

The death of Stalin in March 1953 saved the country from the impending purges.
The Politburo was reduced to 10 members from 25 and Mr. Kosygin was among those
dropped, though he remained in the Government as Minister of Food and Light
Industry.

A power struggle was under way between Mr. Khrushchev, who had emerged after
Stalin's death as head of the party, and Mr. Malenkov, who had taken over the
post of Prime Minister.

His Career Blossomed Again

Mr. Kosygin swung behind Mr. Khrushchev. His career flourished again, in pace
with Mr. Khrushchev's progress in taking over the reins of power. Mr. Kosygin
was renamed a Deputy Prime Minister in the fall of 1953, and in December 1956 he
was transferred to the State Planning Committee as a deputy chairman.

In June 1957, he vigorously defended Mr. Khrushchev during a Central Committee
battle in which Mr. Malenkov, Mr. Molotov and others tried to overthrow the
headstrong party leader.

Mr. Khrushchev emerged victorious and Mr. Kosygin, rewarded for his loyalty, was
readmitted to the Politburo as a candidate member and was once again designated
a Deputy Prime Minister. Named chief of economic planning in March 1959, Mr.
Kosygin immediately set about to liberalize economic controls.

He rose again to the high plateau of Soviet power in May 1960, when he was made
a full member of the Politburo and a First Deputy Prime Minister.

In October 1964, when Mr. Khrushchev was shoved aside ''on pension,'' Mr.
Kosygin moved into his Kremlin office.

An Air of Uncertainty

Uncertainty surrounded the collective leadership in the first months after the
removal of Mr. Khrushchev. Some longtime observers of Soviet affairs doubted
that the team would hold together. But a division of powers was achieved, with
Mr. Kosygin supervising the Government and the economy, Mr. Brezhnev in control
of Communist Party affairs and relations with the international Communist
movement, and Mr. Podgorny looking after the ceremonial functions associated
with the Presidency in the Soviet Union.

In one of the few instances in which Westerners were able to detect any major
policy differences between them, it was Mr. Brezhnev who prevailed.

In July 1968, the Soviet leaders met with Soviet-bloc allies in Warsaw to
discuss the liberal reforms of ''socialism with a human face'' being introduced
in Czechoslovakia, to the horror of other Communist leaderships.

Mr. Kosygin was felt to be a moderate on the issue of Czechoslovakia, seeking to
bring the Prague leadership back into line through negotiation, economic
pressures and rewards. Mr.  Brezhnev, while not a hawk, was more ready to give
consideration to the hard line demanded by the military - invasion.

A month after the Warsaw meeting, the Soviet Army headed a force of troops from
all Warsaw Pact nations, except Rumania, and occupied Czechoslovakia, ending its
liberal policies.

Brezhnev the Dominant Figure

By the early 1970's Mr. Brezhnev had become the leading figure of the collective
leadership in Moscow. He took over many of the contacts with non-Communist
leaders, one of Prime Minister Kosygin's functions. When President Nixon went to
Moscow in May 1972 for meetings that were to end in a declaration of principles
intended to mark a new, more stable and constructive era of Soviet-American
relations, it was Mr. Brezhnev who dominated the Soviet side.

Although overshadowed, Mr. Kosygin gave prestige and a degree of authority to
the post of Prime Minister, which had been of secondary importance during the
time of Stalin and Khrushchev.

In his concern with economic performance, one of the few areas in which the
Soviet Union permits virtually unbridled scrutiny and criticism, albeit by
selected officials, Mr. Kosygin delivered some of the most forthright
self-criticism.

Economic Goals Not Achieved

Early in 1970, for example, he announced that, while the economy had rebounded
more strongly than had been predicted, most of the long-range economic goals he
outlined at a party congress in 1966 had not been achieved.

With a glum expression, he said that Soviet national income had grown by only 4
percent annually instead of the planned 6 percent, a condition he attributed to
a poor harvest and bad management.

At the 25th Congress in 1975, the economic picture had brightened, Mr. Kosygin
told the delegates. He stressed that the Soviet Union produced more steel, oil,
mineral fertilizers, pig iron, cement and other commodities than any other
country. But he added that the labor force could no longer be depended upon to
grow enough to insure increases in industrial output and said improved
productivity must therefore be stressed. He reported that industrial labor
productivity was up 23 percent over the preceding five years, whereas the goal
had been 39 percent.

Despite his efforts, the shortcomings and failures of Soviet industry and
agriculture persisted, approaching a crisis by the time of his death.

Mr. Kosygin flourished in the world of economic statistics and performance
indexes. For his endeavors he received the Order of Lenin six times and many
other decorations. But he had a human touch, a responsiveness, that set him
apart from the droning speech-readers in the Politburo, many of whom behaved in
public as if computerprogrammed.

In 1968, Mr. Kosygin demonstrated a compassionate trait during a funeral in Red
Square for Col. Yuri A. Gagarin, the first man into space, and another pilot
killed in a jet fighter crash. Mr. Kosygin was lined up on the Lenin Mausoleum
with his colleagues during speeches of tribute. When Colonel Gagarin's widow
collapsed from grief, Mr. Kosygin quickly stepped out of the lineup, went to one
side of the mausoleum and beckoned doctors to go to her aid with portable oxygen
equipment.

Russians and foreigners who observed the spontaneous gesture were impressed.
''It was just like Kosygin to do that,'' a young Muscovite remarked.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Aleksei N. Kosygin photo of A.N. Kosygin, L.I.
Breshnev and N.V. Podgorny in 1971 photo of A.N. Kosygin, V.M. Sukhodrev and
President L.B. Johnson photo of A.N. Kosygin and other leading Communists in
1950

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
A CHRISTMAS DREAM

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 907 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 20


After preparing for Christmas the other night, I had a strange and wonderful
dream: Children from the Washington Cathedral were singing carols on the ground
floor of the White House. Upstairs in the Great Hall, the President and his
lady, braving it out, were saying goodbye to old friends and opponents, and in
the East Room, the people were dancing and the band was playing ''Georgia on My
Mind.''

Outside, it was cold but the sky was full of stars and moonlight, and the
capital was dominated by the shining monuments of the past.  But in my trance,
there was no Government -only a friendly going out and coming in - and the
people, weary of strife, were yearning in the stillness for ''peace and good
will on earth.''

As I saw it in my misty sleep, suddenly the beauty and majesty and ideals of the
city obliterated all noise and contention. From Cathedral Hill to Capitol Hill,
there were no more fire alarms or shootings or singing commercials; no more
angry denunciations, or comfortable falsehoods, or morbid miseries, or hostile
ridicule.

Instead, there seemed to be a spirit of compassion and even reconciliation, and
this was confirmed when the morning newspapers - always the highlight of my
dreams - floated through my mind. To my astonishment, they were saying let's
give Jimmy Carter his due and Ronald Reagan his chance.

Everybody seemed to be caught up in the spirit of Christmas, even the
columnists. Bill Buckley was apparently consoled by the thought that while the
Carter Administration was an irretrievable disaster, it had some sound Yale men
like Cy Vance, Kingman Brewster and Lloyd Cutler, and therefore could not be
wholly without some merit.

Tony Lewis of The New York Times had a left-handed compliment for Henry
Kissinger, on the ground that he was a more competent scoundrel than General
Haig. And Jack Kilpatrick, always the good reporter, seemed to excuse the Carter
Administration on the belief that while it didn't make sense, it made news.

Likewise, the news headlines on the front pages as they drifted through my
slumbering imagination were even more remarkable. ''OPEC Cuts Price of Oil.''
said one. ''Chrysler Makes Record Loan to Japanese Automakers'' ... ''Jews and
Arabs Make Peace in Jerusalem'' ... ''Ireland United at Last'' ... ''Red Army
Withdraws From Polish Border'' ... ''Washington Redskins Win Super Bowl.''

I turned the pages with such excitement that I almost woke up.  Inside, there
were some year-end interviews. Ronald Reagan was quoted as saying: ''I was just
kidding about that 30 percent tax cut in the next three years, and that big hike
in the defense budget, to balance the budget. I've told the boys to run it
through the computer again.''

Jimmy Carter seemed to be saying: ''I take back everything I said about Ronald
Reagan. I believe he will be an excellent chief ceremonial officer of the
Government, and I will do anything I can to help him, provided I never have to
go North again.''

Senator Robert Byrd of West Virginia was the principal joy of my dream. I
thought I could see him playing his fiddle and singing a song called ''America
Is a Tune, and Must Be Sung Together.'' Time for a new beginning, he began, no
more Watergate, no more Vietnam, time for forgivings, time to be vague, ransom
the hostages and swallow Al Haig.

At the edge of my unconscious brain, I heard ever so vaguely the voices of my
heroes. Paul Valery was saying: ''We later civilizations, we now know that we
too are mortal. We had long heard tell of whole worlds that had vanished, of
empires sunk without a trace, gone down with all their machines into the
unexplorable depths of the centuries....''

Suddenly my dream had switched into a kind of nightmare, but Valery continued:
''Elam, Nineveh, Babylon were but beautiful vague names ... but France, England,
Russia ... these too are beautiful names.  Lusitania too is a beautiful name.
And we see now that the abyss of history is deep enough to hold us all and that
a civilization has the same fragility as a life....''

But I now heard the comforting voice of another Frenchman, Jean Monnet: Most of
the things we've feared since the last World War have not come to pass. We
cannot save our national economic interests separately unless we save our
civilization together. America is the key, but it cannot save itself or its
civilization unless it truly becomes a tune that is sung together.

Then, in a flash, I thought I saw the answer to the troubles in my dream. For
the first time in history, there was enough food to feed the human family, and
even enough power and wisdom to educate it and house it, but we were all
separate and isolated from one another, at home and abroad, and thinking we
could solve it with more military missiles.

At this point, I awoke with a start, crying out Why can't we be more sensible
and do the practical things that have to be done - why can't we have more peace
and good will? Whereupon my wife shook me very gently and said That's a good
question. Why don't you get up and take out the newspapers and the rest of the
trash? That might keep peace and good will in the house at least until the
children get out of bed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FORT CHAFEE'S UNWANTED CUBANS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5343 words


Paul Heath Hoeffel recently received an Overseas Press Club award for his
article in this magazine on Argentina's disappeared persons. By Paul Heath
Hoeffel Three weeks ago, a band of Cuban teen-agers, mostly 16 and 17 years old,
barricaded themselves inside the second story of one of the white, boxlike
barracks in the makeshift refugee compound at Fort Chaffee in western Arkansas.
In a 20-minute frenzy of protest against what they regarded as the preferential
treatment of eight young troublemakers who had been sent to a relatively
luxurious boys' ranch in Utah, the youths smashed windows, splintered furniture
and ripped up mattresses, before emergency teams of parks police and United
States marshalls forced their way into the building.

In the ensuing melee, at least six people were hurt badly enough to require
hospitalization. With the Army's 600-man ''quickreaction'' force on alert
outside the compound, the 15 offenders were marched to Fort Chaffee's prison
area, Level II, where they have remained pending criminal charges.

It no longer seemed to matter to the young Cubans that the riot would hurt their
chances of release. ''You can see these kids deteriorate with each day of
detention here,'' explained a caseworker in the minors' section a few days
later. ''After waiting around so long, doing nothing, even the best of them have
lost hope. They don't care what happens anymore.''

The brief spasm of violence at Fort Chaffee, the third serious disturbance in
the seven months since the Army was ordered to set up the compound, highlighted
an ugly dilemma facing the country: what to do with about 6,200 Cuban immigrants
at Fort Chaffee who have been shunned by an increasingly unsympathetic public
and who remain the wards of a Federal bureaucracy that seems bogged down in
administrative incompetence. Today, the refugee compound at Fort Chaffee is
virtually an internment camp, not unlike those in which the United States held
many Japanese-Americans during World War II.  With new waves of unskilled and
unprepared immmigrants arriving regularly on these shores, such compounds
threaten to become a permanent fixture of America's crisis-ridden immigration
policy.

The situation is one that few nations could hope to cope with adequately. The
influx of 125,000 Cubans that began last spring inundated southern Florida.
Bitterly denounced in Cuba as escoria, or ''scum,'' the boat people were indeed
an odd lot, most of them marginal citizens in socialist Cuba. Reports that many
were criminals and mental patients, however, were greatly exaggerated. Only 2
percent have been determined to be either criminally dangerous or mentally
incompetent. Many, perhaps a majority of those remaining at Fort Chaffee, were
familiar with Cuban jails, to be sure, but usually as a result of crimes such as
vagrancy, prostitution, black marketeering or petty theft. Nevertheless, an
alleged murder committed by a Cuban in Wisconsin, the camp riots and other
serious crimes attributed to refugees have tainted the harmless majority.

In response to the crisis, President Jimmy Carter ordered a massive airlift of
some 52,500 Cubans to four refugee camps; 19,000 of them went to Fort Chaffee,
an Army base in the foothills of the Ozark Mountains. In theory, the emergency
plans seemed sound enough.  An interagency team, the Cuban-Haitian Task Force,
was formed, drawing on 12 Federal bureaucracies (currently headed by the
Department of Health and Human Services). The task force enlisted the help of
seven voluntary relief agencies, Roman Catholic and Protestant groups, and also
a few nonsectarian organizations, with experience in the ongoing Indochinese
resettlement program. Together, the task force and the voluntary agencies
reunited the majority of Cubans with family members who had previously
emigrated. Then they undertook the search for sponsors -church groups, private
organizations and individuals willing to take responsibility for new arrivals
without family or friends in the United States. A sponsor is supposed to find a
refugee a job and a place to live -but the latter could be anything from a
mobile home with all expenses paid to a mattress on the floor of a ghetto
apartment. The relationship is neither permanent nor legally binding, though
ideally it should last through a Cuban's transition into American life.

After the initial, highly successful family-reunion program, taskforce camps
continued to hold thousands of young, unskilled and predominantly black single
men, a group with which American society has difficulty coping even in the best
of times. In 1980, a shaky economy, apprehension over last month's national
elections and the nagging suspicion that Fidel Castro had dumped his ''problem
people'' in America's lap soon soured the welcome accorded the latest wave of
boat people. Today, the search for appropriate sponsors continues under enormous
pressure as the remaining refugees are being sponsored out of Fort Chaffee at a
rate of only 25 a day, down from 350 a day when sponsors were readily available.

The task force has set Dec. 31 - only 10 days from now - as the deadline for
closing the compound at Fort Chaffee. However, according to Robyn Ziebert, then
deputy representative of the Intergovernmental Committee for Migration, an
international organization that arranges transportation for refugees, ''No one
is taking that deadline seriously. At the current rate, they'll be closing the
camp in the spring sometime.'' One enters the refugee compound at Fort Chaffee
by passing through checkpoints in a series of concentric circles of chain fences
topped with forbidding loops of barbed ''concertina'' wire. Each circle is
patrolled by United States marshalls. Less evident are the concentric circles of
the Federal agencies' jurisdictions within the task force. These poorly
coordinated bureaucracies entangled in red tape are as effective as the armed
guards in preventing the compound's Cubans from enjoying the freedom that lured
most of them from Cuba in the first place.

Despite the ubiquitous barbed wire, life inside the 10-by-20-block compound has
the peculiar appearance of a bustling village. But the milling about on 26th
Street, the ''boulevard,'' thinly masks the reality of enforced vagrancy. In
this village, unemployment is 99 percent - the main occupation is fending off
boredom. A labor pool provides odd jobs, like dishwashing, painting and
janitorial work, for perhaps 50 men, who are paid two packs of cigarettes and a
can of soda for a full day's work. ''They tell you that it improves chances for
getting sponsored out, if you work every day,'' explained Juan Gonzalez
Dominguez, a 57-year-old sugar worker from Matanzas province, and one of 200
older people in the compound. Gonzalez was waiting for his job assignment at the
labor-pool barracks. ''I don't believe them anymore. I just work to keep from
going crazy.''

The Immigration and Naturalization Service (I.N.S.), a key agency within the
task force, invented a new classification for the recent wave of Cubans,
declaring them ''entrants'' until they are sponsored out. On Oct. 1, the status
was again changed: They are now called ''aliens.'' But whatever label they are
given, their new status abridges their rights to social services and to earn
money, both of which would be permitted if they were officially recognized as
''refugees.'' On 23d Street, a bustling black market in clothing, toilet
articles, homemade art and - more discreetly - sex, both hetero-and homosexual,
is carried out in cigarettes, the camp's reigning currency. Across the street,
clusters of people hang around a row of barracks that houses the voluntary
agencies upon which the Cubans pin their hopes for finding them sponsors. In
another barracks, English classes are in session. Although learning the language
is said to speed up release from Fort Chaffee, its irrelevance to camp life has
caused attendance at the classes to decline.

On the corner, a bank of six public telephones is in constant use as a lifeline
to the outside world. Claudio Ochoa is waiting nervously in line to call a
former detainee who was sponsored out by a barber in Washington, D.C., four
months ago. Ochoa's friend, now working in an oyster-packing plant, has promised
to find him a sponsor too. Others are waiting to call a toll-free hot-line
number in Miami, where a Spanish-speaking staff provides addresses and
telephones numbers of fellow refugees whom those still interned have lost track
of.

There is a checkpoint cordoning off the compound's family area, which is
reserved for married couples with or without children and for well-behaved
single young men. Jose Antonio Posado, a 21-yearold electrician's apprentice who
lives in this section, was among the first Cubans airlifted to Fort Chaffee. He
is typical of 95 percent of the Cubans in the camp: Lanky, dark-skinned,
slightly hyperactive, he left a large family in Havana and has no relatives in
the United States to facilitate his early release. Like many inmates, he readily
acknowledges his criminal record: He served time for black marketeering.

The weeks between Posado's decision to leave his family in Cuba and his
assignment to Fort Chaffee are now a blur of makeshift processing centers and
bewildering trips by bus, boat and plane into the unknown. Today, he has less of
an idea of what his future holds than when he left home seven months ago. Posado
is now a barracks leader, a responsibility in which he takes considerable pride,
but which does little to blunt his exasperation over the delays in his release.
''The friends I made waiting to come from Mariel Harbor were separated from me
in Miami. My friends here have gone,'' he explains. ''I'd do anything to see
them again, to see my brothers and mother again.'' Anything, he adds, except
return to Cuba.  On one recent sunny afternoon, a boxing tournament attracted
nearly 2,000 spectators from the compound to watch fellow Cubans slug it out
with local boys. According to the refugees, the recreation program, together
with the food served at the mess halls, is the compound's outstanding
improvement over Fort McCoy and Fort Indiantown Gap, from which many of them
were ''consolidated'' in October. Recreation is an evident concern of the task
force: More chain fences are being erected around a nearby indoor gymnasium to
include it within the enclave for winter use.

The Arkansas farm boys were bruisers, but the Cubans were fast and the matches
thrilled the crowd, which gets little exposure to American life. Although 1,500
local jobs have been created by the task force at Fort Chaffee, citizens of
surrounding Sebastian County have complained loudly about ungrateful refugees
trespassing in their backyards. The mother of a 16-year-old boxer from the area
acknowledged that they were nervous about coming into the camp for the matches.
''You hear such stories,'' she admitted. ''But now I'd like to see these boys
come into town for a tournament.''

In a small room in the hospital barracks, 22-year-old Caridad Valdes Giro is
nursing her 2-day-old son, Renaldo, the fourth Cuban birth at Chaffee. Mrs.
Valdes left for Key West with her common-law husband after both were released
from prison. ''We had taken over a vacant apartment in Havana with our two kids
and were arrested for trespassing,'' she explains. ''We were serving a
three-month sentence when they asked us if we wanted to leave.'' She left
without seeing her other children, who are 2 and 4.

About 50 of the 120 women in the enclave are pregnant, and several of them are
minors. Most of these babies are due in February and March, raising the question
of whether birth-control means are available for inmates - a question that
clearly causes discomfort among officials. David E. Lewis, a program director of
the United States Catholic Conference, denies allegations that the Roman
Catholic Church had discouraged such services. According to Lieut.  Bill Boggs,
the task force's public-health administrator medical services, birth control has
simply not been a subject of discussion.  ''This is a Catholic population, and I
am not going to recommend something which would go against their principles,''
he said. ''If they ask for it, they'll get it.'' When the sun sets at Fort
Chaffee, the temperature drops precipitously, providing the Cubans with a taste
of their first winter. Donning their Red Cross-issue plastic gloves, acrylic
caps and winter coats, the men line up outside the mess halls for their
rice-and-pork dinners and then huddle before the outdoor movie screen to watch
faded B movies in English.

Inside the winterized barracks is a racket of cheap radios and cassette players.
The Army picks up two Hispanic television stations by satellite and plays
nonstop Latin music - salsa - over the base radio station. The barracks are
divided into five-bed dormitories with bedsheets and plywood partitions,
occasionally scrawled with children's drawings of Chinook helicopters and other
Vietnamese scenes, ghostly reminders of the former inhabitants of the camp. In
1975, 50,809 Vietnamese refugees passed through Fort Chaffee in another massive
resettlement program.

The makeshift rooms, neat and clean if smoke-filled, are decorated with
advertisements and girlie pictures from magazines and empty cigarette packs.
Meager possessions are arranged carefully on boxes; clothing is reverently
folded and put away on shelves.

Barracks 1522 is no different from the rest, except that its inhabitants are
predominantly homosexual. Of the 300 homosexuals registered with the voluntary
agencies, many are transvestites and tend to be highly visible around the
enclave. While plaiting his friend's hair before heading off to the nightly
disco, 20-year-old Wilfredo Nunez Pinilla explained why he left the small
provincial town where he worked as a tailor. ''I want to study fashion design,
and I wanted to feel comfortable in the clothes I like,'' he said, referring to
his transvestism. He actually enjoys the life in the enclave and is able to make
clothes for his friends on one of the six sewing machines in the camp's small
crafts center.

According to Sylvia Gonzalez, a Cuban-American task-force troubleshooter,
homosexual life in the enclave is probably freer than in either Cuba or the
United States. ''We have to impress upon them that homosexuality is not an
accepted thing by Americans at large,'' she explains. ''So once they've been
assigned a sponsor, you'll see that the eyebrows tend to grow out and the
make-up fades as they prepare for reality.''

Paula Dominique, the director of Church World Service, the agency with which
most of the homosexuals are registered, says the incidence of sponsorship
breakdown is lower among the homosexuals than any other identifiable group,
largely because of the strong response from homosexual communities around the
country.

The Rev. Robert M. Falls, coordinator of the homosexual and lesbian program of
the predominantly homosexual Metropolitan Community Church in San Francisco, is
himself a sponsor. ''We simply don't want to see our brothers and sisters rot on
the vine in detention camps,'' he said. Homosexual sponsors are screened and
sign an agreement prohibiting sexual exploitation and peonage. ''When refugees
have complained that their sponsors expect sexual favors,'' Falls added, ''our
counselors review the case immediately.''

Homosexuality is grounds for exclusion from the United States by the I.N.S.,
although this policy has been challenged in the courts.  Perhaps the most
complete records kept on the Cubans are the I.N.S.  homosexual files, which have
been compiled with an obsessive eye for detail. ''If the rest of the files had
been so complete, we wouldn't have as many problems at this point,'' one staff
person familiar with the I.N.S. explained. ''But is it the Government's business
to know when, how and how often a person has his orgasms? A lot of the files
read like pornographic potboilers.'' ''As of September, our officers investigate
homosexuality only when it is voluntarily acknowledged,'' said an I.N.S.
spokesman, Janet Graham. ''We no longer ask the question automatically, but
legally, those who admit it face deportation.'' Regarding the homosexual files,
she had no comment.

Up the street, the pulsations emitted by the disco have begun to draw a crowd.
Inside the dim, smoke-filled barracks, the male clientele - both homosexual and
heterosexual - dances to the latest tunes. In the family area, an outdoor salsa
band is keeping a small group of dancers warm. The women change partners
continually to accommodate the more numerous male dancers.

On the other side of the street, one of the 60 Federal Park Police officers who
guard the enclave sits in a patrol car reading a pulp novel. Without the
overwhelming presence of the security forces, one wonders if there would be more
than the four or five stabbings a week, a rape, some aggravated assaults and the
frequent robberies that do occur. ''Take 7,000 people from Scarsdale and throw
them together under these conditions,'' speculates Frank Sharry, coordinator of
the American Council for Nationalities Service, a nonreligious voluntary
organization, ''and you'd really see some violence.'' The basic task of the
voluntary agencies is to find qualified sponsors and match them with appropriate
refugees. The bad publicity generated by the camps and by some of the Cubans who
have left them has made many potential sponsors reluctant to open their homes to
possibly dangerous or troubled individuals. This, together with inadequate
information about the Cubans themselves, has slowed the sponsoring-out process
to a near standstill.

''There are people who call up and request a white, collegeeducated Cuban who
speaks English,'' says Paula Dominique of the Church World Service. ''We remind
them that we're not a Sears catalogue.''

Another major deterrent to sponsors is the stigma attached to the remaining
refugees - the widespread belief that they are the hardcore residue of an
already problematic population. Agency staffers, however, are virtually
unanimous in their contention that up to 70 percent of the refugees are
immediately sponsorable and can adapt to American society with few difficulties.

''There are a number of people for whom we give what is termed a 'yellow light,'
maybe 20 percent of the population who are going to need special social services
and a supportive environment in the form of a halfway house when they get out,''
said Dave Lewis of the Catholic Conference, which is handling the disposition of
more than 60 percent of the Cubans. ''There's no telling how many have crossed
from green to yellow because of their experiences in here,'' Lewis continued,
''but you know there have been casualties.'' Another 10 percent - more than
1,000 persons - have received a ''red light,'' which means they are believed to
be unsponsorable in the usual way.  Among these are the sociopathic, the
physically handicapped and the mentally disturbed.

Among the troublesome policies at Fort Chaffee and throughout the resettlement
program generally are the task force's tendency to count heads rather than to
find qualified sponsors and its reluctance to provide information about refugees
that it fears might slow or stall their processing. These are policies that have
proved to be not only counterproductive, but dangerous as well.

Several of the voluntary agencies complain that Government bureaucracies,
particularly the I.N.S. and the Public Health Service, have refused to release
their files to provide better profiles on the refugees. ''This meant we didn't
know whom we were sponsoring out half the time, and that often led to trouble,''
said Frank Sharry of the American Council for Nationalities Service. ''Now the
policy is backfiring because sponsors are demanding more information about the
refugees and we are unable to provide it.''

''It's very discouraging to get a call from a bewildered sponsor whose parolee
is in the hospital after an epileptic seizure we failed to warn them about,''
said John Fredriksson, head of the Lutheran Immigration Relief Committee and
Refugee Service.''The whole operation gets a bad name because the task force
wants to get rid of people at any cost. Passing the buck is big around here.''

Task-force spokesmen dispute these charges, insisting that they are merely
protecting the refugees' right to privacy by not sharing the data they gather.

''The supreme irony of the I.N.S.'s position,'' speculates Miss Dominique of the
Church World Service, ''is that it'll turn out that what they are hiding is the
fact that they didn't put together files in the first place. They probably don't
have much more than a list of names.'' Bill Boggs of the Public Health Service
explained that a recent P.H.S. memo overruled the right-to-privacy policy
barring the voluntary agencies' access to P.H.S. medical files. He also conceded
that the health service had little more than cursory venereal-disease and
tuberculosis information gathered during the initial screening, and that
compiling in-depth health files for the Fort Chaffee refugees had only just
begun.

The ''move 'em out'' policy of the task force has serious consequences for the
refugees as well as for the sponsors. Fernando Rangel, head of the returnee
program for the task force, attributes responsibility for nearly half the
sponsorship breakdowns to the sponsors. In most cases, the sponsors are
carefully screened and found to be upstanding members of their communities.
According to Rangel, however, the incidence of exploitation and abuse has
increased as the number of sponsors has diminished and pressure mounts. ''The
voluntary agencies are taking bigger chances with the sponsors who approach
them,'' he added. ''You know a lot of these people are going to end up in
migrant labor camps or other exploitative situations that none of us would
tolerate. That's why we fought to let them come back if it doesn't work out.''
The task force optimistically estimates that only 3 to 5 percent of the Fort
Chaffee sponsorships fail.

Mayte Espinosa Garcia, 19, and her husband, Eribito Espinosa Carranzana, 34, are
a returnee couple who now live in the family area. Three months ago, they were
sent to a farm outside Savannah, Ga. ''The farmer made it clear he didn't like
blacks by spitting every time he saw Mayte,'' said Eribito, who is
light-skinned.

Eribito continued his story, which has been confirmed by the taskforce
resettlement office: When it was discovered taht Mayte was pregnant, the farmer
drove her to the airport and put her on a plane for Fort Chaffee, telling them
she was going to a special clinic.  After a couple of days had passed, the Cuban
demanded to know what had happened to his wife. ''The farmer said that he had
been told that the baby had been eaten up by syphillis and that Mayte had gone
crazy. Luckily, I received a letter from her the next day, saying that
everything was all right.''

Eriberto announced that he wanted to leave the farm. Since it was almost harvest
time, the farmer was reluctant to lose his cheap labor. At first, he tried to
persuade Heriberto to remain, promising a bonus at Christmas. When Heriberto
insisted, he claims, the farmer and his two sons tied him up and beat him on
repeated occasions.  Finally a Cuban-American policeman whom Heriberto had
befriended in Savannah intervened and helped him return to his wife in Fort
Chaffee. ''We still want to get out,'' said Mayte, now 7 months pregnant. ''But
they say we've had our chance and now we're at the bottom of the list for
sponsors.'' When the Cuban-Haitian Task Force presents its final bill to
Congress, the half-billion dollar cost of the refugee program is likely to make
the Cubans even more unwelcome. Many critics believe that reliance on camps like
Fort Chaffee invites abuses, delays real solutions and increases the costs of
resettlement. The money being poured into maintaining Fort Chaffee - more than
$11 million a month - would be better spent, some observers argue, if it were
channeled into social services where the refugees are being resettled.

The I.N.S., thwarted from Day One in its function to insure an orderly
immigration into the United States, is understandably demoralized by the refugee
situation. At Fort Chaffee, the I.N.S.  took charge of one of the top security
detention areas, Level II, where fence jumpers and chronic troublemakers are
isolated.

Nevertheless, tough I.N.S. guards and detainees have given Level II a bad
reputation. A recent inspection by a Washington-based supervisor found it
boot-camp spotless. The guards carried Chemical Mace and clubs, but there was no
evidence of the slingshots and ball bearings and the beatings widely reported in
the past.

A fire-scarred barracks is the only sign of the Oct. 7 riot, initiated when a
particularly unpopular I.N.S. guard was hit over the head with a chair during a
weapons search. In the ensuing brawl, two barracks were set afire and eight
people required hospitalization after alleged beatings by angry guards. The
Justice Department ordered an investigation, which is still under way, and,
perhaps coincidentally, two guards - one known to the detainees as ''Mr.
Death'' - and the I.N.S. director in charge were transferred out of Fort
Chaffee.

A tall, scruffy Cuban was called at random from the baseball field for an
impromptu interview through the chain fence. Mike Tosca Martinez had been
transferred to Level II from Fort McCoy, where he had been in a knife fight. In
Cuba, Mike had worked in the burgeoning tourist industry, dabbled in the black
market and learned seven languages, four of which he hinted at during the
conversation. His father had come to the United States in an earlier wave of
Cuban migration and, he pointed out with irony, had been killed in Vietnam.
Asked if he had any complaints about Level II, he glanced around at the six-man
escort and explained that he had served his 30-day sentence but was still being
held. After consulting his record, James K. Selbe, then head of the I.N.S. at
Fort Chaffee, told Tosca he would be held another couple of weeks just to be on
the safe side.

Journalists are not permitted in the psychiatric ward, a cluster of Public
Health Service barracks housing around 100 patients. Early on the morning of
Oct. 13, Marino Aldama Green, a 23-year-old patient, was found dead in the
ward's seclusion area. A psychiatric patient for about two months, Aldama had
severe psychomotor problems and a history of seizures of unknown origin. This
death prompted allegations of negligence in the psychiatric ward, whose
seclusion area has been described by one ward worker as ''something out of the
Middle Ages.'' Why would a patient with a history of seizures be placed in
seclusion without medication or supervision? Boggs of P.H.S remains at a loss:
''I've gone over the file thoroughly and, for the life of me, I haven't been
able to figure that out.''

Aldama's death, the enclave's third, is exceptional, but according to numerous
critics, it is symptomatic of the neglect in other areas of health care as well.
There have been repeated cases of advanced syphilis at Fort Chaffee, and at
least 40 confirmed victims of active tuberculosis, who have been allowed to be
sponsored out without treatment. The initial screening was disorganized and
totally inadequate, according to Dr. Jerry R. Stewart, a local physician hired
to treat the T.B. cases. ''P.H.S. personnel were under tremendous pressure from
the task force not to come up with any serious diseases which might slow the
sponsoring out of the patients.''

''The medical program has no basis in reality as far as I can see,'' said
Richard Harbin Jr., a practical nurse from Denver. ''It is designed to be abused
by the personnel. P.H.S. is just not set up to administer a program like this.''

Task-force spokesmen attribute the inefficiency and lack of coordination
characterizing the operation to lack of experience and the unprecedented wave of
refugees. But the 135,000 Vietnamese who entered the country precipitously in
1975 provided a crash course for scores of Federal employees now working in the
Cuban-Haitian Task Force. An elaborate Government manual was published by the
Defense Department after that emergency, listing in detail the problems and
procedures that were successful with the Vietnamese. The manual has gone
unheeded. ''I have a copy of it sitting on my desk, and it answers most of the
questions which still remain unsolved,'' says Paula Dominique of Church World
Service. ''I can't think of one situation where its lessons were applied.'' Says
Frank Loy, deputy coordinator for refugee affairs, Frank Loy: ''Admittedly, we
don't have a great institutional memory.''

There will doubtless be as many as 2,500 refugees remaining at Fort Chaffee by
February, according to the task force. ''Whether we like it or not,'' says
Charlie Cain, the task-force camp coordinator, ''most of these persons are going
to be institutionalized.'' The details of their disposition are still unclear,
but Congress has allocated an initial $100 million for social services to be
provided by local governments.

While no one likes the idea of detainment camps like Fort Chaffee, few officials
rule out the possibility that more or less permanent ''processing'' compounds
have become necessary if not inevitable.

Caribbean refugees, at the moment predominantly Haitian, are now arriving at the
rate of 1,000 a month. The Federal Government is involved in a court battle to
transfer the newest boat people from Florida to Fort Allen, a military base in
Puerto Rico. But such a move does nothing to alleviate the problem; it only
removes it to a less visible location. While the opening of Fort Allen as a
processing center might eliminate conflicts with state governments, Puerto Rican
resistance to the move seems bound to complicate the island's special
relationship with the Federal Government. From this perspective, the plight of
the Cubans at Fort Chaffee may be the beginning rather than the end of a problem
of national and international proportions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Cubans at Fort Chafee

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
GHOSTS;
by Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 917 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Dec. 21


Eight years ago at this season the United States carried out the most intensive
bombing campaign in history. For 12 days 100 B-52's and 500 smaller planes
struck Hanoi and Haiphong. In the Nixon White House the operation was called
Linebacker II. To the public it was the Christmas bombing.

Few Americans think about Vietnam now, and fewer want to. But it is necessary to
remember, this year especially. For there is reason to doubt that the men about
to take power in Washington learned the lessons of the war that came to an end,
for Americans, with that last unnecessary paroxysm of violence.

That the Christmas bombing was unnecessary can no longer be doubted. It would
never have happened if Henry Kissinger, in negotiating peace terms with Hanoi,
had kept the Saigon Government informed and on board. That is clearer than ever
from Kissinger's own memoirs.

Just before the 1972 election Kissinger declared that peace was ''at hand.'' But
Nugyen Van Thieu and his colleagues in Saigon, surprised by the terms agreed
with Hanoi, blocked them and forced the last bloody chapter.

Thieu demanded 69 changes in the agreement, Kissinger says in his memoirs,
''leaving almost no paragraph of the draft document untouched.'' At the next
meeting with the Communists Kissinger put the 69 points forward. But the list
was ''so preposterous,'' he writes, that ''it must have strengthened Hanoi's
already strong determination to dig in its heels.'' Hanoi then demanded changes
in its favor.

The American reply was the Christmas bombing. It was Alexander Haig, Kissinger's
deputy, who urged the use of B-52's. Then Haig went to Saigon to explain to
President Thieu that the United States was ''brutalizing'' North Vietnam.

When the agreement was finally signed in January, how did it differ from the
October draft? Kissinger's book says: ''The phrase 'administrative structure' to
describe the National Council of National Reconciliation and Concord had been
dropped... The Demilitarized Zone was explicitly reaffirmed... A number of
invidious references to the United States had been eliminated.'' As Kissinger
lists these and other changes, they are almost macabre in their triviality.

The real reason for the bombing is evident. It was intended to punish the party
that had agreed, Hanoi, in order to reassure the party that had balked at the
terms, Saigon. The bombing - and all the killing in November and December - were
the price paid for Kissinger's deception of the Saigon Government during the
peace talks.

The bombing was the symbol of a much larger failure: the continuation of the war
for four years after every informed person knew it could not be won. The price
of that failure was and still is enormous.

From 1969 through 1972 the United States spent $50-billion on the Indochina war,
dropped 4 million tons of bombs, lost 20,492 American lives. But the highest
cost was not measurable in figures. It was the further polarization of this
country, the political embitterment.

How much might have been saved if Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger had really
come to Washington in January 1969 determined to liquidate the war. But Nixon,
raising his fears about himself to the level of national policy, said we had to
continue the war and intensify the destruction or else the United States would
be seen as ''a pitiful helpless giant.''

The most disturbing thing about the political transition now taking place in
Washington is the sense that the helpless giant syndrome may again become a
mainspring of American policy. It is not just the symbolic figure of General
Haig. Too many people claiming to speak in Ronald Reagan's name seem to feel
that the United States must flex its muscles to prove that it is not weak. There
have been other frustrations for Americans since Vietnam, and it is a time of
dangerous temptation to the misuse of power.

We have to remember what happened to us in Vietnam. The United States pursued
''victory'' there - a victory unattainable by means that for us were politically
or morally supportable - in a war remote from any real American security
interest. By doing so, year after obsessive year, we inflicted terrible wounds
not only on the land and people of Vietnam and Cambodia and Laos but on
ourselves.

The lesson is that effective American strength depends on restraint and wisdom
in its use. Wasting our substance in wars remote from U.  S. interests does not
impress the world. Nor does it stiffen the will of the American people to
confront situations where our fate may really be engaged.

But that is not all there is to remember about Vietnam. The men in Washington
who pursued the war knew it was unpopular, and so they turned increasingly to
secret means. In their fearful obsession with secrecy they wire-tapped and
conducted break-ins and deceived Congress and faked official military records.
Nixon even ruled out any public explanation of those last twelve bloody days of
bombing.  The end justified the means.

Now politicians are talking again about the need for secrecy and covert action
and the hard-nosed use of power. And so we must remember: Beware obsession.
Beware secrecy. Beware concentrated power. Beware men untouched by the moral
consequences of their acts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words


Deserted villages are testimony to El Salvador's plight A2
U.N. Assembly session's feat: no action on Namibia A3
Pope to pray at Hiroshima and Nagasaki A4
Around the World A5
Soviet satirist flies to Munich after test of wills at airport A6
Moscow writers, despite harass- ment, press for workshop A7
Castro ends party congress with pledge of support for Moscow A9
Syrians reported to attack mainly Christian town in Lebanon A10
Ireland's farmers caught in an economic squeeze A11
Iran's demands amount to $460 million per hostage A12

Government/Politics
About Washington: Furnishings for life in the seat of power A16
Federal judges are said to be un- happy despite a salary increase A18
Defense Department finds prob- lems in war mobilization test D14
Hoover Institution emerges from relative obscurity D14

General
Around the Nation A16
Wedding reunites people who look like other people A17
Bodies of four are recovered after plane crash in Catskills B2
A Connecticut family ponders its future and the price of oil B2
Systems using G.M. buses report no major structural problems B4

Obituaries
Tempel J. Smith, founder of steel company D15
B13

SportsMonday
Baseball: Much-traded Bobby Bonds ready to hit road again C2
Basketball: Knicks' Webster showing his value C9

College coach decries 'violent aspect' of game C9
Columns: Dave Anderson on the Browns, the cardiac champions C1

Red Smith on a not necessarily noble experiment C8
Football: Giants end season with 33-17 loss to Raiders C1

Michaels of Jets finds no reason for apologies C7

Oilers beat Vikings and are as- sured of wild-card berth C4

Eagles' rally falls short and Cowboys triumph, 35-27 C3

Rams beat Falcons, face Cow- boys in playoff next Sunday C3

Steelers miss playoffs but aim at Chargers tonight C7

Patriots win but need Charger loss tonight for wild-card spot C5

Seahawks (4-12) beaten in finale for 0-8 record at home C7

John Jefferson sparks the elec- tric Chargers C1

Coaches don't want spies- when they can find them C6
Hockey: Islanders rout Hawks C8

Brooks denies he's set to join Rangers<
Outdoors: Nature is a special Christmas gift C11

Arts/Entertainment
''Mama, I Want to Sing'' closes amid rights dispute C12
''Breaker Morant'' is movie about court martial C13
Katharine Hepburn at 71: In work, salvation C13
''Company,'' a novel by Samuel Beckett, is reviewed C16
''Crimes of the Heart'' is stage comedy C16
Mimi Garrard's dances involving shapes and props C16
Three different treatments of ''Messiah'' C17

Style
Relationships: Trauma of holiday family gatherings B6
Caution and care: A book on V.D.  B6

Features/Notes
Issue and Debate: When women bear children for others B6

News Analysis
Ari L. Goldman on Koch, Carey and the Westway project B3

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A22

Buying time with high interest Mobsters in toxic waste disposal Removal of a
defective law Letters A22
Anthony Lewis: Vietnam lessons for the Reagan Administration A23
William Safire: how Deng is re- peating the mistake of Mao A23
Selig S. Harrison: a Finland-like accommodation in Afghan?  A23
Jay Philip Urwitz: public service grants based on achievement A23
Don Bonker: why Reagan should continue human rights efforts A23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY WQORKING TO DEVELOP RAPID-MOVING LIGHT INFANTRY DIVISION

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1083 words

DATELINE: FORT LEWIS, Wash., Dec. 19


The Army has just begun a farreaching experiment here intended to revolutionize
the ability of the United States to dispatch ground forces swiftly to any region
of the world.

''We have to create a new state of mind, a renaissance in military thinking,''
said Col. Harold C. Van Meter, who is in charge of the testing. ''But this could
change the Army for the next 50 years.''

The objective of the experiments is to form a new light infantry division that
can be deployed abroad largely by air but that can carry almost the striking
power of the heavy armored divisions designed to fight a massed land battle
against the Soviet Union in Europe.

To achieve that, the Army plans to use available advanced technology to produce
better but lighter weapons, transport, communications apparatus and devices for
intelligence collection and electronic warfare. It also plans to develop a new
organization and tactics to take advantage of that technology and to exploit
Soviet weaknesses.

Responding to Soviet Mobile Threat

The Chief of Staff of the Army, Gen. Edward C. Meyer, pointed out the need for
such divisions in a recent interview, saying that the Army must have forces
''that are able to respond to the Soviet mobile threat in central Europe and
equally able to respond to threats outside that area.''

''If you're able to do that with improved technology,'' he said, ''you'll have a
division that can do both, which means that it has to be light and strategically
mobile.''

After the war in Vietnam, the Army became almost totally oriented toward Europe
and plunged into a program to ''heavy up,'' especially with new tanks such as
the XM-1 Abrams. But then there dawned the realization that Europe was not the
only place where the United States might have to defend vital interests.

That led to the formation of the Rapid Deployment Force, to a halt in the Army's
rush to acquire heavy muscle and, eventually, to the experiment with the light
division.

Preliminary work began in June but got under way officially only in October with
a relatively small budget. The experiment has been allocated $1.8 million this
year and the Army has asked for $5 million next year and up to $10 million in
each of the following three to five years.

Tests of Three Kinds of Weapons

Colonel Van Meter and his unit have begun to test three kinds of weapons and
equipment: those that exist elsewhere in the Army, among allies or on the
commercial market but are not in front line use yet; those that are available
but need to be improved; and those for which the technology is available but for
which military applications must be developed.

Among the biggest shortcomings in the armed services today is transport. It
would take the Ninth Infantry Division, which is conducting the experiment, for
example, about 1,220 flights of giant C-5 and C-141 air transports to fly from
Fort Lewis. That would tie up the Air Force's entire fleet for weeks.

Since it would take a long time and would be expensive to enlarge the Air
Force's fleet, Colonel Van Meter and his small unit are looking for ways to cut
the number of flights needed as far as possible below 1,000.

Officers in air defense units found, for instance, that the vans housing their
sophisticated communications and control equipment would not fit into a C-141.
Weight was no problem but the vans, atop trucks, were 137 inches tall while the
C-141 would take a vehicle only 107 inches high.

Wrestling With Problem

Major Miles G. Bramblett Jr., an air defense operations officer, and Harold
Feutz, the post maintenance director, wrestled with the alternatives. The vans
would fit into a C-5, but those planes were reserved for heavy equipment. They
could go by sea, but that was too slow. They could be left behind, but that
would seriously weaken the air defense.

Cutting a slice off the top of the van would be expensive and timeconsuming.
Asking the Army to design and produce a new model of the van would take years
and many millions of dollars.

After much head-scratching, Major Bramblett and Mr. Feutz found that they could
take the van off the truck chassis, put Teflon strips on the bottom of the van
and slide it into the C-141. The truck, with Jeeps or cargo on pallets atop the
chassis, would fit in behind the van. The total cost of the conversion of one
van: $600.

Perhaps the most important work in lighter weapons is the testing of a new tank
with a new high-powered gun and an advanced fire control mechanism that can take
on heavy Soviet tanks. The vehicle would weigh 16 to 20 tons and cost about half
the $1 million of the XM-1.

Colonel Van Meter and his associates have begun to identify other new weapons
and equipment that will be tested for the light division over the next few
years. They include improved antitank missiles; a light air defense gun that
some allies have; an air defense sensing and communications system, ''Reliable
Sting;'' new electronic jamming devices, and new aircraft to gather intelligence
and relay it to fire control centers.

The Army is also looking to the past to see what is adaptable to the future,
such as once more mounting machine guns on Jeeps so the weapons can swivel and
fire at helicopters.

Quicker Ways to Dig In

It is also considering the use of lightweight bulldozers, available from
industry, that can dig bunkers quickly. ''To survive,'' Colonel Van Meter said,
''we have got to dig in. We've got to go underground as much as possible.''

A battalion specializing in collecting electronic intelligence, jamming enemy
communications and radar, and gathering information by ground radar has already
begun to run tests. Some of its new equipment was bought off the shelf from a
commercial radio supply store.

Working from intelligence studies, the testing unit has identified Soviet
weaknesses as a rigid, centralized command structure, the massing of second
echelon forces for reinforcement, and the logistics train.

The new tactics to be tested here will focus largely on finding ways to move
faster than the Soviets, to exploit their weaknesses and to disrupt their
channels of communication and command posts. ''We want to find ways to plain
outsmart him,'' Colonel Van Meter said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WAR-READINESS TEST PRODUCES PROBLEMS;
The Washington Star

SECTION: Section D; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 887 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 21


The Defense Department ran into severe problems in a recent exercise simulating
mobilization of the Government for a major war, according to sources who
participated in the test.

In the exercise, ''Proud Spirit,'' which ended Nov. 26, the Pentagon and 35
other Federal agencies that would participate in a wartime mobilization
experienced these problems, according to the sources:

- A major failure of the computerized Worldwide Military Command and Control
System that left military commanders without essential information about the
readiness of their units for 12 hours at the height of the ''crisis.''

- A shortage of about 1 million tons of ammunition and military equipment that
is supposed to be in the war reserve stocks in Europe. The shortage was far
beyond the military's capability to make up during the 20-day exercise.

- A shortage of 350,000 trained soldiers to fill units leaving the United States
and an inability to bring front-line United States Army units in West Germany up
to their authorized wartime strength.

- Evidence that industry's ability to resupply the Pentagon with basic items of
military hardware, such as tanks and ammunition, continues to decline.

Update of 1978 Exercise

Proud Spirit and its civilian counterpart, code-named ''Rex 80 Bravo,'' are an
updated version of a 1978 exercise, ''Nifty Nugget,'' the first simulated
Government-wide war mobilization exercise since World War II.

Nifty Nugget exposed huge shortfalls in munitions, equipment, manpower and
planning. The results of its successor, Proud Spirit, indicate that while the
planning had improved somewhat, the shortages, the confusion and the dismal
results of Nifty Nugget had been re-enacted.

Defense Department officials would not talk about Proud Spirit.  ''We can't
really talk about that yet,'' said Tom Ross, assistant secretary for public
affairs. ''This is just too sensitive a time,'' he added, referring to the
transition to a new administration.

An Army briefing memorandum on the exercise, obtained by The Washington Star,
suggests that the Pentagon has seen better days than those of the Proud Spirit
exercise.

General Doubts Success

''There is a doubt in my mind, in view of our generalized objectives, as to
whether we obtained success,'' the memo quotes retired Gen. Walter T. Kerwin, as
concluding. General Kerwin, former Vice Chief of Staff of the Army, was the
leader of a team of retired military officials overseeing the exercise.

''The exercise seemed to highlight the fact that we just have a long way to
go,'' said Frank A. Camm, an associate director of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, organizer of the civilian agencies that participated. Mr.
Camm declined further comment, saying that the reports dealing with the problems
that occurred in the exercise had not been completed.

One key problem, according to some of the participants, was the failure of one
of the major subsystems of the worldwide command and control system, believed to
be the largest and most expensive computer system in the world. It ''just fell
flat,'' one participant said.

One of the roles of the system is to give generals and admirals up-to-the-moment
reports on the readiness of their units. However, the computer system in charge
of doing that during Proud Spirit became overloaded, so the updated information
was temporarily stored in an interim memory bank called a ''buffer.''

Computers Silent for 6 Hours

When the time came for the buffer to feed the information into the worldwide
system, however, it balked. The result was that the Army's manpower-@ and
equipment-related computer systems went silent for six hours while programmers
struggled to find the right code to release the information. That information
emerged 12 hours later.

The Proud Spirit mobilization assumed that huge amounts of ammunition and
equipment had been shipped to Europe to replenish reserve stocks which,
according to well-placed sources, are now more than a million tons short of
their authorized levels of ammunition and equipment.

The sources made it clear that the shortfall is not just the problem of the
outgoing Carter Administration, but the result of 15 years of neglect and
borrowing in the Vietnam and Arab-Israeli wars.

Longer Time for Tank Order

Another problem that came to light in the exercise was that the ability of
United States industry to replenish military arsenals with tanks, missiles,
aircraft and ammunition continues to decline. It now takes longer to order a
tank, for example, than it did at the time of Nifty Nugget.

One way Proud Spirit planners considered to meet a shortage of in M-16 rifles
was to order them from a plant in South Korea.  Huge gaps in the Army reserve
systems showed up again, as they did in 1978, leaving the overall Army some
350,000 men short of mobilization goals.

''About the only thing we learned between this game and the last,'' said one
participant, ''was how to spread our shortages around a little better.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 23, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME TERMED 'BERSERK' IN MIAMI; REFUGEES AND DRUGS BLAMED IN PART

BYLINE: By WENDELL RAWLS Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1682 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


Robert Boyer has a law office on West Flagler Street, in the downtown business
district. But he uses such names as ''Vietnam,'' ''Dodge City,'' ''The O.K.
Corral'' and ''the war zone'' to describe what the area has become.

''Crime has gone berserk here,'' he said. ''The criminals and refugees have
taken over. In a two-block stretch, four people have been murdered around here
in the past two weeks, 20 or 25 since July. A man was killed when he surprised
burglars in his office on Thanksgiving Day. A secretary was raped and another
was accosted and verbally abused. Tires are routinely slashed, buildings defaced
by vandals, stores robbed, addicts and drunks strewn along the sidewalk.

''We are scared to death,'' he went on. ''In our office we are opposed to
carrying guns, but we've applied for a couple of licenses. We don't allow our
secretaries to arrive or leave unaccompanied. And we don't work after normal
business hours. We are trying to sell our little building and relocate, but
nobody wants to buy in this area.  Even the police don't want to come in here.''

The concerns expressed by Mr. Boyer are becoming common in this sun shrine of
southern Florida. The area is experiencing a crime wave of remarkable
proportions, primarily in the poorer areas of Miami and the communities that
surround the city of about 350,000 people.

''Tourists, generally speaking, are not overly affected by the crime rate when
they frequent places like Joe's Stone Crab,'' said Hal Gardner, executive
director of the Visitor and Convention Authority in Miami Beach, the island city
of seaside condominiums, resort and retirement hotels across the bay from Miami.
''But we have found that it has done nothing to enhance our position in any
form.''

Miami Beach, a city of 95,000 people, is spending $1.7 million on new police
cars, equipment and personnel, Mr. Gardner said, declaring: ''We are trying to
take care of the crime problem before it gets worse.''

Police statistics show these increases:

- As of last week, 554 people had been murdered in Dade County, against 360 for
all of last year. (In New York City, whose population is about five times that
of Dade County's, the number of 1980 homicides reached 1,735 last week.)

- In the city of Miami, there were 134 homicides in 1979. This year there had
been 142 homicides by Nov. 1 and as of yesterday the number had risen to 235.

- In the first 10 months of this year, reported rapes in Miami Beach were up 200
percent, from 20 to 60. Robberies were up 100 percent, from 282 to 563.

- At the Dade County Rape Treatment Center, 140 women were treated in September,
an all-time peak. The number of victims of sexual crimes treated at the center
has climbed from 659 in 1974 to what is expected to be 1,250 by the end of this
year.

- Crime in the Dade County schools also has increased rapidly, with a 192
percent rise in the number of robberies, from 63 in the Julyto-November period
in 1979 to 184 in the same period this year.  There was a 103 percent increase
in breaking and entering at the schools, and a 42 percent increase in weapons
possession.

- About a dozen undercover police officers began riding some city buses three
weeks ago to protect passengers; they made five arrests in the first few hours
of the operation.

- Because of complaints by neighbors fearful to enter them, city parks have been
ordered closed at sundown instead of the usual hour of 10 P.M.

Miami, the nation's 40th largest city ion the nation's 40th largest city, seems
to be compiling crime rates that outpace those of the largest cities. Various
reports on homicide rates, for example, have cited a 25 percent increase for Los
Angeles, a city of 2.9 million, and 50 percent increases for the smaller cities
of Seattle, Honolulu and Memphis. But those do not approach the increase in the
city of Miami.

The reasons given by the authorities for the dramatic increases seem to be as
numerous as the kinds of crime committed, but foremost among them are the influx
of 125,000 Cuban and Haitian refugees last spring and summer; the continuing
wars among smugglers of cocaine and marijuana from South America; poor economic
conditions, and the frustrations of ethnic minorities who feel abused and
alienated.

Although no definitive studies have shown that the Cuban refugees are directly
responsible for the crime epidemic, criminal activity in the areas where most of
them settled has shown large increases since April.

Until recently there was a heavy concentration of refugees in the cheap hotels
of South Miami Beach. Crime statistics for April to September in the whole of
Miami Beach showed rape up 400 percent over the same period in 1979, robbery up
134 percent, burglary up 58.4 percent, assaults up 108 percent and auto theft up
67.1 percent.

''An absolute war is being fought in our streets at night,'' said Alex Daoud, a
Miami Beach Commissioner.

Billion-Dollar Drug Traffic

But much of the increased crime, especially the escalating murder rate, can be
traced to what is estimated by the Federal authorities as a
$7-billion-a-year-drug traffic, which exceeds the $5.2-billiona-year tourist
trade, the state's leading legitimate business.

As of Aug. 1, killings related to the drug wars were up 100 percent from last
year in Miami. Marshall Frank, a Miami homicide captain, said he had not seen a
quadruple murder in his previous 14 years on the force but that this year there
had been four such slayings and more than 20 other multiple murders that took
the lives of more than 60 people.

Racial unrest is another factor cited in the crime wave. Last spring 18 people
were killed in rioting that virtually destroyed the Liberty City section as
blacks protested the acquittal of white police officers who had been accused in
the beating death of a black insurance man.

Other conditions contributed to the racial unrest. Blacks make up only 17
percent of the population of Dade County, which includes Miami, Miami Beach,
Hialeah, Coral Gables and more than 20 other municipalities. Cubans and other
Hispanic residents represent 38 percent of the population, and non-Hispanic
whites comprise 45 percent.

Many of the blacks are packed into such impoverished sections as Liberty City,
where a quarter of the housing was described as ''very definitely substandard''
by Eugene F. Miles, director of Dade County's housing rehabilitation division.
He estimated that $250 million would be required to bring the dwellings up to
minimum standards.

Unemployment and Poverty

Even though blacks make up less than one-fifth of the population, four
inner-city schools remain all-black. According to a recent study, more than 50
percent of the black students drop out before graduating. That number is up from
40.5 percent just four years ago.

An estimated 18 percent of the families in the county live on annual incomes of
less than $7,500. Among black youths, 48 percent are unemployed and the
increasing numbers of high school dropouts are expected to expand the
unemployment and poverty rolls. As they look for work, they will be competing
with thousands of Cuban refugees who still have not found work.

Merrett Stierheim, Dade County Manager, said, ''We are more ethnically polarized
now than any time in the past 20 years,'' and he had a succinct assessment of
south Florida: ''We are a community in trauma.''

Despite that and other such assessments, however, and despite the rising
statistics for categories of crime, State's Attorney Janet Reno maintains that
''Miami's crime problem isn't any worse than that of any other major city.''

Nevertheless, she cites a shortage of police officers as a major problem in
dealing with crime.

Police Recruitment Problems

Miami now has about 50 vacancies in its 650-member force, and the city wants to
increase police strength to 800 officers by next October. However, if Dade
County's experience is an indication, those added positions will be difficult to
fill. Out of 26 applicants in the county recently, only one passed the hiring
test.

Miss Reno also gave lack of police officers as the reason that the Metro Police,
who have jurisdiction over all the unincorporated areas of Dade County, require
more than 23 minutes more to get to a crime scene than the average police
department in the nation. The Metro officers take an average of 27 minutes to
respond; the national average is 3.5 minutes and the average in the Southeast is
2.9 minutes. The city of Miami does not record these statistics.

In Philadelphia, whose population of about 1.7 million is comparable to the
population of Dade County, the police response time averages between three and
four minutes.

One result of the soaring crime problem was the loan of 100 Florida state
troopers to supplement local police beginning Jan. 1. The State Police will
handle traffic control and accident investigation to free local officers for
assignments in crime control.

Another result seems to be an increase in purchases of handguns. In the year
ending Sept. 30, more than 40,000 handguns were sold in Dade County, up from
29,000 in the previous 12 months.

But one aspect of Miami life does not seem to have been seriously affected.
Tourism thrives, with 4.5 million visitors this year, among them about one
million international travelers.

Last week, in anticipation of a festive New Year's celebration, city workers
were assembling bleachers along Biscayne Boulevard, where visitors may watch the
Orange Bowl Parade.

But the planks in the bleachers were littered with homeless refugees and
derelicts asleep in the sun near the monument labeled the ''Torch of
Friendship.'' It was still aflame.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of men protecting their store in Miami (Page A10)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 23, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JAMES BURROWS EDWARDS

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 596 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 22


James Burrows Edwards, the 53-year-old South Carolinian tapped as Energy
Secretary, has for 10 years been pulled by the competing demands of his
successful practice as an oral surgeon and the urging by friends to play
increasingly important roles in politics.

A former State Senator, Dr. Edwards failed twice in bids for Congress, though in
the second effort he defeated Gen. William C.  Westmoreland, the former
commander of American forces in Vietnam, in the Republican primary. But then in
1975 he won election as South Carolina's first Republican Governor in a century,
becoming in the process something of a symbol of Republican renascence across
the South.

After his term ended, Dr. Edwards, who could not succeed himself, returned to
his Charleston practice early last year and for financial reasons, friends say,
decided to pass up a run for the Senate in 1980. Already, however, he is
regarded as a good bet to run for Governor again in 1982.

If so, he may have quickly fulfilled a goal he expressed last week when he
declared: ''I'd like to go to Washington and close the Energy Department down
and work myself out of a job.''

At a news conference today, however, when asked about the pledge by
President-elect Ronald Reagan to do just that, Dr. Edwards seemed to retreat
somewhat, speaking of ''streamlining'' the three-year-old department, which he
believes should have never been created.

Looking on was his wife, Ann, escorted by Senator Strom Thurmond, to whom he may
owe his appointment to a Cabinet in which the South is otherwise unrepresented.

Although Dr. Edwards disclaims much energy expertise - ''I think of myself as a
problem-solver'' - he has displayed more interest in the subject than perhaps
most governors.

An advocate of nuclear power, which is well entrenched in South Carolina, he
concluded early in his term that the state's economic development was at risk
for lack of energy resources and he created the South Carolina Energy Research
Institute to study its options.

Associates describe the former Governor as a staunch conservative who irritated
many blacks in fighting a running battle with the state welfare department over
allegedly wasteful practices, but won plaudits even from his opponents for
pressing an investigation in which five state policemen were sent to prison on
racketeering convictions.

Dr. Edwards also clashed with blacks when he declared on his return from a trip
to South Africa in 1977 that ''The black influence in American politics
prevented the white South African Government from getting its fair share of
sympathy and understanding.''

He later said that his comments had been ''misunderstood'' and that he did not
condone apartheid.  Although he was never accused of involvement, his other
major brush with controversy occurred with the arrest of an associate who was
convicted of using as a base for marijuana smuggling a small offshore island
south of Charleston owned by the associate, Dr. Edwards and several others.

The Florida-born nominee, who took his dental degree at the University of
Louisville in 1955, is no amateur politician, even though he tends to gravitate
back to the dentistry profession and once returned from the state capital to
Charleston on a Saturday to extract four wisdom teeth from the son of one of his
campaign cochairmen.

A long-time backer of Mr. Reagan, Dr. Edwards defected to John B.  Connally for
a time early this year.  The Edwardses live in an old white house overlooking
Charleston harbor. They have a son, James Jr., 26, and a daughter, Catharine,
21.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of James Edwards

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 23, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JEANNE KIRKPATRICK ON DEMOCRACY AND FOREIGN POLICY;
Creating Democracy

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1049 words


When U.S. policy makers and large portions of the liberal press interpret
insurgency as evidence of widespread popular discontent and a will to democracy,
the scene is set for disaster. For if civil strife reflects a popular demand for
democracy, it follows that a |iberalized'' Government will be more acceptable to
''public opinion.''

Thus, in the hope of strengthening a government, U.S. policy makers are led,
mistake after mistake, to impose measures almost certain to weaken its
authority. Hurried efforts to force complex and unfamiliar political practices
on societies lacking the requisite political culture, tradition, and social
structures not only fail to produce desired outcomes.

Vietnam presumably taught us that the United States could not serve as the
world's policeman; it should also have taught us the dangers of trying to be the
world's midwife to democracy when the birth is scheduled to take place under
conditions of guerrilla war.

Commentary magazine, November 1979

Carter's Foreign Policy

Something very odd is going on here. How does an Administration that desires to
let people work out their own destinies get involved in determined efforts at
reform in South Africa, Zaire, Nicaragua, El Salvador, and elsewhere? How can an
Administration committed to nonintervention in Cambodia and Vietnam announce
that it ''will not be deterred'' from righting wrongs in South Africa? What
should be made of an Administration that sees the U.S. interest as identical
with economic modernization and political independence and yet heedlessly
endangers the political independence of Taiwan, a country whose success in
economic modernization and egalitarian distribution of wealth is unequaled in
Asia? The contrast is as striking as that between the Administration's frenzied
speed in recognizing the new dictatorship in Nicaragua and its continuing
refusal to recognize the elected Government of Zimbabwe Rhodesia.

Commentary, November 1979

Autocrats, Right and Left

Generally speaking, traditional autocrats tolerate social inequities, brutality,
and poverty while revolutionary autocracies create them.

Traditional autocrats leave in place existing allocations of wealth, power,
status, and other resources which in most traditional societies favor an
affluent few and maintain masses in poverty. But they worship traditional gods
and observe traditional taboos. They do not disturb the habitual rhythms of work
and leisure, habitual places of residence, habitual patterns of family and
personal relations.  Because the miseries of traditional life are familiar, they
are bearable to ordinary people who, growing up in the society, learn to cope.
Such societies create no refugees.

Precisely the opposite is true of revolutionary Communist regimes.  They create
refugees by the millions because they claim jurisdiction over the whole life of
the society and make demands for change that so violate internalized values and
habits that inhabitants flee by the tens of thousands in the remarkable
expectation that their attitudes, values, and goals will ''fit'' better in a
foreign country than in their native land.

Commentary, November 1979

Third World Policy

A realistic policy which aims at protecting our own interest and assisting the
capacities for self-determination of less-developed nations will need to face
the unpleasant fact that, if victorious, violent insurgency headed by Marxist
revolutionaries is unlikely to lead to anything but totalitarian tyranny. Armed
intellectuals citing Marx and supported by Soviet-bloc arms and advisers will
almost surely not turn out to be agrarian reformers, or simple nationalists, or
democratic socialists. A posture of continuous self-abasement and apology
vis-a-vis the third world is neither morally necessary nor politically
appropriate.

Commentary, November 1979

On Being a Democrat

My grandparents, parents, aunts, uncles were all Democrats.  Changing parties is
thus like denying part of one's self and one's heritage. But persons to whom
policies and ideas are important find it difficult not to notice that the
contemporary Democratic Party is a far cry from the party of their parents, and
grandparents, or from the party of their youth, difficult not to notice that
their party produces Presidential candidates whose policies and commitments are
very different from their own.

Commonsense magazine, Fall 1979

On the Republican Party

Maybe Republicans are right not to embrace the Democrats' (or the Tories' or
Gaullists') versions of the welfare state. That is not the problem. The problem
is that the Republican Party has not articulated any inclusive vision of the
public good that reflects concern for the well-being of the whole community.
During the past half-century or so, Republican spokesmen have consistently
emphasized private concerns such as profit and taxes, and private virtues such
as selfdiscipline and self-reliance and either have not had, or have not
communicated, a persuasive conception of the public good.

Commonsense, Fall 1979

Latin America

Traditionally, the ideological content of Latin politics is low, but since both
the Socialist International and the radical Catholics conceive themselves as
specialists in rectitude, their participation has enhanced its moral intensity
at the same time that Cubans have increased their violence.

The United States ... has also exercised a veto over governments in the area and
reinforced with its tacit approval acceptable governments. Therefore, the
objective economic and political dependency of nations in the area has been
reinforced by a widespread sense of psychological dependency.  Paper presented
to the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, December 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Chart of Ronald Reagan's cabinet

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 23, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG, AND REAGAN'S MANDATE

BYLINE: By Norman Podhoretz

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 910 words


Why has there been so much opposition to the nomination of Alexander M. Haig Jr.
as Secretary of State?  If we take the published comment at face value, the main
reason is that there are what Senator Edward M. Kennedy calls ''serious
questions'' concerning Mr. Haig's role in the Watergate affair. But surely those
who raise these questions must realize that Mr. Haig would in all probability
never have slipped through the net of earlier investigations if any evidence had
existed against him.  Surely, too, he would never have agreed to his nomination
now if he knew that such evidence might still be found.

As for the firing of Archibald Cox as Watergate Special Prosecutor, it is
difficult to see what this is supposed to prove.  Richard M. Nixon as President
certainly had a legal right to fire Mr. Cox. Thus, in making sure that the order
was executed, Mr. Haig, as White House chief of staff, was not only acting
properly but also demonstrating loyalty to his superior - a quality that those
who raise this objection do not seem to understand might be considered a virtue.

Finally, there is the matter of Mr. Haig's support for the 1972 Christmas
bombing of North Vietnam. But here, again, those who raise this objection seem
not to understand that the horrors that have been visited upon the peoples of
Indochina under Communist rule have drained the antiwar argument of its old
persuasiveness. If, therefore, bringing up Watergate is more likely to place Mr.
Haig in a favorable light as a resolute and trustworthy person than to expose
him as unfit for high office, invoking the name of Vietnam is less likely to
discredit Mr. Haig than to remind us of how wrong - morally wrong and
politically wrong - his critics have proved to be about that war.

The stated objections to Mr. Haig, then, are hard to take at face value. But the
opposition to him can be explained easily enough in other terms. Most of the
people who have been attacking his nomination, I would guess, are against him
not so much because they disagree with his ideas about Vietnam as because they
disagree with his ideas about the Soviet Union.

Unlike President Carter, Mr. Haig does not think that the American fear of
Communism has been ''inordinate'' in the past, that the ''threat of conflict
with the Soviet Union has become less intensive,'' and that we should now be
paying more attention to North-South issues than to the dangers of Soviet
imperialism. Unlike the former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance, Mr. Haig does
not believe that the Soviet leaders have the same ''dreams and aspirations'' as
we do for peace and stability. Nor does he tend toward Secretary of State Edmund
S. Muskie's notion that Soviet foreign policy is largely determined by defensive
considerations.

On the contrary: Mr. Haig thinks that the danger we face from the Soviet Union
is, if anything, greater than it used to be. He sees in the Soviet military
buildup of the last 15 years a ''relentless'' threat, ''global in character,''
and aimed at ''the very nexus of Western vitality.'' He believes that we are now
confronted with ''a decision as to whether or not we will continue to seek a
world order hospitable to the Christian-Judeo values and interests of today.''
In his judgment, the great ''task ahead for this vital decade before us'' is
''the management of global Soviet power'' through an increase in our own power
and that of our European allies. What this means to Mr. Haig, among other
things, is the replacement of detente as it has been ''applied in recent years''
with ''a policy involving reciprocity and strength.''

These views have been criticized as narrow and vague. But they are in fact
sharply focused on the essentials and thus entirely clear - as clear, one might
say, as those of Ronald Reagan. And, indeed, in appointing Mr. Haig, more than
in anything else he has yet done, Mr.  Reagan has shown that he is serious:
serious in his apprehensions about the Soviet threat, and serious about
restoring our ability to meet that threat.

Since this is precisely what Mr. Reagan was elected to do, I think it can be
said that those who object to the appointment of Mr. Haig are actually objecting
to the results of the election. By conjuring up the ghosts of Watergate and
Vietnam, they are in effect trying to cast doubt on the legitimacy of the view
of the international situation that was ratified so overwhelmingly by the
electorate this year; and by speaking in scornful and patronizing terms of Mr.
Haig's ideas, they are in effect refusing to acknowledge that their own ideas
have just been overwhelmingly rejected by the American people as dangerous and
defeatist.

Neither tactic is likely to succeed in preventing Mr. Haig's confirmation as the
new Secretary of State. But it is, nevertheless, a pity that so much sterile
resistance should be offered to an appointment so strikingly and reassuringly
faithful to the mandate that Ronald Reagan received on Nov. 4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Norman Podhoretz, the editor of Commentary magazine, is author, most recently,
of ''The Present Danger.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 23, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DON'T RECOGNIZE HANOI

BYLINE: By Daniel C. Arnold and R. Sean Randolph

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 901 words

DATELINE: VIENNA, Va.


Now that United States policies are undergoing reassessment, one key policy
should remain unchanged: We should not recognize Vietnam. This position is born
from more than a lingering resentment resulting from America's Indochina
experience, or ideological differences. Rather, our withholding trade, aid, and
diplomatic recognition is a strategic principle related to the geopolitical
balance in Southeast Asia.

North Vietnam's blatant invasion of South Vietnam in April 1975, in defiance of
the Paris peace accords, brought down a longstanding ally. Hanoi's internal
repression has attracted severe criticism from the human-rights community. More
significant is Vietnam's surrogate relationship with the Soviet Union and the
threat it poses to the rest of Southeast Asia. Aggressive Vietnamese imperialism
acting as the regional vehicle for Soviet global expansionism is the major
destabilizing element in Southeast Asia.

Vietnam maintains an occupation army of 200,000 in Cambodia. Though under the
nominal leadership of Heng Samrin, Cambodia is ruled by a Vietnamese military
government that has discouraged the emergence of a viable, potentially
independent indigenous administrative structure.

It is clear from Asian history that Hanoi considers itself the dominant power in
Southeast Asia, with a manifest destiny to control Indochina. Laos is
indisputably controlled by Vietnam; all that remains for the achievement of
Hanoi's objective is suppression of military resistance to its occupation of
Cambodia. Once that is achieved, the integration of the three Indochinese
countries into a Vietnam-dominated ''federation'' will be realized.

Given the disastrous condition of Vietnam's economy and the enormous cost of
waging war in Cambodia, Vietnam's extended position in Indochina could not be
maintained without substantial Soviet backing, which Moscow does not give
without a quid pro quo. Soviet naval vessels - now more than 18 ships in the
South China Sea - regularly call at Danang and Cam Ranh Bay; TU-95 long-range
reconaissance and TU-142 antisubmarine aircraft operate out of Danang. The
Russians have established sophisticated electronic-intelligence, radar, and
telecommunications facilities, and Soviet advisers play an increasingly visible
role throughout Indochina.

Vietnam finds Soviet support essential to its expansionist objectives, and the
Soviet Union finds in Vietnam a unique power base from which to put pressure on
China and on ASEAN (the Association of Southeast Asian Nations). A united
Indochina under Vietnamese leadership would stand as a major threat to China; to
Thailand as the ''frontline state,'' and the other ASEAN members: Indonesia,
Malaysia, the Philippines, and Singapore. From this base, Vietnam could exert
pressure on their governments, neutralizing them politically while undermining
ASEAN. The economic viability and political security of non-Communist Southeast
Asian countries is a vital American interest, for the commercial and military
lines of communication between the Pacific and Indian Oceans run through them.

Diplomatic recognition of Vietnam would play into the Soviet Union's and
Vietnam's hands, strengthening their position in Laos and Cambodia, but would
gain the United States nothing. Instead, an effective American policy must be
based on the recognition that the Soviet Union is an Asian power and that
Vietnam's military alliance with the Soviet Union poses a major threat to us and
to allied interests. Every effort should be made to persuade Vietnam to withdraw
from Laos and Cambodia and to cooperate in relieving the sufferings of the
hundreds of thousands of refugees who have fled those countries. This might best
be done through aggressive support for an international conference on Cambodia
while working for the creation of genuinely neutral regimes in Laos and Cambodia
that would be threatening to neither Vietnam nor ASEAN.

Thailand should receive sufficient economic and military assistance to defend
itself against Vietnamese attacks and to strengthen its internal structures.
America must also continue its humanitarian assistance to the Indochinese
refugees in Thailand and other Southeast Asian nations.

Our policy toward Vietnam is based on American and non-Communist interests in a
stable, secure Southeast Asia. That stability is under severe pressure from
Hanoi's aggressive military alliance with Moscow and its own imperial ambitions.
Above all, we must avoid strengthening either Soviet or Vietnamese power in the
absence of major good-faith concessions by Vietnam. Only when Vietnam has shown
itself responsible, willing to live in peace with its neighbors and to shed its
role as a Soviet proxy, should America extend diplomatic recognition.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Daniel C. Arnold, who spent 37 years in the Government working on, and in Asia,
heads a consulting firm that specializes in Asia. Sean Randolph is senior
foreign policy analyst for the House Republican Study Committee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 23, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIEW FROM THE LAB: PROSPECTS ARE GLUM FOR ENGINEERS;
100,4.9;
WEST LAFAYETTE, Ind.

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 2; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1486 words


LONG rows of hulking green machines fill one of the engineering laboratories
here at Purdue University: screw machines, turret lathes, various milling and
grinding contraptions. Unfortunately, most of them are ''museum pieces,'' in the
words of Purdue's chairman of industrial engineering, Wilbur L. Meier. ''These
are mostly World War II surplus,'' he said. ''We cannot teach our students
modern manufacturing methods with these.''

The situation is much the same 250 miles across the midwestern industrial belt
at Ohio State University, where students have begun to complain to the provost
about being closed out of overcrowded courses. Dean Donald D. Glower says he had
to begin the last quarter short by 18 professors; students begin to line up at 7
A.M. to fight for a chance to work on badly outdated computers.

Leaders of the engineering profession say that the nation has permitted its
engineering schools to erode just when the link between technological prowess
and American productivity and security is being more clearly recognized. They
cite the technical demands of the energy crisis, of national defense, automobile
design, environmental protection - demands that require a well-trained corps of
engineers if this country is to maintain the industrial innovation needed to
meet stern foreign competition.

But they say, paradoxically, that industry itself is rapidly devouring the
nation's engineering seed corn. It is luring seasoned professors away from the
colleges with high salaries and making such attractive job offers to new
engineering graduates that few young people are willing to stay on for the
graduate training needed to produce new faculty members.

Last October, in a report to the President, the National Science Foundation and
the Department of Education glumly depicted the state of American scientific and
engineering education. In particular, the report urged the Government to upgrade
research and training equipment at campus engineering and computer departments,
and recommended new incentives to provide professors for burdened engineering
schools - whose enrollments reached historic highs this year after slumping
during the Vietnam years.

In response, the science foundation has promised more money for engineering and
is creating a separate directorate of engineering.  But though the agency's new
director, John B. Slaughter, has sought to minimize the conflicts, the efforts
are bringing out long-latent antagonisms between the engineers and the ''pure''
scientists, whom the engineers feel have received more than their share share of
the glory and the money.

Dean Glower of Ohio State seemed to reveal just such feelings recently when he
told academic and industrial colleagues that America and England have been
''winning Nobel laureates and building trade deficits'' while Japan and Germany
have been busy ''applying our technology to corner world markets for
themselves.'' To save itself, ''the U.S. must free itself from the grasp of
traditionalists, the high priests of the liberal arts who yearn for a utopia
that never was, or at best seek to preserve a status quo more relevant to the
Dark Ages than to the current age of technology.'' Engineers, Dean Glower said,
must communicate the ''inherent terror'' of the situation to the public.

While such engineering spokesmen as Dean Glower might be exaggerating for
effect, there seems little doubt that engineering is under severe strain.

Demand-Pull Enrollments

One cause of the problem is also, in the long run, a step toward its solution:
the sudden and staggering increase in undergraduate engineering enrollments. The
number of bachelor's degrees awarded nationally jumped by nearly 40 percent in
just four years -from 38,210 in 1975 to 52,598 in 1979. Enrollments in some
specialties, such as mining, and nuclear and petroleum engineering, have tripled
or quadrupled in a decade. Why? ''Just go and try and get a job and see where
they are - engineering is wide open,'' said Donald F.  Schriner, a Purdue
sophomore.

''In the mid-60's, engineering was looked on as a detriment - now we are viewed
as a good thing, so the best students are flocking in,'' said Dean Daniel
Drucker at the University of Illinois, where they have had to restrict
engineering enrollments.

But most schools have been unable to hire many new professors, so class sizes
are swelling and laboratories bursting at the seams.  Classes have typically
swelled from 25 or 30 to 60 or 70 on many campuses.

At Ohio State, for example, the chairman of electrical engineering, Prof. H.C.
Ko, reports that the ''Switching Circuits Laboratory'' has been expanded to six
sections with 150 students for the next quarter, and 27 students still had to be
turned away. Meanwhile, ''Introduction to Digital Systems'' has had to shut out
30 students.  Professor Ko and other department chairmen are trying to
accommodate the overflow by hiring part-time instructors from nearby commercial
research laboratories and by borrowing equipment.

A Drought of Doctorates

But is unclear who will teach in the future. While undergraduate enrollments
have soared, graduate ranks in engineering have remained about steady - meaning
that the number of new Ph.D's in engineering, the people who might go into
teaching, is not increasing. Moreover, nearly half of the graduate students are
foreigners.

The reason is that starting salaries in industry for young engineers with
bachelor's degrees now range from $20,000 to $25,000 or higher - more than an
assistant professor would earn after years of advanced training. Dean Glower
says, ''A youngster with a bachelor's degree says 'If I listen to the guys on
the faculty and put in four more years for a Ph.D, then I can come back to teach
and make $22,500.'''

The deans are asking the Federal Government to provide scholarships to produce
1,000 additional Ph.D's every year; various engineering groups have estimated
there is a national faculty shortage of 2,000 professors.

Retaining and recruiting faculty has become a headache for the schools. At
Purdue, Dean John C. Hancock says he has been looking for a professor of
integrated optics - an important new field that involves the transmission of
information through fibers - for years.  They recently found the right man in
industry, but he spurned the school's offer of $55,000 in salary and $1 million
in equipment as inadequate. So the school offers no courses in this key field.

The mechanical engineering department at Ohio State, whose enrollments have
doubled since 1975, needs 8 to 10 more professors.  The chairman, Prof. James E.
A. John, says advertisements usually elicit 50 to 100 responses, only 10 from
Americans; of those, only four are suitable, and other schools are competing for
them.

Who Wants to Teach?

Even retaining good professors is difficult. Dean Hancock was recently offered
$140,000 to join a large industrial company, more than twice his $65,000 salary
at Purdue. He demurred because he says he prefers the freedom of academic life
and working with young people. But mounting enrollments and antiquated equipment
have reduced that attraction for many.

What makes the engineering problem so intractable is that engineering research
and training depend so much on costly equipment. Technology advances so rapidly
that it may take several million dollars every few years for a school to keep up
with the latest in, say, solid-state circuits. Prof. Clarence L. Coates, head of
electrical engineering at Purdue, says his department is 10 years behind the
times in equipment. One essential machine, for example, inserts very small
amounts of one material into another to alter the electrical characteristics of
a semiconductor; it costs around $500,000.

In addition, scholars say it is essential for professors to do research to
remain on top of their specialities and to train new scholars.

But who should pay for all this equipment, salaries, research and training is
much debated. Thus far, American industry - with some notable exceptions - has
made little contribution to the schools it expects to train its new employees.
The schools look mainly to Washington, but the new Reagan Administration, while
expected to be sympathetic to their pleas, has promised to cut Government
spending.

But few would argue with Prof. Gerold W. Neudeck, who teaches integrated
circuits at Purdue, when he says: ''We provide industry with its heart and soul
- good highly trained engineers cost money.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of industrial engineer (Page C2) Photo of an
engineer and his equipment

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 23, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

'HEAVEN'S GATE' IS RE-EDITED BY CIMINO FOR FUTURE RE-RELEASE

BYLINE: By ELEANOR BLAU

SECTION: Section C; Page 5, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 462 words


''Heaven's Gate,'' the epic $36 million western by Michael Cimino that was
withdrawn by United Artists last month after critics at its first screening
expressed almost universal scorn, may be making a comeback soon.

Mr. Cimino, whose previous film was the Oscar-winning ''The Deer Hunter,'' has
re-edited the 225-minute ''Heaven's Gate,'' cutting it by more than an hour, and
United Artists executives said they would release it after a little more cutting
and ''fine tuning.'' The additional cost, they estimated, would be less than
$500,000.

''We saw a 2-hour-40-minute version Friday,'' Hy Smith, a United Artists
spokesman, said, ''and we were very, very happy about what we saw. He not only
edited it, but also added some connective scenes, perhaps from the cutting-room
floor, which he had not felt necessary to include in the original.''

Shortens Some Scenes

Mr. Cimino, who wrote and directed ''Heaven's Gate,'' also shortened some of the
scenes, Mr. Smith said, adding that ''One of the major problems that people had
with the film was that certain scenes just dragged.'' And, he said, Mr. Cimino
dealt with another criticism - that the film was difficult to follow - by
changing its structure somewhat, establishing certain relationships between
characters earlier than before.

The director himself wants to make some additional changes, feeling that a few
scenes ''didn't work'' during the screening Friday, Mr.  Smith reported, and he
was asked to return ''sometime in January with a tighter and hopefully final
version. Then, once we estimate how long it will take to re-score and re-sound,
we will prognosticate what date it can be released,'' Mr. Smith said, explaining
that ''one of the problems with the original version was that the sound and
music sometimes overpowered the voices.''

Based on Historical Incident

The film, which stars Kris Kristofferson, Christopher Walken and Isabelle
Huppert, is based on a historical incident in Johnson County, Wyo., in 1890, in
which wealthy cattle barons conspired to murder German, Bulgarian, Russian and
Ukrainian settlers encroaching on their lands.

Reviewing ''Heaven's Gate'' in The New York Times, Vincent Canby said it ''fails
so completely that you might suspect Mr. Cimino sold his soul to the Devil to
obtain the success of 'The Deer Hunter,' and the Devil has just come around to
collect. The grandeur of vision of the Vietnam film has turned pretentious. The
feeling for character has vanished and Mr. Cimino's approach to his subject is
so predictable that watching the film is like a forced, four-hour walking tour
of one's own living room.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 24, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Bleier's Finale: He'll Miss Games and Guys

BYLINE: By WILLIAM N. WALLACE

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 755 words


Rocky Bleier's last football game on Monday night was less than auspicious as
his team, the Pittsburgh Steelers, lost to the San Diego Chargers, 26-17, and
Bleier had his hands on the ball only a few times.

He carried twice, gaining 13 yards, and the officials, without appreciation of
the occasion, ruled against him on two pass-catching attempts.

''If they had any sense of theater,'' said Ed Kiely, the Steeler publicity
director, ''they would have given Rocky that last one for a touchdown as a
goodbye present.''

Bleier caught a tipped ball in the end zone near the finish, but the official
rulings were that he had been out of bounds and that Terry Bradshaw, the passer,
had been sacked, so the play ended before he threw the pass.

''They were 0 for 2 against me,'' Bleier said. He had earlier caught a low pass,
but an official said the ball had hit the ground first. ''It had,'' said Bleier,
''but I thought they should have given it to me because I made such a nice
catch.''

He spoke by telephone yesterday from his home in Fox Chapel, Pa., which he
reached at 7 o'clock this morning after the team had flown home from San Diego.
The season is over, and the Steelers are out of the playoffs for the first time
in nine seasons.

Bleier, who said last summer that this would be his final season, enjoyed a more
fitting farewell in the last home game eight days before, against the Kansas
City Chiefs. The Steelers won when Bleier scored a touchdown on his favorite
play, 84 trap, an inside slant on which he gained 11 yards. There were cheers in
Three Rivers Stadium, none in San Diego.

Bleier had prepared himself for his last game. ''I did not think about it being
the last one on purpose,'' he said. ''It was not so much the last game that got
me, but having to say goodbye.

''I'm not going to miss the practices. I'm not going to miss the training camps.
The biggest thing is the competition, the Sundays, the Monday nights. And the
guys.

''Games are emotional to begin with, and it probably was not the right time to
try to say goodbye. You're up for the game, the emotion is there.''

His teammates, one by one, wished him well. ''What was different,'' he said,
''was knowing you'll never be in that position again or have those relationships
again.

''That was the toughest thing, to say goodbye to Franco, to say goodbye to Dick
Hoak. It was something special, all the backfield situations that Franco and I
had met, and Dick Hoak coming back to coach us after he had been my teammate.''

Bleier had returned to the Steelers as a wounded Vietnam War veteran in 1972,
the rookie season for Franco Harris, the fullback.  By 1974, Bleier was the
regular halfback and the two played side by side in four winning Super Bowl
contests. Hoak, the backfield coach, was the Steelers' best running back - and
just about their only one - when Bleier arrived in 1968 as a 16th-round draft
choice from Notre Dame.

He said he survived the farewells and the sense of finality until the charter
flight landed in Pittsburgh. ''I fought back the tears fairly well,'' he said.
''I was really proud of myself, in the locker room and afterwards. I fought 'em
back even on the plane.''

At the airport before dawn, he got in his car and drove home.  ''That's when it
hit,'' he said.  After some sleep, he tackled his emotions and spoke of his
attitude. Regrets? Not a single one.  ''I'm so glad I made this my retirement
year,'' he said. ''My body was telling me to retire. I could feel those little
screams in many different places.

''I feel lucky having accomplished so much. I thanked the Lord again for letting
me play all these years, for letting me be a part of a team that could go down
as the best ever.

''I don't have to look back and say, 'Oh gosh, we didn't do it.' Or that I
didn't fulfill my fantasies. Or live up to my expectations. I don't have a sense
of having to hang on.''

Bleier is a sports broadcaster for a television station in Pittsburgh, and he
hopes to be hired by a network as a game analyst.  He said he believed that
broadcasting would keep him close to football.

But he can never be a member of the team again. ''That's right,'' he said.
''Teams have special relationships. When you're on the outside, you can never be
a member of the team again.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Rocky Bleier

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Around the World;
261 Vietnamese Refugees In Bangkok on Way to U.S.

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 138 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 25


Two hundred and sixty one Vietnamese men, women and children arrived here today
on the first stop of a journey to new homes in the United States.

Lee J. Peters, a United States Consul who headed the American team that
processed the refugees in Ho Chi Minh City, said he expected those aboard
today's flight to continue on ''within a few days.''

A total of 518 refugees who came out on the two previous flights this month have
been resettled in the United States, he said.  Vietnam agreed in 1979 to
cooperate with other countries to let citizens leave legally. Refugees had been
fleeing in open boats across the South China Sea or trekking overland through
Cambodia, often to countries that did not want them.

The next flight from Vietnam is scheduled for Jan. 8.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              364 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AFGHAN WAR: A YEAR LATER;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words


One year after Moscow's military intervention in Afghanistan, Soviet forces are
still encountering formidable opposition from Afghan rebels. But the resistance
is dwindling, according to experts' studies of the situation, and enormous aid
from abroad would be needed to break the Soviet grip.

In Washington, State Department officials believe the Russians intend to fashion
Afghanistan into a satellite nation comparable to Mongolia but are still meeting
stiff opposition from Afghan rebels.

According to Afghan rebels and some European and American analysts, however,
resistance is fading because of a lack of foreign arms and unity among the
insurgents.

Military analysts agree that, after a year, Afghanistan has not become the ''
Vietnam'' for the Soviet Union that was widely forecast when the Russians troops
first went into the mountain nation.

Assessment of Analysts

According to the analysts, these are the reasons the occupation has not become a
quagmire for the Russians:

- No outside military power is providing arms for the insurgents on the scale of
the Soviet Union's military assistance to the Vietnamese.

- Outside military and political direction, such as that the North Vietnamese
Government gave the Vietcong, does not exist and there is no firm base to which
the insurgents can retire, as the Vietcong could when they retreated to North
Vietnam and Cambodia at intervals in the Vietnam War.

- The rival tribal factions among the insurgents are no closer to a united front
than they were when the Russians struck. The Sovietsupported Government of
Babrak Karmal has problems with internal opposition factions and with troops
defections.

But it can rely on the support of the Soviet Army and on thousands of Russian
advisers who have assumed commanding power in every ministry.

State Department officials say that 75 percent of the countryside is outside the
Government's control and that the Soviet forces and what remains of the Afghan
Army control only cities and towns. This may be true on any given day, other
analysts concede, but it does not account for the complete freedom of operations
of the Soviet Army. They emphasize that no village, no crossroads hamlet, no
caravan is safe from attack by Soviet helicopter gunships, which now number
about 240, and which have proven the most effective weapon against rebellion.

In any case, the extent of the insurgency is far smaller than anticipated in the
first months of the Soviet occupation. According to Afghan sources, no more than
1,000 rebels are in contact with the Soviet forces at one time on any day and
their effectiveness is limited to occasional successful attacks on single trucks
- convoys are too well protected - and on isolated Soviet outposts.

The rebels' freedom to operate is limited today, as it has been from the start,
by the character of the terrain. There are no jungles to provide shelter and
many of the mountain hideouts that have served the tribes against invaders and
troops from Kabul for generations have been made uninhabitable by napalm from
Soviet fighter-bombers.

Rebels' Weapons Inadequate

At the start of the occupation's second year there are no firm indications that
the insurgents' deficiencies in arms will be made up by shipments from outside.
At the most, the Afghans have five or six launchers for surface-to-air missiles
that could be employed against the gunships and their supply of missiles is
limited.

No major supplies of weapons needed by the insurgents have reached them. These
would include heavy machine guns, grenades, mines and demolition equipment and
ammunition. The insurgents' basic weapon remains what it was a year ago, the
locally made version of the Lee-Enfield rifle.

European and American analysts believe that arms can reach the insurgents only
if the Pakistan Government is given a guarantee by the United States coupled
with extensive arms aid. The Carter Administration refused to provide either.

Some analysts who see an opportunity in Afghanistan to embarrass the Russians
militarily hope that the incoming Reagan administration will review the
situation.

The Russians have not escaped unscathed from what a State Department report
calls an effort ''to cement Afghanistan into the Soviet orbit.''

Dispute on Soviet Casualties

The department's estimate that the Soviet Union has suffered 15,000 dead or
wounded is disputed by some outside sources, who put the total at about 10,000.
Nor do these sources accept the State Department estimate that the Soviet Union
would need 170,000 to 255,000 troops to pacify the country.

Those estimates, they suggest, betray an ignorance of the role and flexibility
of air power in a country where there is no natural cover and where a single
bombing attack can eliminate a village.

The Russians made a number of serious mistakes when they entered the country.
Among them were their excessive reliance on heavy weapons, tanks, armored
personnel carriers and medium field artillery, their failure at the outset to
patrol the roads and pathways from Afghanistan into Pakistan, their
overconfidence that led to the loss of patrols straying too far from the main
body of troops and their misplaced trust in the fighting quality the Afghan
Army.

The character of the Soviet forces has changed since the first days of the
invasion. Lightly armed infantry provide the bulk of the combat forces
accompanied by helicopter gunships. The fighter-bombers are used sparingly.
Tanks are seldom employed although armored personnel carriers occasionally
accompany infantry units on forays against insurgents.

From the insurgents' standpoint one of the distressing developments has been the
flow of refugees out of Afghanistan. The latest State Department figures are
that there are 1,267,000 refugees in Pakistan and about 250,000 in Iran.

The State Department analysis claimed that ''the situation in Afghanistan is a
standoff after a year of punishing Soviet military operations.'' They called
this ''a psychological victory for the nationalists.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              365 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK Reehling;
IN POLITICAL THEAER, SOFT CAMPAIGN IS BEST

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1448 words


NINETEEN EIGHTY was not just a political year in real life; it rapidly become a
political year in the theater. In one way or another, political issues surfaced
in many of the fall's major plays, including such short-lived diversions as
''Division Street,''''The Suicide,''''The American Clock'' and even, God help
us, ''Onward Victoria.'' Right now four of the best new theatrical evenings in
town deal with contemporary political matters: Athol Fugard's ''A Lesson From
Aloes,'' Lanford Wilson's ''Fifth of July,'' Amlin Gray's ''How I Got That
Story'' and JoAnne Akalaitis's ''Dead End Kids.'' If there were only a debate
about class theory in ''Brigadoon,'' one might be tempted to call this
development a trend.

Of course, political theater is not always a good thing. In the wrong hands, it
can be a disaster. Audiences are willing, I think, to face alien ideological
views in a theater, but they quite rightly have no stomach for boredom. In
failed political theater - remember ''Zoot Suit''? - actors come out and hector
the audience about the obvious. A perfect example of such silliness was provided
this season by the Manhattan Theater Club's production of the Canadian drama
''One Tiger to a Hill.'' That play actually began with a guilt-ridden liberal
lawyer stepping forward to chide the audience about the need for prison reform.
He was a fine-looking fellow with the obligatory furrowed brow and three-piece
suit, but who needs him? Most people are in favor of humane prisons before they
arrive at the theater - and, if not, they're not going to be won over by an
unctuous advocate. Listening to this fellow, we're tempted to yell back,
''Enough already! I gave at the office.''

Smart playwrights never stoop so low. In adventurous works like ''How I Got That
Story'' and ''Dead End Kids,'' old issues like the Vietnam War and nuclear
holocaust are refurbished with new images and comic conceits. When the cast of
''Dead End Kids'' launches into a vibrant rendition of a 1940's pop song
(''Hubba Hubba'') celebrating the bombing of Hiroshima, we're forced to
re-examine the dehumanizing impact of the bomb on our cultural and moral
sensibilities. In ''How I Got That Story,'' we meet a maimed war photographer
who's proud of having snapped a shot of his own dismemberment. We laugh at the
joke - and then remember all over again just how perversely the Vietnam War
affected not only its victims but also its innocent bystanders.

More traditional plays also find a way to sneak in their messages when the
audience isn't looking. ''Fifth of July'' is about Berkeley activists of the
1960's who reunite in a Missouri farmhouse in 1977.  The Vietnam War has had a
profound - and often tragic -impact on virtually every character on stage, from
the pill-popping heiress (Swoosie Kurtz) who once firebombed her own family's
business to the schoolteacher (Christopher Reeve) who lost his legs in battle.
But Lanford Wilson, who hides his comedy's plot in the Chekhovian manner, does
the same with his politics. There isn't a single debate about Vietnam in the
play; the references to the salad days of the anti-war movement are usually
inferential. Nor will Mr. Wilson make an issue out of the homosexuality of the
evening's principal love relationship.

This is how it should be. Paraplegic Vietnam veterans, ex-radicals and
homosexuals do not spend their days talking about their identities; like
everyone else, they go on with the daily business of life. By truthfully
capturing the intimate behavior, at once painful and comic and affectionate, of
his dislocated characters, Mr. Wilson creates a more compelling portrait of
Vietnam's complex legacy than any moralizing speeches ever could. Athol Fugard
takes a similar course in ''Aloes.'' Rather than lecture us about apartheid,
this South African playwright burrows into the souls of three people (two of
them white) whose private, personal sorrows are metaphors for the tragedy of
their nation. ''Aloes'' is a domestic drama that just happens to make a very
familiar political evil suddenly seem horrifying all over again.

A horror of a far more trivial nature can be found in many of this season's more
important theatrical endeavors: counterproductive sets. It's unusual to see so
many plays that are hopelessly gummed up by their scenery before a single actor
appears on stage; maybe gremlins are at work. Certainly that seemed to be the
case with ''The American Clock.'' This Arthur Miller play had a fine,
straightforward set in its original incarnation last spring at the Spoleto
Festival in Charleston. By the time it reached Broadway, some bright soul had
added a backdrop featuring a cloudy map of the United States. I think the map
was meant to symbolize the distress of the Great Depression, but all it really
did was make one look for a weatherman. It was typical of everything else that
went wrong with this once-promising play.

For sheer ugliness, there was ''Perfectly Frank,'' the sometimes amiable Frank
Loesser revue that closed recently. Entering the Helen Hayes Theater, the
audience confronted a purple curtain that one wouldn't want to find in a motel
shower stall, not to mention a Broadway musical. When it parted to reveal the
set within, we were greeted by an archway of concentric gray flats that looked
almost as soiled as the walls of a public animal shelter. Since ''Perfectly
Frank'' only played one city prior to New York, our suspicions were aroused. Was
the set picked up cheap from a defunct bus-and-truck tour of ''Oh! Calcutta!''?

Down at the Public, where Andrei Serban's production of ''The Sea Gull'' was
recently stumbling about, much (though not all) of the confusion took place on a
bridge that dominated the set designed by the usually clever Michael H. Yeargan.
It was a pretty set -it used more blond wood than I've seen since the late Boris
Aronson's huge sushi bar of a stagefloor for ''Pacific Overtures'' - but it
might have been more appropriate for ''Bridge on the River Kwai.'' The bridge
not only extended the play's entrances and exits interminably, but it also
dislocated the geography of Chekhov's household. I'm still not sure where the
estate's lake was supposed to be in Act I.  In Act IV, when Nina made the
evening's most dramatic entrance, she was unaccountably allowed to skip the
bridge entirely. Maybe she got a note from home.

The biggest clinker, though, is John Conklin's vertigo-inducing Main Line
mansion for ''The Philadelphia Story'' at the Vivian Beaumont. Lincoln Center's
luckless theater has enough problems without a set that goes out of its way to
accentuate the awkward dimensions of the stage and the auditorium. Mr. Conklin's
vision of a Main Line mansion isn't just huge, however; it's so overstuffed with
chintz-upholstered furniture that it swallows up the entire production. When
this set is finally dismantled, some smart entrepreneur should buy it all up
cheap and open a hotel in Miami Beach.

At least ''The Philadelphia Story'' presents a sympathetic portrait of its
namesake city. This show aside, the home of Frank Rizzo and Rocky is taking a
beating in the theater. In such recent Albert Innaurato plays as ''Gemini'' and
''Passione,'' South Philadelphia looks like a colorful enough place - but given
the peeling paint and nosy, noisy neighbors, who would actually want to live
there? I dare say Mr. Innaurato isn't dying to go home again.

In ''The Woolgatherer,'' the Circle Repertory Company's hit of last summer, we
were taken to a North Philadelphia apartment with dark walls, a few sticks of
furniture, a hanging lightbulb and a window that looked out on an airshaft. But
if there's any theater in town that seems to have a particular grudge against
Philadelphia, it's the Negro Ensemble Company. The first two plays of its new
season - ''The Sixteenth Round'' and the current ''Zooman and the Sign'' - both
take place in grim, joylessly furnished Philadelphia homes that are menaced by
criminals.

No one protests, of course. Ever since W.C. Fields, the city of brotherly love
has been fair game for anyone who wishes to insult it. But if that prison lawyer
from ''One Tiger to a Hill'' wants to take on a cause that really is unpopular,
now is clearly the time for the Philadelphia defense fund.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Christopher Reeve, Swoosie Kurtz, Jonathan
Hogan ans Joyce

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              366 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 27, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

MICHIGAN TO RELEASE ITS FILES ABOUT POLITICAL SURVEILLANCE

BYLINE: By REGINALD STUART, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 964 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, Dec. 26


After a six-year legal battle, the State of Michigan is set to release next
month nearly half a million pages of political surveillance information compiled
on some 38,000 state residents from 1950 through 1974.

The action was ordered by two judges who found unconstitutional a 1950 state law
authorizing a ''Red Squad'' in the State Police Department with responsibility
for compiling dossiers. The judges said the act of compiling such information
was in itself unconstitutional and a violation of First Amendment rights.

The City of Detroit, which had no ordinance providing for political surveillance
but compiled such files on more than 100,000 residents from the 1930's through
the 1970's, is also preparing to open its files in May to persons about whom it
collected information, because a court found its activities unconstitutional as
well.

The state and city are each expected to spend several hundred thousand dollars
in efforts to notify those who were objects of the surveillance, many of whom
are now prominent politicians, judges, business executives, labor leaders and
educators.

Damage Suits Expected

Lawsuits seeking damages are likely after the files are distributed, according
to Howard Simon, director of the Michigan Civil Liberties Union. Mr. Simon was
on the team of lawyers representing plaintiffs in one of the cases and he later
learned that he was the subject of a ''Red Squad'' file.

George Weller, a Michigan assistant attorney general who handled the state's
defense in the litigation over the surveillance and files, said he could not
speculate on the possibility of suits against the state.

The release of the files could be blocked by the intervention of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation. John Anthony, a spokesman for the Detroit office of the
bureau, said the agency might ask that the files not be released until it
checked the information in them to assure that its release would not disclose
any intelligence investigatory techniques or information that could lead to the
identification of bureau informers. Attorneys for the plaintiffs said that they
would vigorously oppose F.B.I. intervention, which they said could delay for as
long as two years the distribution of the files.

Lawsuits similar to the two in Michigan are pending in New York City, Seattle,
Chicago and Los Angeles, according to attorneys for one of the plaintiff groups
here. They believe that the cases here are the first to reach a point where the
police have been forced to notify citizens that they can claim their files.

Perception of Communist Threat

The ''Red Squad'' intelligence program was Michigan's answer to the post-World
War II perception of a Communist threat to the American Government. Detroit's
surveillance program was believed to have started in the 1930's when workers
began trying to organize labor unions.

In the course of the legal battles, plaintiffs found that files were being
established on people and organizations for activities ranging from protests of
the Vietnam War to criticism of a lawmaker by a consumer group.

''The files clearly contained public information, such as that can be gathered
from reading the newspapers or something,'' said Mr.  Simon. ''But a lot of
information that could be gathered only through infiltration of organizations
and meetings was in these files also.  Some had the names of people attending
meetings, membership lists of organizations and the license numbers of cars
parked near where meetings were held whether it was known if the drivers or
owners of these vehicles were in the meetings or not.''

Two lawsuits brought in 1974 led to the discovery of the extent to which
surveillance was being conducted.

Suits Filed in Two Courts

The principal lawsuit was filed in Wayne County Circuit Court by Walter Benkert,
head of the Michigan Association for Consumer Protection, and his group against
the State Police Department and Detroit Police Department after the consumer
group learned that the state police had begun an investigation after reading a
letter critical of a state lawmaker in the group's newsletter.

The second suit was brought in Ingham County Circuit Court by Zolton Ferency, a
one-time Democratic candidate for governor in Michigan. After the judge in the
Ferency case found in 1976 that the Red Squad law was unconstitutional, he
turned jurisdiction on the final formula for distributing the files over to the
court handling the Benkert case.

There were no appeals on the merits of the case, only on the procedural issue of
allowing people to see the information in their files.

The Legislature acted two years ago to abolish other laws with surveillance
provisions similar to those of the ''Red Squad'' law.  Last month the State
Police mailed some 32,500 notices to individuals whose names it had on file and
published advertisements in papers around the state asking those who thought
files might have been compiled on them to respond if they wanted to see the
information.

Among those who have received notices that the state has files on them are Joyce
Garrett, public information director for the City of Detroit; Mary Ellen
Riordan, retiring president of the Detroit Federation of Teachers; Emil Mazey
and Irving Bluestone, retired executives of the United Auto Workers; former
United States Representative Ray Clevenger of Ann Arbor; Patricia Blackwell,
founder of the Michigan chapter of the National Organization for Women; Roger
Craig, former corporation counsel for Detroit; Robert Blackwell, Mayor of
Highland Park, Mich., and Robert Repas, a professor at Michigan State University
in Lansing.

As far as lawyers in the cases said they could determine, none of the people on
whom files were kept were ever indicted on any criminal charge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 7, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
In an article Dec. 27 about a suit challenging police surveillance in Michigan,
the role of Howard L. Simon, executive director of the state's Civil Liberties
Union, was incorrectly stated. Mr. Simon is not an attorney.

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              367 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW ADMINISTRATION AND CONGRESS FACE MAJOR IMMIGTRATION DECISIONS

BYLINE: By JOHN M. CREWDSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 4304 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


After years of relative inattention to the control of immigration, there are
signs that the incoming Congress, with encouragement from the Reagan
administration, may confront a difficult question: How wide open should the door
be through which millions of immigrants have stepped?

The impending debate, certain to be spirited and divisive, follows a year in
which nearly half the country's population growth has been attributable to legal
immigration and in which, by most estimates, illegal immigration has never been
greater.

Indeed, the 1970's may be remembered as the decade of the immigrant. In the last
10 years, the United States has absorbed more than four million immigrants and
refugees and perhaps twice that number of illegal aliens, more new residents
than in any decade in its history.  If current immigration and fertility rates
remain the same, the nation's population will double in 100 years.

'Not Sure Problems Are Soluble'

The immigration control system is in such disarray, many officials acknowledge,
that practically anyone who wishes to and who can afford the passage can come to
the United States, legally or illegally, and stay for months or years, if not
for good. Until now the prevailing attitude, in Congress and elsewhere, has
appeared to be fatalistic, typified by a Democratic Congressional aide who
remarked: ''I'm not sure the problems are soluble anyway. A lot of it is beyond
our control.''

But there are growing indications, in public opinion polls and in angry letters
from constituents, that many Americans, convinced that immigrants are taking
their jobs, draining the treasury and dividing cities into isolated and
increasingly hostile ethnic communities, are demanding a solution. One recent
poll by the Roper Organization showed that nine of 10 of those surveyed
supported an ''all-out effort'' to halt illegal immigration and that eight of 10
favored reducing the number of legal immigrants.

Senator Alan K. Simpson attributes this reaction to ''compassion fatigue,'' and
there can be no disputing that America in recent years has displayed an
abundance of compassion. In 1970, some 373,000 immigrants and refugees were
legally admitted to the United States. This year, counting 160,000 Cuban and
Haitian ''boat people'' who were not invited but who are being allowed to
remain, there will be more than 763,000, more than will be taken in by all other
countries combined.

''Somewhere along the line we're going to have to learn to say 'no,''' said
Senator Simpson, a Wyoming Republican. As head of the revitalized Senate
subcommittee on immigration, he said, his task will be to take the expected
legislative reforms from the Reagan White House and ''get the stuff up for a
vote.''

''The real issue,'' said the Senator, who reflects the conservative mood of the
incoming 97th Congress, ''and the one I intend to bring the focus back on, is
what is best for the existing human beings who are U.S. citizens. I don't hear
anybody saying, 'wait a minute, what about those of us who are here?'''

The reluctance of Congress to ask that question has been a source of
exasperation among those in the executive branch aware of the burgeoning
problem. ''When I was with the I.N.S.,'' Leonel Castillo, the former
Commissioner of Immigration, said recently, referring to the Immigration and
Naturalization Service, ''I realized that Congress likes what we have now.
Clearly, some people derive great benefit from the present situation.''

Though Mr. Castillo did not name them, the main beneficiaries appear to be
business interests that employ illegal aliens at low wages. Twice in recent
years business lobbyists have helped defeat in the Senate legislation forbidding
the employment of illegal aliens after it had been passed by the House of
Representatives.

And though there is a growing belief around the nation that, in a time of
continuing high unemployment, immigrants are taking jobs from American workers,
the real impetus for change, if it comes, will more likely be the long-awaited
final report of the Select Commission on Immigration and Refugee Policy, set up
last year to chart immigration policies for the rest of the century and beyond.

Among the 16 commissioners are four Cabinet members, four Senators, including
Mr. Simpson, four Representatives and four members at large, including the Rev.
Theodore M. Hesburgh, the panel's chairman, who is president of the University
of Notre Dame.

Earlier this month, the commission voted to recommend an amnesty for illegal
aliens in this country and passage of a Federal law prohibiting the employment
of workers without proper papers. The commission's logic appeared to be that the
situation was so hopeless that the practical solution was to start over by
making the illegal aliens now here citizens and removing incentives for others
to follow in their footsteps.

But sorting out citizens from uninvited visitors is difficult in a country whose
population is made up of so many ethnic strains, and the commission left what
some see as a crucial gap by failing to endorse a national ''work permit'' that
would help employers tell whom they could hire.

Stronger Enforcement Favored

The commission, now divided between conservatives and liberals on the work
permit question and other issues, will grow more conservative next month when it
is joined by a new Republican Attorney General and new Secretaries of State,
Health and Human Services, and Labor. Members say that votes on some key
recommendations may be reconsidered before being sent to Congress.

The Reagan administration, still in its transition phase, has not formulated a
detailed list of immigration reforms. But aides say that President-elect Ronald
Reagan has indicated his support for strengthened enforcement of the immigration
laws, combined with a program to permit more foreign workers into this country
on a temporary basis. The idea of temporary workers was rejected by the
commission but it is appealing to Mr. Simpson and other key Senators.

Though an amnesty proposal died in Congress after it was submitted by President
Carter more than three years ago, Congressional aides say the legislation was
badly managed by the White House and that there may be enough support for such a
plan in both the incoming Republican-controlled Senate and the House of
Representatives, which will have a Democratic majority but be more conservative.

As distasteful as the idea of an amnesty may be to Americans - a recent Gallup
Poll found that only 37 percent of those questioned supported such a plan - most
students of the problem are convinced that there is no practical alternative.

A mass roundup and deportation might be impracticable if not unconstitutional.
Senator Simpson, who said there ''may be close to 12 million'' illegal aliens
living in this country, double the highest estimate of the Carter
Administration, terms such a dragnet ''the greatest waste of effort and
resources'' imaginable.

Most authorities feel that to allow the aliens to retain their illegal status,
on the other hand, would be to perpetuate a permanent underclass subject to
abuse and exploitation from a host of sources, including alien smugglers who
force them into peonage, unscrupulous immigration officers who solicit bribes,
employers who demand kickbacks in return for jobs and landlords who gouge them
on rents.

And while illegal aliens pay the same Federal and state taxes as citizens,
numerous studies have shown that they are reluctant to take full advantage of
social services financed with their taxes.

Though the aliens may be willing to put up with hardships in return for economic
survival, Ray Marshall, the outgoing Secretary of Labor, has suggested that
their children will not have the same attitude and that ignoring the problem
''may result in another civil rights struggle in our nation in 10 or 15 years.''


Support for Amnesty Assessed

All these problems, and others, would be resolved by a general amnesty, and
Senator Simpson said he believed that ''the American people may buy it if they
see that we have an appropriate enforcement mechanism in place so that it isn't
going to happen again.'' But such a mechanism would depend largely on new
legislation prohibiting the employment of illegal aliens, and the debate over
the passage of such a law is certain to turn on the thorny question of whether
illegal aliens are displacing American workers.

No economist doubts that many illegal aliens perform unattractive, low-paying
jobs that would otherwise go begging, or that some laborintensive industries,
such as garment manufacturing, are now virtually dependent on them for survival.
But there are also those who argue that the presence of illegal workers keeps
wages and working conditions from improving to the point where they would be
attractive to Americans, and Secretary Marshall has asserted that without the
millions of ''undocumented workers'' now in this country the nation's
unemployment rate might be reduced to less than 4 percent.

Mr. Reagan's views on this question remain to be seen. But Henry Zuniga, a
campaign aide, said the President-elect had expressed the feeling ''that the
folks coming from Mexico for the most part are doing work that's necessary, that
they're not replacing U.S. citizens and that Mexico needs this kind of
assistance.''

Though a law forbidding the employment of illegal aliens is increasingly
attractive to many, critics argue that the United States is very nearly unable
to enforce existing immigration laws and that searching every place of business
in the country would require an army of police officers. Proponents reply that
while such a law might not stop all illegal immigrants and might not be
rigorously enforced with regard to restaurants and other small businesses, it
would enable the Justice Department to accuse large employers of a pattern of
employing illegals.

Whatever its ultimate intent, talk of an employment law inspires anger among
many Hispanic Americans, who fear that it would subject citizens with Spanish
surnames to inordinate and perhaps unconstitutional scrutiny by employers. ''If
they do have sanctions they better do it in a way that certain groups don't bear
the brunt of it,'' said Lupe Salinas, until recently a special assistant to
Attorney General Benjamin R. Civiletti. ''If they don't, they'll have every
Hispanic in the country up in arms.''

A crucial element in enforcing a Federal statute would be the sort of
Government-issued ''counterfeit-resistant'' work permit opposed by the select
commission. Senator Simpson dismissed fears of civil libertarians on the
commission that such a permit might become a ''national identity card,'' and
said he hoped the Congress would approve one. ''Enforcement can't work without
some kind of identification,'' he said.

Though the idea of temporary alien workers was also rejected by the select
commission, some of those who favor employer sanctions, among them many
rank-and-file immigration officers, argue that some provision ought to be made
for allowing such workers into the country on a controlled basis if a need
arose.

Mr. Reagan endorsed such an approach in a campaign speech last September in
which he suggested that aliens be given visas enabling them to work in this
country ''for whatever length of time they want to stay.'' According to Mr.
Zuniga, Mr. Reagan explained more recently ''that he's in favor of doing away
with the abuses of the undocumented worker, where people don't pay their wages
and these kinds of things.''

Resentment Over Bilingualism

The temporary-worker concept is strongly opposed, however, by much of organized
labor and by Hispanic rights groups. Other critics point to the experiences of
West Germany and France, which imported millions of ''guest workers'' from
southern Europe and then found it difficult to persuade them to leave.

Besides the question of competition for jobs, there is also growing grass-roots
concern that, unlike immigrants of the 19th and early 20th centuries, many of
the newest arrivals, particularly those who speak Spanish, are less inclined to
trade their primary cultures and languages for those of their adopted country.

The resentment that this occasions is most evident in the heated debate over
bilingualism in the schools and at the polling place, and over bilingual or, as
is true in Los Angeles, multilingual (English, Spanish and Japanese) signs and
notices in public places.

But the dismay is also more fundamental, as with the growing annoyance among
non-Spanish-speaking residents of Miami who find it difficult to communicate
with the Cubans who are rapidly supplanting blacks in service jobs there. The
same linguistic frustrations can be found to a lesser extent in New York City,
with its large Puerto Rican population, in Chicago, where half a million
Mexicans and Mexican-Americans now reside, and in polyglot Los Angeles, amid the
clamor of more than 80 languages and dialects.

Incidents of Violence

In some places, cultural disparities are giving rise to racial and ethnic
tensions that have occasionally erupted in violence. Last year, boats were set
afire and a man murdered after Texas shrimpers tangled with Vietnamese
fishermen. In the suburbs of Chicago, as in cities across the Southwest, gunfire
has erupted between Mexican-Americans and illegal Mexican aliens with whom they
compete for jobs and housing.

Several of those slain by blacks in last summer's rioting in Miami were Cubans,
and in Los Angeles, where aliens from Mexico and the Far East have taken over
formerly all-black neighborhoods, gangs of black, Hispanic and Asian youths
frequently battle each other. Most disturbing of all are the recent reports from
Texas that paramilitary units of the Ku Klux Klan are training their members to
hunt illegal aliens along the border.

A central element in the select commission's proposals, and one for which there
appears to be substantial support in Congress, is the appropriation of more
money, manpower and materiel for the immigration service, whose officials feel
their mounting problems have been largely ignored by successive administrations.

Keeping unwanted aliens from its shores has never been among the highest
priorities in a nation that thinks of itself as a land of immigrants, and
because citizens and lawmakers have instinctively recoiled from adopting such
measures as border fortifications and national identity cards the immigration
enforcement system that exists today was never intended to deal with anything
like the influx that confronts it.

8 Million Arrests Since '60

In 1960, only 70,000 illegal aliens were arrested in this country.  But there
have been eight million such arrests since then, including nearly a million this
year. Because the nation's defenses have not increased at an equal pace, the
United States now finds itself largely unable to insure the security of its
borders.

There are only about 350 Border Patrol agents on duty at any one time, most of
them concentrated across from the Mexican border cities of Tijuana and Juarez.
Only five agents are assigned to patrol 3,300 square miles of heavily traversed
southern Arizona desert. The Canadian border, fast becoming a favorite crossing
point for illegal aliens, is even more sparsely guarded.

In Los Angeles, where officials estimate that one resident in 10 is an illegal
alien, the immigration service is nearing total collapse and nowhere is the
situation much better. In a report issued last month, the General Accounting
Office declared that, once inside this country, an illegal alien ''has little
chance of being located and deported.'' In an increasingly troubled world the
United States is a most attractive sanctuary for those seeking political or
economic refuge, and as the overworked, underpaid employees of the immigration
service slowly sink beneath a sea of forms, permits, petitions, applications,
visas and other documents, the aliens continue to arrive in ever-larger numbers.

It is not altogether clear how a request for more funds will be received by a
Reagan administration committed to reducing the size of the Federal Government.
But with or without more money, reforming the immigration service, Mr. Civiletti
said, promises to be ''one of the most difficult issues that the new management
of the Department of Justice will have to deal with.''

Though there have been improvements in the agency's operations, the immigration
service continues to embrace what Representative Richardson Preyer of North
Carolina recently termed ''a woeful litany of problems.''

The problems are not all of the agency's own making. A large part of the
service's inability to stem the flow of illegal aliens has arisen from
restrictions, instituted this year to facilitate the counting of illegal aliens
during the census, that prevent officers from entering a residence or workplace
to look for aliens without a hard-to-obtain court order.

The restrictions have capped what has easily been the most trying year in the
agency's history. Besides the loss of personnel siphoned off to handle the
influx of Cuban refugees to Florida and the deportations of Iranian students
ordered by President Carter in retaliation for the seizure of the American
hostages in Teheran, the service has been hampered by gasoline shortages, by the
absence, for more than 15 months, of a permanent Immigration Commissioner and by
the refusal of the Carter Administration to budget more funds for enforcement.

Most immigration officials share the view of Joseph Howerton, director of the
agency's Los Angeles office, that ''there's nothing that couldn't be
accomplished with a blank check, except perhaps sealing the border.'' But Mr.
Civiletti has insisted that until the course of the nation's immigration policy
is decided, ''large budget increases for border enforcement personnel would be
premature.''

Shortcomings of 'Body Sensors'

No one knowledgeable about the problem, including David Crosland, the Acting
Commissioner of Immigration, favors an effort to seal the Mexican border. ''Law
enforcement alone is not the answer to the problem of illegal entry,'' Mr.
Crosland said the other day. ''You don't have to have an open border or a police
state. It's a question of how much control we need to have.''

Judging from past experience, however, it is far from clear that more personnel
and hardware represent a solution. A few years ago, at great cost, the
immigration agency salted parts of the border with a network of electronic
''body sensors,'' like those implanted by the Army along the demilitarized zone
in Vietnam, in hopes that they would detect the footsteps of illegal
border-crossers. When the sensors work at all, however, they are frequently
triggered by dogs and jackrabbits.

Nor are more personnel necessarily the answer. The real expense, some officials
say, is not in catching illegal aliens but in sending them home. The Government
is spending about $13 million a year to ''repatriate'' aliens from such distant
countries as Argentina and Hong Kong, but at a time when a one-way ticket abroad
can run to $1,000 or more there are far more aliens than funds to return them.
As a result, aliens under deportation orders are often simply given a letter
directing them to leave the country on their own.

Then, too, the agency is more than an innocent victim of bureaucratic
indifference. Among other things, the agency for years has limped along with
archaic handwritten record-keeping practices that afforded it virtually no idea
how many aliens, visitors, students, immigrants, businessmen or refugees were in
the country.

For years such shortcomings made little difference to anyone but those whose
files were routinely lost or destroyed. Then, in November 1979, President
Carter, reacting to the seizure of the American hostages in Teheran, ordered the
immigration service to deport Iranians who had entered this country to study and
then had dropped out of school.

The agency was forced to admit that it had no idea how many Iranian students
were in the country or who or where they were, provoking what Justice Department
aides said was an angry outburst from Griffin B. Bell, then Attorney General,
whom they described as ''stunned'' and ''shocked'' at what he subsequently
learned about the agency's jumbled operations.

Mr. Crosland, the agency's former general counsel and its acting commissioner
for over a year, said in an interview that he had ''tried to bring some sense of
professionalism'' to the agency, and perhaps his most important undertaking has
been bringing in management experts from the Interstate Commerce Commission to
reorganize the agency's operations.

In addition to working on the critical problems of computers for record keeping,
the study team has corrected problems with finances and purchasing practices and
strengthened internal audit procedures.  But officials now say it will be six or
seven years before the agency is fully computerized.

Tainted by Corruption

As if its other problems were not enough, the growing realization among many of
the immigration agency's 10,000 employees that their task is both impossible and
thankless has bred frustration that has resulted in a degree of brutality and
corruption unmatched by any other Federal law-enforcement agency.

Four Border Patrol agents, the first ever to face such charges, were convicted
this year of having physically abused illegal aliens, and more such trials are
pending. Mr. Crosland, a former civil rights lawyer, said that while efforts by
the agency to clean its own house had resulted in ''predictable kinds of morale
problems,'' he welcomed such prosecutions in hopes that ''people will think
twice before they push people around.''

Instances of corruption have also surfaced. In October, Representative Preyer, a
Democrat who heads the House Government Operations Committee, disclosed that a
number of immigration employees were ''under investigation for selling or
altering immigration documents.'' A few weeks later, an El Paso Border Patrol
agent was arrested after offering to sell a border-crossing card for $2,000, and
three weeks ago the immigration service announced that six employees of its New
York City office had been convicted of taking bribes to ''tamper'' with
immigration records.

There has been no permanent commissioner since Mr. Castillo resigned in October
1979, with the result that at a crucial time in its history the agency has been
somewhat adrift. A high-ranking Republican Congressional aide said that ''the
first order of business'' for the new administration would be ''to get somebody
in there that can turn that place around.''

That may not prove easy. A Justice Department aide acknowledged that ''the
position is a difficult one, very unattractive,'' and Mr.  Civiletti agreed that
there had not been ''hundreds of people seeking to become I.N.S. Commissioner.''

Whatever the quality of the new commissioner, and whatever new laws are enacted,
one thing remains certain: the aliens, especially those from Mexico and the
Caribbean, where the pressure to migrate increases by the day, will continue to
try to slip into the United States.

The reasons go well beyond the reach of Congress. More than half the work force
in Mexico is unemployed or underemployed, and demographers say that the
country's population of 68 million will nearly double by the year 2000. Though
the Mexican economy is growing by 8 percent a year, the benefits of growth are
more evident in the cities than in the impoverished countryside from which most
illegal aliens come.

The waiting list of Mexican citizens wishing to legally emigrate to the United
States contains about one million names, and it can take as long as 10 years to
get a visa. On the other hand, for a few hundred dollars a potential emigre can
arrange to be smuggled into the United States in a matter of days.

There are a few arguments for keeping things as they are, among them the
suggestion that the continuing northward flow of Mexico's poorest people
provides a ''safety valve'' against the possibility of a leftist revolution
there of the sort that recently occurred in Nicaragua.

Another theory holds that, to the extent that world resources are unevenly
distributed, exporting labor from a nation rich in human capital to a neighbor
blessed with natural and industrial wealth maximizes the benefits for both in
the long run. The debate in Congress may turn on whether, in the short run, the
United States owes more to the disadvantaged peoples of the world than to its
own.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Alan K. Simpson (Page 20)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              368 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LEFTIST GUERILLAS REPORTED TO OPEN BIG ATTACK IN EL SALVADOR'S JUNGLES

BYLINE: By the Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 601 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Dec. 27


A thousand leftist guerrillas opened a major attack against Government troops in
northern El Salvador today and heavy fighting was under way, a military source
here said.

''The attack can be considered one of the strongest the leftists have launched
in that region and it could be an attempt by the Marxist-Leninists to control a
zone where they can set up a revolutionary government,'' the army source said.

''A large number of guerrillas'' and at least three Government soldiers were
known dead in the fighting in Chalatenango, a province near the Honduran border
430 miles north of this Central American capital, according to this source.

'They Will Not Succeed'

Spokesmen for the Government and the armed forces refused to comment on the
report, which could not be confirmed independently because communications with
the area were cut.

The army source, who asked anonymity, said that the guerrillas launched the
attack late last night and early today on police stations and military
installations in the towns of Patamera, Arcatao, Las Vueltas and El Carrizal.

''Of course, they will not succeed because combined army forces are on the way
to the area to control the situation,'' he added.  He said that Government
reinforcements being rushed to the area included infantry, planes and
helicopters. He refused to give details of the military deployments.

Chalatenango, a province of jungle and hills, includes terrain that ''makes
counterinsurgency operations difficult,'' the source said.  The area has been a
hotbed of guerrilla activity in recent months.

Other army sources said the attack was launched by the Farabundo Marti National
Liberation Front, a coalition of five leftist guerrilla organizations that have
been fighting for more than a year to overthrow the ruling civilian-military
junta in El Salvador.

The Front, named after the Communist leader of a peasant uprising in El Salvador
in 1932, had announced in leaflets distributed in the Salvadoran capital that
''the hour of decisive combats and final triumph'' would come some time this
week.

Yesterday a member of the Front's five-man Executive Directorate said that the
insurgents planned what he called a final drive against the ruling junta before
President-elect Ronald Reagan takes office on Jan. 20.

The commander, Ferman Cienfuegos, said that Mr. Reagan would ''find an
irreversible situation in El Salvador by the time he reaches the Presidency.''

'Just as Happened in Saigon'

He said that the planned final drive would not be directed at the major cities.
The guerrillas' objective, he said, ''will be to surround them, just as happened
in Saigon.''

Directorate sources said the five guerrilla groups have a combined force of
10,000 armed men and women, supported by another 50,000 leftist sympathizers.
However, military sources estimated that there were only 2,500 trained
guerrillas and about 5,000 sympathizers.

The junta has been trying unsuccessfully to quell leftist-rightist violence
since it succeeded Gen. Carlos Humberto Romero's conservative regime, which was
overthrown in a military coup on Oct.  15, 1979.

The rightists, who allegedly have considerable support among the nation's
security forces, want a return to conservative, militarydominated government.

More than 9,000 people, mostly civilians, have been killed in political violence
in El Salvador since General Romero's ouster.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of El Salvador

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              369 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam's 1981 Plan Calls For More Consumer Goods

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 116 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 27


Vietnam's Parliament approved a 1981 economic plan calling for an increase of
almost a third in consumer goods, the Vietnam News Agency reported today.

The plan, adopted yesterday, also projects a 6 percent increase in agricultural
production and a 2.3 percent rise in industrial production, the report said.

The Government, the press agency said, will insure the ''supply of food and
essential goods for public employees and workers in fixed quantity and will
stabilize the living conditions of the people in the cities, industrial areas
and areas stricken by natural calamities.''

A new Constitution was also adopted.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              370 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CCONNECTICUT INVALIDATES ADOPTION OF 2 VIETNAMESE

BYLINE: By ROBERT E. TOMASSON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 640 words


After a five-year legal fight, Connecticut's highest court has ruled that two
children adopted by an American should be returned to their Vietnamese mother.

The case arose ''out of a unique factual context, one which occurs perhaps every
generation: the separation in wartime of children from their parents,'' the
Connecticut Supreme Court said.

In its ruling last Tuesday, the court noted that courts in Colorado, California,
Michigan, Ohio and Pennsylvania had also ruled on cases in which parents,
usually a mother, sought to regain custody of children who were presumably
legally adopted by Americans. In all the cases cited, the courts ruled that the
children be returned to their natural parents.

For the Connecticut plaintiff, Hao Thi Popp, the legal fight to regain her
children has taken five years. While she apparently has won her final major
court decision, some questions must be worked out before she is reunited with
her sons, Mark, who is 13 years old, and Paul, 11.

In the Supreme Court's 5-to-0 reversal of a lower court's ruling favoring the
adoptive parent, Justice Joseph A. Bogdanski noted that Mrs. Popp was the mother
of three boys, all ''of mixed Vietnamese and Caucasian blood.''

''Toward the end of the Vietnam War,'' the opinion said, ''she became frightened
that if the North Vietnamese took over Saigon, she and her children would be
killed'' because of the mixed racial parentage.

The United States Agency for International Development and the South Vietnamese
Ministry of Social Services arranged Operation Babylift, which involved the
removal of more than 2,000 children from orphanages in Vietnam as panic gripped
Saigon. The Vietnamese Government issued collective permits for children removed
in a group and waived much documentation. While many of the children were
orphans, others had parents who could not leave the country.

While Mrs. Popp had sought from the fall of 1974 to have her children leave
Vietnam, she did not part with them until Operation Babylift. Then she asked
Richard Lucas, an Exxon employee working in Saigon, ''to take her children to
the United States,'' the justice said.

''He agreed to do so, providing he could adopt them,'' the opinion continued,
''and arranged for the plaintiff to sign a relinquishment document to Friends
for All Children Inc., an American international adoption agency.''

The two older boys left Vietnam on April 24, 1975, under the auspices of the
adoption agency. They went to live with relatives of Mr. Lucas's in
Massachusetts while he was transferred to Thailand.  Mr. Lucas, originally from
Fairfield, Conn., was subsequently transferred to Brazil and now has the two
boys, according to Lucy V.  Katz, the mother's lawyer.

The mother left Vietnam some months later, leaving the youngest child, Larry,
now 7, with an American minister. Larry was later adopted by an American couple
in Colorado under the auspices of another international adoption agency, Friends
of Children of Vietnam.

A Colorado court ordered Larry returned to his mother after she filed suit.  The
Connecticut court ruled that the relinquishment document signed by Mrs. Popp
''did not terminate the plaintiff's parental rights'' because in Connecticut
''termination of parental rights cannot be effected through private contractual
arrangements'' without court supervision.

''In any controversy between a parent and stranger, the parent should have a
strong initial advantage, to be lost only where it is shown that the child's
welfare plainly requires custody to be placed in the stranger,'' the court said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              371 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AN INTIMATE TALK WITH WILLIAM PALEY

BYLINE: By Tony Schwartz

SECTION: Section 6; Page 15, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5521 words


''I don't know if I will fall in love again, but I know the kind of person I
could fall in love with. She'd have to be much younger than I am, I think. I
could match up with most young people, and I do. It helps keep me young. But I'm
a realist, too. You get to a certain age, and things happen. Knock on wood, they
haven't happened yet the way I thought they would. I go through all the same
emotions I went through 20 and 30 years ago. I don't sit back and say, 'O.K.,
you can rest now, Paley.'''

''It's just preposterous for people to say I'm an autocratic old man, that I
can't stand it when people under me start to succeed. To the extent that I don't
want to be replaced, I'm conscious of it and I keep it under control. But I also
built this company; I'm like a father with a child, and I want it to succeed
when I'm gone.''

William S. Paley, the man who built CBS Inc. from a few failing radio stations
into a giant communications empire, turned 79 in September.  He retains the
spirit of a man half his age, which is all the more remarkable since he has just
emerged from perhaps the most difficult and dispiriting period of his life. A
man long used to having things go precisely his way, Paley has recently endured
a period of major personal and professional crises.

His wife of 31 years, Barbara Cushing Paley, died last year of cancer at the age
of 63, following a debilitating five-year illness.  For most of that period, the
search for a cure became the central focus of Paley's life. At the same time,
the CBS television network, Paley's favorite division and the company's most
profitable one, lost the lead in the audience ratings to ABC, after 20 years of
unchallenged dominance.

Meanwhile, a revolution in telecommunications had begun to take shape. New
markets, such as cable television, video cassettes, videodisks and teletext,
were threatening to undercut the growth of the broadcasting industry that Paley
had helped create.  Both inside and outside CBS, it was suggested that Paley was
too preoccupied with his wife's illness to keep up with the changes and too
rigidly set in his ways to understand them.

Then, in May, Paley engineered the resignation of CBS president John D. Backe,
whom he had earlier touted as his successor. Precisely the same thing had
happened to Backe's predecessor, Arthur Taylor, who was discharged by Paley four
years earlier. In both cases, the dismissals occurred during periods when CBS
was prospering. The Backe ouster only added to the impression that Paley was a
fading and arbitrary old man, unwilling to bow out gracefully. Dennis Leibowitz,
a broadcast analyst for Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, echoed the sentiments of
others when he said, ''It just reinforces the image that the company is run
capriciously by one man, and nobody can have confidence in what they're going to
be doing.''

But Paley, in his 80th year, seems to have prevailed. Still the chairman of the
board, he is back working a full day at CBS, where he remains the only enduring
exception to the company's mandatory retirement-at-65 policy. The Backe affair
is behind him, and Paley has found a widely respected replacement in Thomas H.
Wyman, a former Pillsbury and Polaroid executive. Moreover, the CBS network has
returned to first place in the audience ratings, the corporation has begun
moving aggressively into most aspects of the new electronic technologies, and
Paley is now able to talk about cable television and videodisks with almost as
much animation as he talks about commercial television. Nor does Paley confine
his activities to work. On most nights he is out and about in New York - at a
party, a business affair or at a small restaurant on the Upper East Side,
sometimes with an attractive younger woman on his arm.

Paley can be immensely charming, particularly when he smiles his dazzling smile
and his brown eyes come alive, but he can also be nervous and wooden. He is
particularly uncomfortable when asked to interpret his motives or analyze his
actions - to be introspective.  In those stumbling moments, he seems older, less
in control.

But seconds later, he can become a commanding presence again, articulate,
bracingly combative, quick and sharp in his responses to questions.

Paley is reluctant to talk about his personal life, but he does acknowledge that
it has changed since the death of his wife. Known to her friends as Babe, she
was considered one of the most beautiful and elegant women in the world, a
gracious hostess and a symbol of good taste. Babe's death forced Paley to face
the feeling of loneliness for the first time in his life. ''When I was married,
I didn't go out as much,'' he said. ''But now I find it's better to be with
people.  Even though I don't always like being in a big crowd, I prefer it to
being alone.''

Being single has also made Paley more receptive to invitations he might not have
accepted several years ago. Shortly after the Backe dismissal, he was
interviewed by a young reporter for a business journal. After the story came
out, the reporter called and invited Paley over to his apartment for dinner.
Paley, who has spent much of his life avoiding journalists, consented. He
invited his daughter Kate along, and they spent a leisurely evening at the small
Greenwich Village apartment of the reporter and his friend.

Much of Paley's social life revolves around food. ''He considers himself a
connoisseur,'' said Walter N. Thayer, a lawyer and one of Paley's closest
friends. ''I don't know if he really is, but he certainly loves to eat.'' Paley
frequents most of the city's bestknown restaurants, ranging from expensive
French places, such as La Grenouille, Dodin Bouffant and The Quilted Giraffe, to
more social spots like Mortimer's, Woods, Mr. Chow and ''21''.

He also entertains at home, both at his apartment in New York and at his house
in Southampton. He bought the Southampton place after Babe's death, when he
discovered that it was simply too painful to return to the much larger house in
Manhasset, L.I., where they had lived together for 30 years. His parties now are
usually small, ranging from two or three guests to perhaps eight. Paley wins
praise as a host. ''He's genial, warm and very generous of spirit,'' said
Marilyn Berger, a journalist, who is married to Don Hewitt, the producer of
CBS's ''60 Minutes.'' The Hewitts have a house near Paley's in Southampton and
have been invited over several times for lunch. ''There are always people around
when we go, family and friends, and he obviously enjoys that,'' said Miss
Berger. ''He's a good storyteller, but he's also interested in the people around
him.  I find him a very attractive man.''

Thayer believes that, while Paley has rebounded from his wife's death, he still
feels a void. ''He has this great reserve he has called on, and one of his
wonderful characteristics is his enthusiasm, but I think there are times now
when he's very lonesome,'' said Thayer. ''I can imagine him getting married
again, and I'm sure he'd very much like to have someone in his life.''

His wife's death also made Paley especially aware of how important their
relationship was to him. ''You understand much more about the value of a
marriage when you've lost it,'' he said. ''Of course, I was terribly alarmed
when I found out about Babe's illness, but you don't have time to think about
it. My mission became to save her life. I was determined to be the most
knowledgeable man in the world about cancer, and I think I was. But there comes
a time when the realization finally hits you that you've gone as far as you can
go.  It's a hell of a letdown. Instinctively you know you're going to be
miserable without this person. Babe was very active. She drew very well, she was
a wonderful gardener, she did charity work and everyone who knew her liked her.
She was an extraordinary woman, but she lacked a certain kind of confidence. She
never quite appreciated her talents. I think I enjoyed them more than she did.
At the end, she didn't want to be at the hospital, and the doctors were very
cooperative about letting her come home. We were married 31 years, and when the
end came, it wasn't very easy to let go.''

Paley has also outlived many of his friends, and that has prompted him to
re-evaluate the importance of friendship, too. ''The older you get, the more you
come to realize that individual relationships are the most important thing in
life,'' he said. ''I've had three or four friends die in the past year. I
realize now that I worked much less hard at my friendships when I was young. I
just took them for granted. Youth is very callous about those things. I never
realized how important it was just to be able to call someone for lunch, to say,
'What are you doing tonight?' or just to exchange ordinary gossip.

My closest friend now is Jock Whitney, my brother-in-law, who is very sick. I
adore him. I love him. He always had a tremendous appetite for life. But I have
more intimate friends in Europe now than I have here.''

Paley also has six children - two from his marriage to Babe, two by his first
marriage, to Dorothy Hart Hearst, and two stepchildren from Babe's earlier
marriage -and he says he has grown closer to them since his wife's death. By his
own account, he was less involved with his children when they were growing up.
''I was all right as a father,'' he said, ''but you know, men don't enjoy babies
very much.  They become interested in children when they reach 10 or 11 or 12
and start to make a little sense. My father was a great man for children. He'd
come to the house and he'd say, 'I want to see my grandchildren!' He'd gather
them all around and have a wonderful time for about 10 minutes. Then he'd look
at his watch and say, 'My God, isn't it time for their dinner?'''

Now, Paley gives himself better marks. ''On the whole, I've been a good
father,'' he said. ''I think my children believe in me and trust me, and I'm
very direct and straightforward with them.'' He speaks about his children with
great affection, but not without the critical eye he has long directed at other
aspects of his life. His two stepchildren are Amanda Ross and Stanley Mortimer
3d. Amanda Ross, 36, works for the New York State Urban Development Corporation,
has two children from her first marriage to the former city councilman Carter
Burden, and is now married to Steven J. Ross, the chairman of the board of
Warner Communications. Mortimer, 38, is married, has one child and is the
president of Lightbourne Products Inc., a perfume company. The two children from
Paley's first marriage are Jeffrey, 42, a writer and journalist, and Hilary
Byers, 41; both live in New York. Paley is in frequent contact with the children
he had with Babe: Kate, who is 30, single and lives in New York, and William,
32, who lives in Washington, D.C.

''Kate's a very independent girl - an artist and very accomplished,'' said
Paley. ''She has definite points of view, but she'll listen to my views, and I
think she trusts my judgment and my taste. I'm honest with her. Right now, she's
very interested in this so-called video art. I don't understand it, it doesn't
stimulate me or give me any pleasure, and frankly I'm trying to get her away
from it. I love the way she draws, and now she's going back to it, at my
insistence, really.''

Paley takes a more laissez-faire attitude toward his youngest son, William.
''He's a very attractive young man, completely irresponsible, but with charm the
likes of which you'll never know.  He ran a restaurant for a while, but he has
very little interest in material things. He lives simply and modestly and he'd
give you the shirt off his back. All his money just disappears. I don't want to
change him, though. He just got married to a very attractive woman, and he'll
find something that he likes doing. We're very close. He loves me, and I love
him.'' If Paley has grown more appreciative of the personal relationships in his
life, it is still his work that occupies most of his time. On most mornings,
Paley is awake by 6. On the table next to his single bed in the bedroom of his
huge Fifth Avenue apartment, there is a remote-control device that permits him
to turn on the three television sets, one for each of the major networks, that
are stacked at the foot of the bed. Next to the televisions, he has a videodisk
player, which he doesn't use very often, and a video-cassette recorder, which he
does use to watch tapes of upcoming CBS programs when he returns home in the
evening.

In his office at CBS, the three television sets are more discreetly camouflaged,
side by side, inside a cabinet along the wall opposite his desk. Paley also has
three television sets in the bedroom at his weekend house in Southampton, but
only one in the bedroom of his home in Lyford Cay, Nassau, since he has more
difficulty with reception there, despite a special antenna.

Paley usually spends his first waking hour in bed, reading either a book (he
particularly likes history and biographies) or documents that he has brought
home the previous evening. At 7 A.M., he flicks on all three televisions and
listens to the ''CBS Morning News,'' a program that he lists among his
favorites, even though it finishes third in the ratings behind the ''Today''
show on NBC and ''Good Morning America'' on ABC. Paley, who remains fiercely
competitive about the ratings, argues that the CBS news program compensates for
its small numbers by reaching an elite audience, but that doesn't preclude his
admiring the competition.

'''Good Morning America' is a very good show, aimed at a mass audience,'' he
said. ''I think they hit the jackpot when they took that girl from California -
what's her name, Rona Barrett? - who does the movie gossip. That's probably the
most important feature on the show.'' (Miss Barrett has since moved to NBC,
where she will begin appearing on the ''Today'' show next month.

Paley has always been more directly involved in entertainment programming than
in news, but he does take an interest in major policy decisions. For example, he
was consulted by the president of CBS News, William A. Leonard, when the choice
was being made about a successor for Walter Cronkite. ''I think Dan Rather was
the best person,'' said Paley. ''He's a good newsman, and he has that extra
dimension. Roger Mudd never wanted to go out of Washington on assignment. Rather
wanted to go to Vietnam, and he went to Afghanistan even though he was told not
to. He also has a nice style and a good appearance, and I think that's important
now.''

Each morning at about 9:30, the chairman is driven to his office in a dark red
Cadillac limousine. His office is on the 35th floor of the CBS headquarters at
52d Street and the Avenue of Americas - the black granite-veneer building
designed by Eero Saarinen and known as Black Rock. On most days, Paley has lunch
in his private dining room or at the beautiful circular 19th-century
chemin-de-fer table inlaid with pearl numerals that serves as his desk.

The 35th floor at CBS seems more like a Madison Avenue art gallery than a suite
of executive offices. When a visitor steps off one of the high-speed elevators
for an appointment with Paley, he is greeted by a receptionist, who stands as
the elevator door opens and leads the way to a waiting room, which adjoins
Paley's office. The waiting room is comfortable and understated. There are fresh
flowers in vases, the day's newspapers folded neatly on the table in front of
the couch and a small desk and chair in one corner. Several paintings, including
a Jackson Pollack, hang on the walls. When Paley is ready, his secretary of 28
years, whom he still calls ''Miss Carroll,'' turns the gold door handle leading
to his office and makes the introductions. Paley's office is more eclectically
decorated than the waiting room, with off-white walls, paintings that include
Picasso's ''Guitare par la table,'' a Giacometti oil, a black and white abstract
by Franz Kline, a collection of old CBS-radio microphones, an architect's table
and an antique wooden reclining chair once used by the British in India.

Paley, an immensely wealthy man, is accustomed to luxurious surroundings.  At
CBS alone, for example, where he is the largest single stockholder, he owns
approximately two million shares, worth nearly $90 million, making his 1979
salary of $789,109 seem like a pittance. Still, Paley says that he has never
given money much thought. ''At a very early age,'' he explained, ''I took it for
granted that I would be rich and successful, so I was prepared for it and I
wasn't in the least bit embarrassed by it. I just thought that if I put my mind
to something I'd accomplish it. I wasn't going to have to worry, because I was
going to be my father's heir anyway. If the gamble with CBS hadn't worked out,
my father had a very successful cigar business in Philadelphia that I could have
gone back to.''

Paley has enjoyed his wealth. He endowed the William S. Paley Foundation, which
supports a variety of endeavors, including the Museum of Broadcasting, which he
founded; Paley Park, which he built on East 53d Street 13 years ago in his
father's memory, and the Paley Art Center, a children's museum in Jerusalem.
Paley also contributes to the Museum of Modern Art, where he is chairman of the
board.  ''What money has given me is a lot more beauty,'' he said. ''I like art
and furniture and I'm interested in design. I've enjoyed the houses I've lived
in and I love to participate in building things. A change wouldn't be fatal,
though. It's silly to say you can take it or leave it, but I think I could
accommodate myself to any standard of living. I also think that you can have a
lot of money and be very vulgar about it. I feel I've had an innate sense of
taste, an intuitive feeling about what is good and what isn't.''

At CBS, Paley sees himself now as a senior adviser, someone who asks good
questions, but is not involved in day-to-day operations.  Officially, he turned
over the role of chief executive officer to John Backe three years ago, and when
Backe was dismissed, the title was given to Wyman. ''I don't give orders,'' said
Paley. ''I am a kibbitzer. I like to encourage debate, to play the devil's
advocate, even if it means taking a position I don't really believe in, just to
get the positions out in the open.''

John Backe found that Paley's inquisitive style could be disconcerting. ''He
always asked a lot of questions at meetings,'' Backe said. ''He was capable of
great charm, and when he knew what was going on, he could ask very good
questions. When he didn't, he used the devil's advocate role to take people off
base. He'd just keep asking questions, until finally you gave up.''

Actually, several of those who have worked closely with Paley say that he has
always operated by posing questions rather than by giving direct orders. ''His
position was to kibbitz you constantly, but never to assume responsibility for a
decision,'' said Michael H.  Dann, who survived for seven years as head of
programming for CBS before resigning in 1970. ''In all my years of working for
him, he never ordered or insisted that I put a program on the air. But that
doesn't mean he wouldn't interfere. He just did it by questioning you on
everything you did. His style was always to identify with success and never to
admit failure. If you made a mistake, though, he'd beat you over the head with
it.''

It has never been Paley's style to praise his subordinates, even if their work
pleases him. In the generally unrevealing autobiography that he published last
year, ''As It Happened,'' Paley referred cryptically to his style as a boss. ''I
am not good at flattering people or even complimenting them,'' he wrote. ''I
have worked for years with people at CBS whose skills I have admired and who
have not had from me the kind of acknowledgment they deserve or would like to
get. I like to believe, however, that they understand me and know how I feel
about them.''

Paley makes his influence felt at CBS simply by his presence. He continues to
attend all the major meetings on corporate policy, including a lunch with the
CBS division presidents once a month. He also has lunch alone with Wyman once a
week and speaks to him every day, sometimes several times. Wyman himself, who
came to CBS from the Pillsbury Company, where he was vice chairman, declined to
be interviewed, saying that he did not yet feel he had been at CBS long enough
to add anything substantive. However, an executive who has attended a number of
group-president meetings provided an insight into the way Paley continues to
exert influence.

''You start with the fact that the meetings are always scheduled to accommodate
Paley,'' the source explained. ''If something comes up for the chairman at the
last moment, you'll get a call from his secretary the night before, saying the
meeting has to be put off.  Then there's the simple fact that you can't have a
meeting in which Paley is included without people looking to their left and
right to see if Bill is smiling. There's a pressure, particularly on a new guy
at the top, to position the corporation differently, to make his mark. At the
same time, Paley has to be included in that, and so part of the problem is
getting Bill interested in an idea. A lot of guys over 65 get very fixed notions
about themselves and don't want to change. I don't believe that's happened to
Bill. He is still open to con-sidering new things. Where Backe failed, I think,
is that he couldn't figure out how to get Bill to share his excitement about
acquisitions and directions for the company.''

Backe acknowledges that he struggled with that situation, but he has a somewhat
different perspective about it. ''When Babe was dying, Bill was very
preoccupied,'' said Backe. ''He just wasn't functioning, and he didn't keep up
with what was going on here. Then, after she died, he threw himself into writing
his autobiography. When that was finished, he decided he wanted to be more
involved at CBS again. In effect, he wanted his corporation back, but by then
things had changed. The industry was evolving rapidly, with cable and the new
technology, and he didn't understand it. He resisted a lot of the things we
wanted to do. He didn't want to go back into the movie business, for example. I
tracked his feelings on that one, and he changed his mind eight separate times
before we finally went ahead.  In cable, when it was finally demonstrated to him
that we could get involved legally, he began to be enthusiastic. But he slowed
things up, held us back.''

Paley flatly rejects Backe's assertion. ''I've always been on the lookout for
new things,'' he said. ''I try to be ahead of the parade. For almost a year, I
was trying to get someone knowledgeable from outside to head up an investigation
of the new technology, to develop a plan so that we could get involved.''

Peter A. Derow, who served for six months in 1977 and '78 as a senior vice
president at CBS, before returning to Newsweek, as chairman of the board,
believes that Paley continued to exert an important positive influence at the
group-president meetings. ''I remember one day,'' Derow said, ''we were talking
about capital investment in a record plant and whether we should take into
account the impact of cassettes in designing the space. In the middle of the
meeting, Bill interrupted and said he had a question. 'Why aren't our cassettes
as good as Sony or Memorex or TDK?' he asked. There was a lot of tittering, and
someone asked what he meant. Bill said, 'Well, I'm doing my book now and I'm
working off a tape recorder and our tapes clearly don't have the same audibility
quality that the other ones do.' Bill is concerned about quality. I think he
still cares about a product with the CBS name on it: It should be as good as or
better than anyone else's.''

Paley has not lost his perfectionist instincts. While being photographed one day
recently in Paley Park, he ordered a frankfurter from the concession stand. It
so happens that Paley was responsible for choosing the hot dogs. When it opened,
he tasted dozens of different varieties and finally asked Sabrett to manufacture
a special one for the park, slightly fatter than average.  He also developed the
cooking method: The hot dog is steamed first, then grilled and served on a
toasted and lightly buttered roll. Paley insists that his is the best hot dog in
New York, and he may well be right, but on this particular morning he was
dissatisfied. The roll was too dry, he concluded at first. Then he decided that
the hot dog was not as juicy as usual. Riding back to the office in his
limousine, he couldn't seem to get the subject off his mind. ''Maybe they were
warned that I was coming and got nervous,'' he said to his guest. ''You really
ought to go back and try one on your own some time.''

Paley denies the suggestion that he is unable to let go gracefully of the
corporation he built. He believes that he has simply not been astute in his
choices of successors. And because the CBS board of directors remains totally
loyal to him, Paley does make the choices.  ''I'm just a bad picker, I guess,''
he said. ''I thought I had someone good in Arthur Taylor. He was young,
articulate, ambitious, aggressive, but he just didn't work out. Some people grow
with power, I think, prosper and flower, and some just can't get enough of it.
They want more recognition. The title isn't enough. I think that was the case
with Taylor.''

Taylor has another view of what happened to him. ''Anyone else's prominence
became a source of jealousy,'' he said. ''CBS made record profits during the
time I was president.I think when Paley began to hear people saying how well I
was doing, he couldn't tolerate it. My reaction was to redouble my efforts, but
at that point, nothing I did was enough. It was like sleeping next to an
elephant. You treat the elephant gingerly, because he may roll over on you.
That's what happened to me.''

As for Backe, Paley cites a different problem. ''I think Backe wasn't secure
enough. He felt he didn't have the authority with me there. You need to feel
secure to grow in a job. I'd hoped I could mold Backe, bring him around. I'd
chosen him because he had done well running our publishing division and because
I didn't want to go outside the company again, as I had for Taylor. But after
Backe had been president for a couple of years, I began to question whether he
was the right person to lead the company on his own and I decided we should do a
re-examination. I thought it was the only prudent thing to do. I wanted to be
goddamn sure the company was left in good hands, that it was guided in the
future as well as it had been in the past, in all immodesty. The evaluation
wasn't complete, and we hadn't decided anything, but when Backe found out about
it, he took offense and demanded the showdown. We probably handled the Backe
thing wrong. We should have said more, but how much do you say, where do you
stop? I'll tell you that it hurt to read all those things written about me
during that period.'' CBS has grown during Paley's tenure into a diversified
communications company with interests in recorded music, publishing and musical
instruments, but the area that remains his first love is broadcasting - and
programming in particular. When the ratings race between CBS and ABC got close
at the end of last season, Paley had the Nielsen overnight audience ratings
phoned to him at home every morning.

To Paley, there is an enduring tension between seeking quality programs and
appealing to the largest possible audience. ''I don't think people always
understand that television is a mass medium,'' he said. ''I care about quality,
but I also care about the bottom line.  'The Paper Chase' was a quality show,
wonderfully cast, beautifully written, superbly directed, but it just didn't go.
You want quality, but you have to know where to make the cutoff. If one network
gets too far out ahead, the others would take a beating. It's a competitive
situation. We do have some shows that combine quality and popularity. I think
'M*A*S*H' is one, for the writing, and 'The White Shadow' is another, because it
always has an important social message. There are usually one or two a week.''

As for the CBS shows that win no critical acclaim but nonetheless attract large
audiences, Paley has never been one to quarrel with commercial success, even on
shows that he doesn't like. ''I think 'The Dukes of Hazzard' is a lousy show,
and I was against putting it on,'' he said. ''But I wasn't right from the
standpoint of circulation. It has done well, to my own personal chagrin about
what should be on CBS.''

High ratings for a show have always tended to mute Paley's complaints. ''I
remember when we first put 'The Munsters' on the air,'' said Mike Dann, the
former CBS programming chief. ''Bill called me, after looking at the pilot, and
said, 'That's a terrible show. We can't put it on the network.' I said, 'Bill I
can't get another show ready in time.' And he told me, 'Well, you better fix
it.'' We ended up going ahead with the same show he'd seen, and it was an
instant hit. The next week I ran into Bill in the hall and he said, 'I knew
you'd fix it.' I think he probably did think it was different. Bill writes his
own rule book, and he lives by it.''

But much as high ratings delight Paley, it is not the successful shows that
truly engage him. He doesn't watch ''Dallas,'' for example, the CBS hit series.
''I don't look at many of the popular shows,'' he said. ''I'd rather watch the
ones that aren't working, and figure out why.'' Dann remembers that quality. ''I
used to love to call him and tell him the good news, but he just wanted to hear
the bad. He was never upset by what was wrong. He loved to tackle a problem,''
said Dann. ''You could call him at home at 11:30 at night and he'd always talk
to you.''

It has long been the top programming executives with whom Paley has maintained
his closest working relationships at CBS. He was especially close to Robert A.
Daly, the head of programming for the past three years and the man given most
credit for helping the network to regain first place in the ratings. Paley and
Daly talked several times a week, discussing characters in shows or issues of
scheduling or new shows or upcoming specials.

''I'm a detail man,'' Paley explained. ''I've always been interested in details.
I'll call up one of our program guys and ask why someone is wearing a hat on a
particular show. They'll tell me, 'Well, he likes to wear a hat.' I'll say,
'Tell him to wear a hat when he goes out and not on the show.' I just called our
program guys one day recently. I said that one of the characters on a series
seems to be getting prissy, too prissy, and he said, 'You know, you're right,'
and changed it.''

Until he left last month, Daly was the person who received most of Paley's
calls. Several sources at CBS said that Daly often seemed to be exasperated by
Paley's persistent calls and suggestions, but Daly himself says that the
relationship was mostly a constructive one. ''I think Paley's instincts in
programming are superb,'' Daly said.  ''There were times when we'd disagree, but
his questions were on the money most of the time. He cared a lot about the
characters on the shows being likable, since audiences had to spend a lot of
time with them.''

It is that sort of direct involvement in the everyday details of running CBS
that Paley says he misses most. Although he retains some of it on the
programming end, the corporation has grown much too large for him to exercise it
elsewhere. ''I used to do everything here,'' said Paley. ''I was the salesman. I
made the news decisions.  I knew all the correspondents on a first-name basis.
I'd call up in the middle of a radio program and get them to change something.
I'd go down to Broadway and catch a show, and if I saw someone I liked, I signed
them up. It isn't fun giving up that authority, not doing the things you once
did.''

To his surprise, Paley has found that he has become more of a celebrity as he
grows older. ''I wasn't noticed too much until recently, but more and more
people come up to me now in public places,'' he said. ''I don't like fame. I'm a
very private guy by nature. I don't mind being in a column too much if they say
something nice, but the criticism still hurts. I'm much better about it now than
I used to be, but I prefer to be thought well of. You hope that the image you
represent is a reasonably good one. I'd like to be seen on the basis of the work
I've done.''

As far as Paley is concerned, there is plenty of work ahead of him. ''I thought
about death more when I was younger than I do now,'' he said. ''When you're
young, you know you're never going to die, and that's a wonderful time. Around
45 or 50, I began to think about it.  I felt scared and angry, too. You think,
'What do you mean end?  What's it all about if it's going to end?' But nature
has taken care of that. I don't think about death now. The only problem is that
the numbers keep increasing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of William Paley's children (Page 18) Photo of
William Paley at his desk (Page 17) Photo of William Paley in his office (Page
16) Photo of William Paley, Walter Cronkite and William A. Leonard

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              372 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLANDERS;
SUCCESSFUL STORIES MAKE SUCCESS STORY

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 2, Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 686 words


''WRITING?'' said Nelson De Mille of Garden City and Sag Harbor.  ''I never
thought of it.'' When he was growing up in Elmont - playing football, wrestling
and running dashes at Memorial High - Nelson De Mille was one of those people
who had no clear idea what he was going to do when he grew up.

Today, at the age of 37, he finds himself a best-selling novelist.  ''By the
Rivers of Babylon,'' his 1978 suspense novel and Book-ofthe-Month Club main
selection, is being reissued by Berkley Books in paperback, where its sales are
in the hundreds of thousands. His latest novel, ''Cathedral,'' about an Irish
Republican Army splinter group that takes over St. Patrick's Cathedral on St.
Patrick's Day, is scheduled for publication in April and is a Literary Guild
selection.

Mr. De Mille is the first to say that the road to success hasn't been simple. En
route, he studied political science and history at Hofstra University, receiving
a B.A.; saw combat as an Army officer in Vietnam; worked as an insurance
investigator; spent time on the unemployment rolls; edited Civil Service study
guides and flirted with taking a Government job.

One day in 1974, an old Army buddy, Bob Reid of Hicksville, invited Mr. De Mille
to have a drink with him and a friend of Mr. Reid's named John Littel, an editor
for a paperback publisher. ''At the time, police books were very big,'' Mr. De
Mille said. Mr. Littel asked him, ''Could you knock off one of these police
thrillers?''

''Having had about five drinks at that time,'' Mr. De Mille said, ''it seemed I
could have been a writer. The whole thing sort of came to me like a conversion
on the road to Damascus. I didn't really want to work and I thought writing
would be a good way to get out of it.  So I said, 'Yes, I can write a police
novel.'''

A deal was struck. Mr. De Mille found himself writing Volume 4 of a series
called ''Joe Blaze, N.Y.P.D.'' Not only did it elicit a positive response, he
was invited to create a cop of his own, and before long he found himself doing
research by riding in a patrol car on Manhattan's upper West Side.

In slightly more than two years, Mr. De Mille churned out nine novels, not
earning much money but learning his trade. ''I was finding out that I could
recreate dialogue and speech patterns. Cops talk like cops. Women talk like
women. Children talk like children. I was able to recreate the jargon of
whatever profession I was dealing with.''

At that point, he said, Mr. Littel called him in and said: ''You're fired. Go
out, find an agent and become a best-selling author. We can't do anything more
for you here. It's not fair.''

Mr. De Mille found himself an agent in the person of Joseph Elder, a former
editor, who took him to Bernard Geis Associates, where, in June 1976, Mr. Geis
and Mr. De Mille concocted the plot of ''By the Rivers of Babylon'' and Mr. De
Mille found himself in possession of a $10,000 advance.

''I knew it was a make-or-break situation at that point,'' Mr. De Mille said.
''I was 33 years old.'' His wife, the former Ellen Wasserman, a medical
technologist, had lost her job. ''We had a house and we were very deeply in
debt,'' he said. ''If I couldn't do a major novel, I was going to give up
writing. This was really a moment of truth.''

Mr. De Mille threw himself into the research of the major elements of the book -
the Concorde aircraft, ancient Babylon and modern Israel - with a vengeance. In
September 1977, he delivered the manuscript.

''At the beginning of October,'' Mr. De Mille said, ''my agent called me up and
he said, 'You'd better sit down.' I said, 'I've been waiting for someone to say
that for three years, so I'm going to stand.'

''He said, 'The book was bought by Harcourt Brace Jovanovich for $412,000.' ''I
said, 'Wow!' Then I sat down. It was finally all worthwhile.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Nelson De Mille

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              373 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

First of an occasional series;
BRINGING THE PAST ALIVE FOR STUDENTS TODAY

BYLINE: By EDWARD B. FISKE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2182 words

DATELINE: STAMFORD, Conn.


A growing number of students across the country now arrive at high school
without the reading skills necessary to study history, and over the last two
decades history has virtually disappeared as a distinct subject in American high
schools.

In many schools, history has become part of ''social studies'' - a change that
reflects the emergence of psychology, sociology and other social sciences as
well as a judgment about the relative importance of the present as opposed to
the past. Often, the traditional yearlong survey course in American history has
been chopped up into ''mini-courses'' that tell students about the Civil War,
black history, women's history, the 20th century or the history of the labor
movement, but not necessarily in any rational order.

But as far as Bart Gerardi is concerned, Room 203 at Westhill High School in
Stamford is a stage filled with characters out of American history, and his job
as teacher is to make them live.

''Let's look at the candidates in the election of 1824,'' he said to his
third-period class one morning recently. ''First we have Clay - a hawk, very
charming and smooth. And John Quincy Adams, who was the exact opposite. Capable
yes, brilliant yes, but charming not. He was a tactless and a nasty personality.
His sons called him sir.''

As he talked, Mr. Gerardi moved constantly about the room, gesturing and varying
the volume of his deep and resonant voice, repeating phrases to make them sink
in. ''And then, of course, there was Andrew Jackson, the frontiersman,'' he went
on. ''Clay said that he was 'dangerous.' Can you think of someone else recently
who said that a rival politician was dangerous?''

Mr. Gerardi obviously relishes his five hours a day of strutting and fretting in
front of 11th-grade students of American history, and - just as any good teacher
teaches to his strength - he uses his own sense of drama and fascination with
historical figures as a vehicle for doing his job. ''I haven't made up my mind
whether people shape events or the other way around,'' he observed. ''But I
teach a people course because that's something that students can easily
understand.''

Such is one teacher's approach to a subject that never was an easy one to teach
to adolescents, if only because they have not been around long enough to have a
sense what history is or why it is important. ''Our job is to teach students
something that most of them are not interested in,'' said Ken Ehrenthal, a
colleague.

At Westhill, the metal plate on the door of the department office says ''Social
Studies,'' but by and large the department's 19 members have resisted the
national trends and remain committed to traditional values. ''We're still a
history department,'' said Vincent J. Falcone, the 46-year old chairman. ''Most
of the courses go for a full year, and we think things like a sense of
chronology are important.''

Westhill High School is 10 years old, the newest of three high schools in a
rapidly growing city of 100,000. There are more than 1,900 students in grades
nine to 12, almost all of whom are enrolled in a required or elective history
course. They range from the poor living south of the railroad tracks to the sons
and daughters of upper-middle-class professionals in North Stamford. Nearly
two-thirds of the school's graduates move on to some form of further study, from
trade schools to Yale and Harvard.

The State of Connecticut requires only that high school students take a year of
American history, but the Stamford Board of Education insists on at least two
more years of history of some sort. The typical student in all three high
schools thus takes a year of ancient and medieval history in ninth grade, modern
European history in 10th and American history in 11th. As seniors, they can sign
up for electives ranging from Afro-American history to a college-level course in
Russian history.

Students 'Tracked' by Ability

Students in the history courses at Westhill are rigidly grouped according to
ability, with goals and expectations varying enormously from the ''zero-level,''
the highest, to ''3-level'' the lowest.

At the ''3-level,'' the emphasis is more on the development of basic skills than
the teaching of history. ''The students can't read, they don't know latitude and
longitude and they know nothing about chronological order,'' Mr. Ehrenthal said.

In the ninth and 10th grade, when most students are taking ancient, medieval and
modern European history, ''3's'' take a year of ''Today's Society,'' which
teaches academic skills and is Westhill's most conspicuous concession to the
social studies movement, and then a ''World History'' course that covers
everything from the Greeks and Romans to World War II.

Even when they reach American history in the 11th grade, such students are given
help in basic skills. ''They will forget the history, but they will be reading
all their life,'' said Carl Marino, who makes such students do a lot of reading
aloud in class.

Long Reading Lists

At the other extreme are the ''0-level'' courses designed for the top students
hoping to go on to Ivy League and other selective colleges. Students are given
long reading lists and held responsible for knowing the content of lectures. In
Mr. Marino's Russian history course, for example, a senior elective, there are
seven required books, including a college-level text, ''War and Peace,'' ''Dr.
Zhivago,'' and works by Pushkin, Dostoyevsky and Solzhenitsyn.

In between are courses at the ''1-level,'' which are fairly conventional college
preparatory courses based around textbooks, collections of essays and oral
reports, and those at the ''2-level,'' where teachers are likely to introduce
films or other nonreading resources.

In all of the courses below the ''1-level'' the emphasis is on names, dates and
facts rather than concepts. The instruction relies heavily on worksheets and
questions at the end of each chapter of the textbook, which students answer as
homework and then discuss in class. One ''3-level'' textbook, for example, which
is actually written at a junior high school level, asked, ''What part of the
United States did not allow slavery in 1789? (See paragraph 4).''

Revisionists Not Welcome

During the 1960's and early 1970's, much was made in American education of
''revisionist'' history that focused on the roles of Indians, blacks and other
minorities as well as presidents and generals, and there was considerable
discussion of the ''inquiry'' approach under which students would, instead of
relying entirely on textbooks, read original sources and draw their own
conclusions. At Westhill, though, a Rip Van Winkle who learned his history in
the 1950's and fell asleep for two decades would probably be unaware of these
trends.

The history being taught to some students today is more complex than in the
past. Because of new research, students may be taught, say, six causes for the
Civil War instead of five , and more attention to social and economic forces
rather than just military and political factors. There are also modest changes
in the treatment of some subjects. The Vikings are routinely credited with have
made it to the New World well before Columbus, although Columbus is usually
praised for returning to talk about it. Communism is no longer the ''red
menace'' so much as an ''alternative economic system.''

Nudged by their teachers, students still root for Jefferson's farmers against
Hamilton's bankers, though there are some exceptions. ''I think Hamilton did a
good job with the public debt,'' said Pam Damsky, a 16-year old.

A Shift in Focus

One place the revisionists seem to have made an impact is post-Civil War
Reconstruction. The almost-impeached Andrew Johnson is no longer portrayed as
the wise but maligned victim of the Radical Republicans. Instead, students are
told that the Johnson Administration, by being so conciliatory to the South,
wasted an opportunity to bring about long-term social reforms.

By and large, the history texts used at Westhill - and, presumably, in most high
schools across the country - are, as Mr. Falcone put it, ''good but boring.''
The text used in the 1-and 0-level courses, Thomas A. Bailey's ''The American
Pageant,'' is solid in its scholarship and brightly written and filled with
plays on words such as ''The Golden Age of Wooden Ships'' and ''When the Iron
Horse was a Colt.''

''American History for Today,'' a text by Margaret S. Branson that is used in
''3-level'' American history courses, describes itself as ''a new kind of
textbook'' that is intended to give every American ''a sense of pride in
discovering how his people have helped make this country the last best hope of
earth.'' It tells how Indians taught the early colonists how to grow plants and
how migrant agricultural workers ''helped to make parts of the U.S. into Gardens
of Eden.''

In the ''0-'' and ''1-level'' courses teachers introduce the concept of
''historiography,'' or the idea that history is an art rather than a science and
that different historians offer different views of the same events. ''You get
Boorstin's conservative view and Beard's economic view, and you learn about the
American Whigs and the British Whigs,'' said Marjorie Gochberg, a 16-year old
junior.

More Passive Students

Even in the most advanced courses, though, where a knowledge of the facts is
presumed and the emphasis is on sophisticated ''concepts,'' students are told
what the different historians have said, rather than - as proponents of the
''inquiry'' approach would have it - directed to readings that would enable them
to discover it for themselves.

This is partly a reflection of scheduling. ''There are lots of things that we
would like to do with the best students, but you would never reach the 20th
century by the end of the year,'' said Mr. Falcone. But students and teachers
also agreed that students today were simply more ''passive'' than those of an
earlier era.

''Even in the '0' classes the students sit there and read what's given to them,
and that's it,'' said Terry Berman, a 17-year old senior. ''There aren't many
who conceive their own ideas.''

Students are also acutely sensitive to teachers' own views. Mr.  Marino is
viewed as tolerant of opposing views. ''You can criticize what he says, but
you'd better have your facts,'' said Cheryl Crowley, 17.

Highly Grade-Conscious

Students in the advanced courses are also highly grade-conscious.  ''Some
students will try to get out of zero-level courses and into a one so that they
will get an A instead of a B,'' said Mr. Falcone.  ''I've even had physicians
call up to say that a zero-level course is dangerous to the kid's mental
health.''

The assassinations of President John F. Kennedy and the Rev. Dr.  Martin Luther
King Jr., the war in Vietnam and other recent events have taken their toll on
the heroes that used to walk the pages of American history. High school students
today may be more sophisticated than those of an earlier era, quicker to see the
blemishes of American history and more willing to accept them.

Thus Harold S. Atwood 3d, in his American history course, likes to point out to
students how the famous painting of the driving of the Golden Spike differs from
a less well-known photograph of the event.  ''The artist took out the liquor
bottles and added some dignitaries who weren't even there,'' he pointed out.
Teachers will routinely talk about Sally Hemmings, the slave at Monticello who
is said to have been Thomas Jefferson's mistress.

Television's Hidden Influence

At the same time, such skepticism has had the effect of making authentic heroes
all the more visible. Miss Gochberg said that George Washington was one of her
heroes, not because he chopped down the cherry tree but because he was an
enormously effective president who set wise precedents in both foreign and
domestic policies. Another popular figure is Theodore Roosevelt, if only because
he stood up to big business.

Most teachers agree that television has changed the teaching of history. Mr.
Gerardi thinks that this has been for the better, at least among students in the
lower-level courses. ''Programs like 'The Adams Chronicles' show them what
things were like in the past,'' he said.

Others, however, said that television makes teaching history more difficult
because students expect teachers to ''entertain'' them.  They also point out
that there is no chronological order to the impressions that flash across the
television screen and that, since television cuts into reading time, students
now arrive in class with less general background knowledge. ''They don't want to
read,'' said Shwerwin Baer. ''Nobody wants to read.''

On the wall in the social studies lounge at Westhill is a poster with the
much-quoted statement of the philosopher George Santayana, ''Those who cannot
remember the past are condemned to repeat it.'' It stands as something of a
symbol of both the goals and frustrations of those who teach history at
Westhill.

On the wall in the social studies lounge at Westhill is a poster

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Westwood High School Photo of Bart Gerardi, a
teacher at Westwood High

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              374 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REP. STOCKMAN NAMED IN FILES KEPT BY POLICE

BYLINE: By REGINALD STUART, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, Dec. 28


Representative David A. Stockman, directordesignate of the Office of Management
and Budget in the Reagan administration, was involved in 1967 in an antiwar
group on which the Michigan State Police ''Red Squad'' kept a file. Mr.
Stockman's involvement in the group was relatively well known - he was its chief
spokesman - but that the group was under surveillance was not.

From what little has been disclosed by people who have been advised by the state
that files exist on them and may be obtained at their request, the documents
collected by the ''Red Squad,'' the State Police intelligence unit, include the
names of dozens of persons who are now public officials, business executives,
labor leaders, academicians and clergy.

Mr. Stockman, a rising star among conservative Republicans, is the first
politician of national stature whose name has come to light as being included.

He confirmed in a telephone interview that he had been affiliated with the
group, Vietnam Summer, as its only paid staff member. But he said that before
today's brief interview he had been unaware that the group was under
surveillance by the State Police and did not know of the existence of a file on
the organization.

Basically a Church Group

''This was basically a church group engaged in an entirely acceptable
activity,'' Mr. Stockman said, expressing surprise that a file had been
compiled.

Mr. Stockman said he might request copies of any file on himself or the antiwar
group ''if it's relevant to do so,'' but said that he did not think that the Red
Squad would have collected any information that could harm his chances for
Senate confirmation next month ''unless expressing opposition to a Government
policy is something that is wrong.''

The file on Vietnam Summer is one of about 38,000 compiled by the police under a
1950 law that established a political surveillance unit within the department.
Two Michigan judges found the units and their data-gathering activities
unconstitutional nearly four years ago and next month the state is scheduled to
carry out a court order to distribute the files to persons on whom dossiers were
kept between 1950 and 1974, the year in which two lawsuits were filed seeking to
halt the clandestine activity.

F.B.I. Wants to Review Files

The Federal Bureau of Investigation, however, has said that it is considering
asking the court to allow it to review the estimated half-million pages of
information before they are released and to delete any information about
national security, intelligencegathering techniques or names of informers.

Mr. Stockman's name was included in the files of two Democratic State
Representatives, both from the Lansing area, who were leaders in Vietnam Summer
and have had limited access to their State Police files as a result of the
litigation.

One of them, H. Lynn Jondahl, said the information that he had seen, including
his name, that of Mr. Stockman and that of the other legislator, David
Hollister, was of two basic types. ''One was of a copy of a list of persons from
whom we had hoped to solicit money to finance our efforts,'' he said, ''and the
other was basically newspaper clippings and other materials published for public
consumption.'' He said he had no idea how the Red Squad obtained the list of
potential donors.

Mr. Jondahl, an ordained minister with the United Church of Christ, said that
Vietnam Summer was in business in the Lansing area for the summer of 1967 and
had as its mission ''educating'' the public, neighborhood by neighborhood, about
the group's views in opposition to the war. Mr. Stockman, who was between his
junior and senior years at Michigan State University, ran the group's day-to-day
operations, and served as chief spokesman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Rep. David A.Stockman

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              375 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM, CAMBODIA AND THE 1979-80 FOCUS OF U.S. POLICY

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 637 words


To the Editor:

A Nov. 13 Op-Ed article by Anthony Barnett quoted me as having told a delegation
visiting the White House in April 1980 that ''there is no reason to normalize
diplomatic relations with Vietnam other than liberal, neurotic guilt.'' On Dec.
2, you published a letter from Jerry Elmer, field secretary of the American
Friends Service Committee, elaborating on the discussion of Vietnam and Cambodia
at which I presumably made the remark. I was at the time a member of the
National Security Council staff.

I have the highest regard for the American Friends Service Committee, which,
along with other American voluntary organizations, has done splendid work in
helping to alleviate the recent Cambodian famine, and I want to set the record
straight.

U.S. policy in 1979-80 toward both Cambodia and Vietnam was predominantly
focused on averting the disaster facing the five million or so Khmer people who
had survived the Indochina war, the genocidal Pol Pot regime and the 1978
Vietnamese invasion. The U.S.  effort was channeled through the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the U.N. Children's Fund. The U.S. Government
provided $118 million and American private groups - including the A.F.S.C. -
over $50 million.

One of the principal obstacles to the international relief effort was the
persistent refusal of the Cambodian authorities installed by the occupying
Vietnamese army to allow anything approaching adequate entry of food, or minimal
monitoring of its use. In their effort to help break the logjam, President and
Mrs. Carter, the N.S.C. staff and the State Department all steadfastly refused
to be diverted by political considerations or arguments that the U.S. should
take sides.

The question of diplomatic relations had been put on hold following the
Vietnamese invasion, but unofficial contacts were always available. The
immediate issue was whether hundreds of thousands would live or die. Numerous
appeals, through many channels, to Hanoi and its Soviet backers seemed to make
clear that they were focusing on the conquest of Cambodia and were indifferent
to the fate of the Cambodian people.

Despite U.S. policy and the strong opposition of Vietnam's neighbors to any
weakening, I was prepared to argue internally for a policy change if there was
any real chance it would break through the local obstacles that thwarted the
international humanitarian effort.  However, after scores of consultations, and
on the basis of all available information (including Vietnam's own food
problem), I concluded there was little or no evidence that that would make any
difference.

At the meeting described by Mr. Barnett (who was not present) and Mr. Elmer (who
was), a great many things were said. The only remark of mine they chose to quote
- assuming that I indeed made that remark - can doubtless be ascribed to
fatigue, although I will confess to exasperation: one of the participants had
just returned from telling the leadership in Hanoi that the White House and the
State Department had ''used the Kampuchean crisis to provide political support
for the Pol Pot regime'' and that the funds the U.S.  contributed were only
''ostensibly to be spent for aid to Kampuchea.'' He had also told the Hanoi
leaders that Mrs. Carter's visit to refugees in Thailand had been ''part of the
President's strategy to override the influence of the N.S.C.''

Anyone who knew the facts knew that this outrageous tissue of lies and
distortations could only have the effect of encouraging the Vietnamese rulers to
continue their stonewalling, and it is appalling to think how much additional
suffering may have been caused by this caricature of the single-minded U.S.
efforts to feed the starving.
LINCOLN P. BLOOMFIELD, Professor of Political Science, M.I.T., Cambridge, Mass.,
Dec. 11, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              376 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A SWIMMER DEALS WITH AN 'OLD' PROBLEM

BYLINE: By BRIAN BROWN

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1200 words


PURCHASE, N.Y.  NOW, just before his manhood, before he can vote or fight a war,
the pie in the sky already sits full and bright. Like an insect with a lifetime
that is only the dimension of a season, there is an urgency to what he does. He
is a swimmer. And swimmers die young.

Urging every precious bit of youth from his body, accumulating enough miles of
backstroke in a week to swim from the pool at Manhattanville College in Purchase
to his home in Mount Kisco and back again, Rick Carey lives by an alarm clock
set to go off in his early 20's. Thirty-year-old men teach the 200-meter
backstroke. They do not swim it.

At 17 years old, Rick Carey made the 1980 United States Olympic team in the
100-meter backstroke. But that wasn't his only achievment this year. When he
touched the edge of the pool at a meet in Toronto on Dec. 7, and the clock
stopped at one minute 59.67 seconds, he became the holder of the American
short-course record in the 200-meter backstroke.

On a bitter Saturday morning two weeks ago, Ed Reese, the swimming coach at
University of Texas, which finished second in the National Collegiate meet last
winter, watches Carey. Dressed smoothly and tanned, Reese smiles. ''How many
prospects do you think made the Olympic team?'' he says. When talking about Rick
Carey the words ''rare,'' ''remarkable'' and ''unbelievable'' fill one sentence.

Carey's coach is a blond-haired man vicariously living the shortfused life of a
world-class swimmer. John Collins, the coach of the Badger Swim Club speaks fast
and moves fast. He was once an all-American at Indiana University. He has
expected the unexpected from Carey.

Collins is about to drive Reese to the airport, but before leaving he brings
Carey into the swimming office. Carey's morning practice is over. It is 10:30
A.M. The practice began at 8.

''We thought he would make the team in the 200 meters,'' Collins says of the
Olympic trials at Irvine, Calif., last summer.  ''What happened?'' ''He didn't
beat enough guys,'' Collins replies.  Carey wears a short smile. He stays
silent. He leans against a calendar on the wall. A red arrow is drawn through
the first two weeks in January. ''GAINESVILLE'' is written through the first
weekend; ''AUSTIN'' is spelled on the second. Carey will be in Florida and Texas
next month. In Gainesville, he will swim against Bengt Baron of Sweden, the 1980
gold medal winner at the Moscow Olympics in the 200-meter backstroke.

For this reason, the practices have been tense lately. Carey worries that he is
stale.  ''I used to hate to lose a lot,'' Carey says. ''In school, when I was
about 9 or 10, I hated to lose at any of the games. Kickball, anything. The gym
teacher said I was a poor sport. My parents made me swim. They thought I would
understand how to lose.''

Carey, a senior at Fox Lane High School in Bedford, N.Y., now fights his battles
in chlorinated water. And he still fights for peace of mind.

''Doesn't this all get to be too much?'' he is asked. ''All the people, the
travel, the practice. Is winning that important?'' ''What else is there?'' he
replies.  But winning has never been easy.  It has been a long year for Rick
Carey. His father, Jack, knows.  He recalled some of his son's agony when they
traveled to the Amateur Athletic Union nationals in Austin last April.

''He got blown out of the pool, like he was standing still,'' the father said.
''He had been beaten by the same guys before. After he got out of the pool, we
went to Wendy's. We were there from 8 to 11, until the restaurant closed. He
said to me: 'Dad I can't win the big ones. I always choke.' He was tired of
swimming. He said: 'I don't have any social life. All I do is swim.'''

He still does. Six days a week now. Two hour workouts twice a day.  Swimming
literally miles every week. It is a life Carey must fight to accept. It is a
life in which a free Saturday evening is as precious as anything in the world.

''Won't it be over soon anyway?'' he is asked.'' What about burning out?''
''That's not something you think about.'' he says.

There is a man who Collins has invited to help his swimmers cope with the mental
strain of losing and winning. Collins believes Richie Morris can help avoid
potential breakdowns and burn outs. Morris is a psychotherapist with a degree
from New York University. Once an Olympic weight lifter and a soldier in
Vietnam, Morris has become a disciple of positive thinking.

''When you step on the starting blocks,'' Morris says to the members of the swim
club after practice, ''you have to tap into your inner monologue. A winner's
inner monologue says, 'I can win this race.' If you start saying things to
yourself like, 'Oh, what if I mess up with the turns, what if I go out too
fast?' then you will mess up the turn and you will go out too fast.''

Standing in a door in the dark gym at Manhattanville College, his black hair
slick from practice, Carey listens. Morris continues. He gives a sheet of paper
to everyone. On the sheet there are several questions, including: ''What are my
dominant fears? What are my dominant desires? Do I focus on the rewards of
success or the penalties of failure more?''

Carey has chiselsed his body into the V-shape of a swimmer's. His shoulders and
chest are broad. When he swims the backstroke, his pectoral muscles unfold like
the expanding wings of a butterfly. He is 5 feet 11 inches tall and 180 pounds.
Though many of his sentences include the words, 'I don't have time,' he is
trying to begin a romance.

The intensity of his sport spills over into his life in the classroom. His
Scholastic Aptitude Test scores - he ranks 22 in a class of 384 - make him a
potential Ivy League student. But he has narrowed his college choices to four:
Southern Cal, California, Texas and Florida, all swimming powers.

Carey thought his Olympic dream was smashed when he finished fourth in the
American trials at the 200-meter backstroke last summer. So, he relaxed at the
start of the 100-meter backstroke later in the week.

''John told me to relax going out, and feel good coming home,'' Carey
''At 50 meters I was sixth. I planned to go out easy and not get too far behind.
At 50 meters, I felt really good. I kept my stroke smooth and powerful. I could
see I was a little ahead of the guy in lane one, and I could see the feet of the
guy in lane three. I touched that guy out at the end of the race.''

Rick Carey is courteous, intelligent, articulate. Slow and lose are words he
doesn't use. Neither is patience. He is impatient. He is a swimmer. And swimmers
die young.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Rick Carey said.

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              377 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 30, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ALLOWS CLASS SUIT AGAINST DEFOLIANT MAKERS

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 520 words

DATELINE: WESTBURY, L.I., Dec. 29


A Federal District judge ruled tonight that Vietnam veterans allegedly injured
by the defoliant Agent Orange could join in a class-action suit against five
companies that manufactured the chemical, and that the manufacturers could not
sue the Federal Government.

Attorneys representing the veterans hailed the ruling by Judge George C. Pratt
in what has been described as one of the largest and most complicated product
liability cases in American history.

More than 7,000 Vietnam veterans, including 1,200 Australians who fought with
the American military forces, have joined the 20 who originally filed the suit
two years ago.

The veterans have contended that they while in Vietnam they were exposed to
Agent Orange, a herbicide known as 2,4,5-T that contains the chemical dioxin.
They asserted that the potent toxin had caused them to suffer tumors, skin
lesions and even cancer.

There were 19 chemical companies named as defendants in the lawsuit, including
the following five as principal defendants: the Dow Chemical Company, the
Monsanto Company, the Diamond Shamrock Corporation, Hercules Inc. and the
Thompson Hayward Chemical Company.  The companies had argued that the danger of
dioxin exposure to humans had never been proven. Attorneys for Dow Chemical, who
were present for the decision tonight, declined to comment on the ruling.

In an 88-page ruling, Judge Pratt said that a class action suit was
''appropriate'' and ''superior to any other available method for the fair and
efficient adjudication of this controversy.''

Decision Called 'Magnificent'

An attorney for the veterans, Victor R. Yannacone Jr., of Patchogue, L.I.,
called Judge Pratt's decision ''magnificent.'' He said that it ''resolved all
the complicated procedural issues fairly and, we believe, in the best interest
of all Americans and especially the men who served in Vietnam.''

Ronald De Boer, one of the first veterans to bring the case to court, said that
he was ''grateful'' that ''the courthouse door has been left open for us.'' Mr.
De Boer, who served in the Army in Vietnam in 1968, underwent surgery for cancer
two years ago.

In ruling, Judge Pratt denied a motion by the chemical companies that the suit
be dismissed, and he ordered lawyers for both sides to present briefs Jan. 23 on
the assertion by the chemical companies that they were not liable because they
were only Government contractors.

In deciding that veterans could, as a class, sue the chemical companies, Judge
Pratt noted that 167 Agent Orange cases were pending in the Eastern District of
New York, each involving scores of veterans.

''A single trial of common issues has obvious benefits in economy and
efficiency,'' he said. ''Any determinations reached in the class action would
bind all defendants as well as all members of the class except those who chose
to opt out.''

He also held that sovereign immunity protected the military and the Government
from countersuits by the manufacturers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              378 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 30, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 993 words


Mao's widow, hauled from court, shouts, ''I am prepared to die'' A2
French direct anger at immigrant workers A3
Greek Premier defends nation's Common Market membership A3
Soldiers turn out to quiet Afghan protests, diplomats report A4
Around the World A5

Government/Politics
Special counsel chosen for Haig confirmation hearingss A7
Reformer gets task of cleaning up Philadelphia Civil Service A8
Judge Shilling wins stay of his re- moval from bench Judge
Koch administration resisting state plan for homeless centers B7
F.C.C. battles illegal interna- tional shortwave broadcasts D16

Energy
New power plan is ordered for Plattsburgh Air Force Base B7

General
Around the Nation A6
Once-militant blacks are a symbol of hope in Milwaukee A6
Underground gas leak concerns a community in West Virginia A6
Sharp rise in anti-Semitic inci- dents reported in 1980 A9
The Region B2
The City B3

Obituaries
Nadezhda Mandelstam, widow of Russian poet D15
James Kellogg, once headed Port Authority D15

Style
Notes on Fashion C10
The state of style: No more dicta- tors C10
Book explains parents' rights C10

Science Times
Microscope shows the death of a cancer cell C1
Galactic jets are the cosmos' larg- est structures C1
About Education C1
Surgeons' Assistants, a new health profession C2
Science Q & A C2
Science Watch C3
Education: The trials of Massa- chusetts C4

Arts/Entertainment
Spalding Gray's autobiography is performing art C4
''Black Nativity'' in a new produc- tion by Hazel Bryant C5
Paris display shows how science uncovers art forgeries C5
Paul Zweig's ''The Heresy of Self- Love'' is reviewed C9
Culture, Jamaican reggae trio C9
Kennedy Center lists inaugural entertainments C9
Colonel, writing anonymously, at- tacks leadership in Vietnam C9
''The Mating Season,'' about two bird watchers, on CBS C9
Don Covay sings at Tramps in soul series C11
Cable-TV revenues climbed 20 percent in 1979 C11
Greeks revive satires on leaders and daily lives C12

Sports
Ali surrenders his Nevada boxing license B8
Lendl upset by DuPre in Austral- ian open tennis B9
Sherrill, Pitt football coach, wants a national college playoff B9
Raiders' Hayes calls Oiler offense ''archaic'' B9
Motta starting over at bottom with Mavericks B9
Nordiques are building for future B10
Syracuse beats Colgate, 100-84 B11
Dave Anderson on Moose Krause's Notre Dame B12
Nephew, 13, doesn't regard Nas- tase as his model B12
Trade that fell through pays off for Clippers B12

Features/Notes
Notes on People B8
Going Out Guide C6

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A10

Iran's outrageous outrage The value of CETA New Jersey's crowded primary Letters
A10
Flora Lewis: Eurocommunism's racial slip A11
F. M. Esfandiary: looking beyond reindustrialization A11
Richard Faust: when the plant store disappeared A11
Langhorne Bond: the Federal budgest cap A11

B4

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              379 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 30, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SURGEON'S ASSISTANT: NO MEDICAL DEGREE BUT SKILLED WITH SCALPEL

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1181 words


BIRMINGHAM, Ala.  TEN or 12 times a week, Charles W. Watkins appears at a
seventhfloor operating room at the University of Alabama Hospitals here and,
with scalpel, forceps and scissors, slowly harvests the greater saphenous veins
from the legs of patients who are simultaneously undergoing coronary bypass
surgery. The veins are implanted as substitutes for coronary arteries that no
longer work properly. The veins are accessible, lying on the outside of the leg,
and remaining veins can easily take over their share of the circulation.

Mr. Watkins, who is 36 years old, has done this demanding and delicate surgical
procedure exclusively for the last five years. He is much respected by the
physicians and surgeons who know his work, and has gained a reputation for the
high degree of skill and dedication he brings to his task.

But Mr. Watkins is not a doctor. He has never attended medical school and has no
intention of doing so, although he has completed some credits toward a master's
degree in public health. He is, as his nametag says, a surgeon's assistant, one
of perhaps 250 people in the nation who are not doctors but who have been
legally performing surgery and other significant operating-room chores for the
last 10 years.

A surgeon's assistant is certified and registered to a specific surgeon and
normally works only for that doctor. Nationally, assistants' salaries range from
$20,000 to $50,000, depending on where they work and what their experience level
is. This is far less than most specialized surgeons would make, but more than
the salaries of most interns and residents who might otherwise do the same work.

Although there has been broad acceptance of both physicians' and surgeons'
assistants, there is some resistance, too. Most of it emanates from New Jersey,
the only state in which medical groups are actively trying to block legislation
that would make the two occupations legal there.

''There are a few surgeons who see us as a threat,'' said Gregg Munson,
president of the American Association of Surgeons' Assistants.

Surgical Program Developed

The concept that people without medical degrees could do surgery or act as first
assistants to surgeons was developed in 1967 by Dr.  John W. Kirklin, chairman
of the Department of Surgery at the University of Alabama. He believed the
program was necessary because surgeons were becoming scarce and many of their
tasks would not be difficult to learn.

Alabama now has the largest training program in the country, but it is not the
only one. Other accredited programs are offered at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill; the Cornell Medical School in New York, and at the
Cuyahoga Community College in Parma, Ohio. All of the programs are small,
graduating only a handful of assistants each year. Requirements vary, but two
years of college are generally required to enter a program. Most assistants have
bachelor's degrees.

The notion that you do not have to be a doctor to do some of a doctor's work is
not a new one. In 1961, Dr. Charles L. Hudson, writing in The Journal of the
American Medical Association, called for ''an advanced medical assistant with
special training, intermediate between that of the technician and that of the
doctor, who could not only handle many technical procedures but could also take
some degree of medical responsibility.''

Dr. Hudson was not alone in his convictions, and in 1965 Dr. Eugene A. Stead Jr.
began a physician's assistant program at Duke University. By 1972, there were 12
such programs at various institutions, and currently about 60 are accredited by
the American Medical Association. To date, more than 14,000 students are
enrolled in such programs or have graduated from them. Most of them work with
internists or physicians with a general practice.

Physicians' assistants conduct physical examinations, interview patients,
compile their medical histories, and in general can do about 70 percent of the
clinical procedures carried out by a general physician. Surgeons' assistants can
do the same things, but they have the added dimension of operating room work.

''It is very much like having a permanent intern on your staff,'' said Carl
Fasser, president of the American Academy of Physician Assistants, who is
director of the P.A. program at the Baylor Medical School.

In New Jersey, however, both the medical society and the New Jersey State Nurses
Association have actively lobbied against proposed legislation that would enable
the assistants to be certified, even though Rutgers, the state university,
offers an accredited course for those who want to become physicians' assistants.

There are 75,000 registered nurses in New Jersey, and according to Glenna Cole
Slattery, director of government relations for the New Jersey State Nurses
Association, many nurses are afraid for their jobs because physicians'
assistants duplicate their functions.

''I have the idea that a physician should do what he is licensed to do and not
let others do it,'' she said. ''Anyhow, these programs were only started to get
corpsmen from the Vietnam War off the street.''

In the initial stages, there were a number of former members of the Medical
Corps among the surgeons' assistants. Now, though, the career is increasingly
being sought by people who have never been in the military. About 40 percent of
all surgeon's assistants are women.

Medical Society Responds

Mr. Fasser of the American Academy of Physician Assistants says that many people
get into an assistant's program ''when they want to have a career in the health
field but do not wish to be nurses and cannot become doctors, either because
they lack the funds to go to medical school or because they cannot gain
admittance.''

Although many physicians in New Jersey are known to favor the assistants, the
medical society wants no part of them. ''There is no doctor shortage in New
Jersey,'' said Martin E. Johnson, director of public affairs and medical
education for the medical society, ''and there is a concern that if these people
were not properly supervised, they would become junior M.D.'s.''

In New York State, where both physicians' and surgeons' assistants can work, the
medical society has endorsed the programs, but recently issued a statement that
said, ''It is recommended that a system be evolved to assure firmer controls of
the training, supervision and utilization of physicians' assistants.''

The medical society added that it is ''constantly evaluating the position of
physicians' assistants and the effect on the delivery of health care in New York
State, and is attempting to control the activity of such physicians' assistants
in order to avoid abuse.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of a Surgery team

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              380 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 30, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

OFFICER INDICTS GENERALSHIP IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 543 words


A book strongly critical of American military leadership, written under a
pseudonym by an Army colonel who wants to remain on active duty and therefore
has disguised his authorship, will be published at the end of next month by W.W.
Norton & Company.

''Self-Destruction: The Disintegration and Decay of the United States Army
During the Vietnam Era,'' is written by ''Cincinnatus,'' as the author calls
himself. The book says that Vietnam was ''a failure of the American military
mind.'' The author blames the generals in Saigon, especially William C.
Westmoreland, as well as ''the high command'' in the Pentagon who thought and
fought, he writes, ''like corporate executives.''

''We are unaware of the book's existence and do not know who wrote it,'' said
Col. Michael Vargosko of the Army's public information branch at the Pentagon.
He said that it was policy for members of the armed services on active duty to
submit what they write before publication,''primarily to see if it contains
classified material rather than to censor their opinions.''

Didn't Seek Clearance

In two telephone interviews that he initiated to prevent identification and
conceal his whereabouts, the author said that he had not submitted his book for
clearance but that it contained no classified secrets. He said the reason for
his pseudonym were that he wanted attention paid to what he had to say rather
than to himself in order to bring about Army reforms.

The author calls himself ''Cincinnatus,'' after the Roman patrician Lucius
Quinctius Cincinnatus, who was appointed dictator in 458 B.C., saved his country
by generalship and then returned to farm life. The Society of the Cincinnati was
the name adopted by the association of regular officers of the Continental Army
after the Revolutionary War, in an allusion to the Roman leader.

Despite its anonymity and subject-matter, ''Self-Destruction'' will be a
selection of the Military Book Club. The book is dedicated to the 57,002 combat
and noncombat dead in Vietnam.

Rose From Private

In the telephone interviews, ''Cincinnatus'' said that he has been in the Army
since 1952. He served as a private first class and corporal in Korea, was
commissioned in 1962, graduated from the Command and General Staff School and
Army War College, and served as a captain during the 1968 Tet offensive. He
declined to mention which branch of the Army because that could lead to his
identification.

His editor, Eric P. Swenson, who is vice chairman and executive editor at
Norton, initiated the book, has checked the colonels credentials, has spoken to
him many times, but has never seen him in person. The book itself bears the
copyright ''Cincinnatus.''

''Cincinnatus'' says he does not fear reprisals even if his name emerges because
his views are based on talks with many high-ranking officers. He believes that
even some four-star generals agree with his opinions. ''Self-Destruction,'' he
hopes, will be closely read by his superiors in the armed forces.

''There's a bookstore in the Pentagon,'' he said, ''and I'm sure it will be on
sale there.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              381 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 31, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AFTER LONG COURT FIGHT, CITY POLICE ACCEPT POLITICAL-SURVEILLANCE CURBS

BYLINE: By ANGEL CASTILLO

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 934 words


In a settlement that ends a nine-year-old court battle, the New York City Police
Department agreed yesterday to create a three-member board to oversee all future
police intelligence gathering and surveillance involving political groups and
activists.

All such police work is to be conducted under a formal set of written guidelines
aimed at safeguarding political activities covered by the First Amendment,
according to the settlement.

At the same time, the Police Department agreed to release 300,000 pages of
information gathered and filed by its special services division - known as the
Red Squad - to the 250,000 people on whom dossiers have been kept by the
department since 1955.

The squad has long been disbanded, although surveillance work is still conducted
by the public security section of the Police Department's intelligence division.

The formal 24-page settlement agreement was negotiated by the Police Department
and the City of New York with attorneys for a coalition of political activists
that included the former Yippie leader, Abbie Hoffman, and members of the Black
Panther Party, the Vietnam Peace Parade Committee, the Gay Liberation Front and
other organizations.

The agreement was submitted yesterday to Judge Charles S. Haight Jr. in Federal
District Court in Manhattan for his consideration.  The settlement puts an end -
without a trial or any finding of wrongdoing by the Police Department - to a
class action lawsuit that was filed in May of 1971 by attorneys for the New York
Civil Liberties Union, the National Lawyers Guild and the National Conference of
Black Lawyers on behalf of 16 named political activists and ''all others
similarly situated.''

The suit asserted that the alleged activities of the special services unit,
which were said to have included the infiltration of political groups by
undercover detectives, had improperly interfered with the plaintiffs' expression
and advocacy of unpopular political and social views, contrary to the mandate of
the First Amendment to the Constitution.

When that suit was filed, the Police Department stated in court that any police
abuses that might have occurred were ''aberrations'' in violation of department
policies.

Dorothy J. Samuels, executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union,
and two of the attorneys who worked on the case, Paul G. Chevigny and Franklin
Siegel, yesterday praised Robert J.  Mc-Guire, the city's Police Commissioner,
for his ''spirit of cooperation,'' ''reasonableness'' and ''realistic attitude''
in helping to bring the case to a conclusion.

Miss Samuels called the settlement ''a major step toward eliminating police
surveillance and recordkeeping directed at lawful political activity and
dissent.'' She added: ''The settlement establishes the principle that the needs
of legitimate law enforcement do not require interference with First Amendment
rights.''

, Mr. McGuire said the creation of the supervisory board was a ''unique safety
mechanism without parallel in any other city police force in the United
States.''

The board will consist of William J. Devine, the Police Department's first
deputy commissioner; Kenneth Conboy, the department's deputy commissioner for
legal matters, and a civilian member to be named later by Mayor Koch. While
campaigning for Mayor in 1977, Mr. Koch had stated that he supported the
disclosure of Red Squad activities as requested in the lawsuit.

Mr. McGuire said that the allegedly improper activities cited in the suit had
been discontinued by the Police Department in 1971 and that surveillance
activities since then had been conducted under internal operating procedures
very similar to those made formal in the new guidelines.

''The new guidelines do not impact on or impair the department's ability to
investigate overt criminal activities, but rather represent an enlightened
approach to balancing the rights of political activists and the police
responsibility for maintaining public order and investigating crime,'' the
Commissioner said in a prepared statement.

Under the new guidelines, Mr. McGuire said, the Police Department will continue
to keep ''generic information'' about some political activities, such as the
number of persons attending a public demonstration, the number of arrests made
in connection with the event, if any, and the number of police officers needed
to maintain order.

However, the Police Department will not open an index or a file on any person
simply because of participation in such public events, the Commissioner said.

Although the department will continue to maintain files containing information
from publicly available sources, he added, persons or organizations will not be
indexed solely because they are mentioned in such public records.

Under the settlement announced yesterday, all files involving political
activists and organizations kept by the Police Department from Jan. 1, 1955,
through Dec. 31, 1959, must be maintained by the department for six months
following final court approval of the settlement. This provision was made to
allow inspection of the files by the persons and groups to whom they refer.

A similar procedure must be followed for a one-year period with files containing
entries made from Jan. 1, 1960, until the present.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              382 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 31, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WRONG ON RIGHTS

BYLINE: By Stanley Hoffman

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 885 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


The newly designated representative to the United Nations, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick,
along with Richard M. Nixon, Henry A. Kissinger, and Ronald Reagan, has often
stated that President Carter's human-rights policy failed to distinguish between
the absolute evil of totalitarian countries and the more limited and remediable
lapses of authoritarian regimes, many of which are staunchly anti-Communist and
friendly to the United States. According to a whole spurious theory that has
been developed in order to buttress this view, such authoritarian regimes
''tolerate'' injustice or cruelty rather than create it, and people in these
countries accept misery or a lack of political and civil rights - until Marxist
agitators come along.

Had this construction not become a quasi-official ideology, one would not want
to take it seriously. However, since it has a good chance to affect policy in
the Reagan administration, it is necessary to say that it is both morally wicked
and politically disastrous.

Any reader of the recent report of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
about what can only be called official counterterrorism in Argentina, any person
familiar with Nicaragua under Anastasio Somoza Debayle and Iran under Shah
Mohammed Riza Pahlavi and his secret police, the Savak, can only be amazed by
the callousness of the new orthodoxy, which apparently assumes that justice and
freedom are affordable only in advanced societies.

The United States has always insisted that it was not merely concerned with
preserving the global balance of power and with protecting its interests around
the world, but rather that it stands for certain values and for a certain
concept of human rights. This concept has been enshrined in a number of
international declarations and covenants. Of course, it is beyond the reach of
the United States alone to force foreign regimes to honor their word and to
provide their citizens with even the most basic rights, but for the United
States to concentrate its rhetoric and its pressures on its foes and to spare
its ''friends'' - and, indeed, to spin a pseudo-theoretical tale in order to
justify the distinction - would be seen by many Americans, and by even more
people abroad, as a singular form of cynicism and as the height of hypocrisy.
Many of our ''friends,'' who imprison, torture, or massacre freely, depend in
one form or another on our assistance, or at least on our complicity.

It is true that when such tyrants fall, the successors often turn out to be no
better rulers of their people, as well as anti-American. But anyone familiar
with revolutions, and with the bloody legacy of corrupt and rigid authoritarian
government that resists reform until it is too late for anything but civil war,
knows that it is postponement of reform that prepares the excesses, sometimes
the horrors, of the successor regimes.

It is Washington's apparent endorsement of the ''friendly'' tyrant that gives an
anti-United States thrust to those who fight him, and provides pro-Cuban or
pro-Soviet forces with a golden opportunity.  That many of the rebels battling
authoritarian tyrannies should be attracted by Marxism is no surprise, given
both the class and power inequities in their countries, and the frequent failure
of moderates and liberals, squeezed between repression and revolt. But the
longer the United States appears to support repression, the greater the
likelihood that local Marxists will become embittered foes of the United States,
as well as the only alternatives to the status quo.

The logic of the new view is simple. It would make of the United States the
protector, and therefore the hostage, of every authoritarian client or
''friend.''

Nothing could be more capable of helping our Soviet adversaries cover their own
record of oppression and brutality and strike the pose of defender of human
rights in the third world. Should the same approach be taken in the case of
South Africa, the United States would soon again become the target of hostile
majorities at the United Nations. We could, of course, revert to the unhappy
tactic of behaving as the beleaguered opposition there, and of denouncing the
majority as a bunch of hypocrites and totalitarians. But this could have
disastrous effects not only in our relations with key thirdworld countries but
also in straining our ties with our allies.

A coherent and multinational policy on human rights remains to be defined. But
to move from the occasional incoherence and contradictions of the Carter policy
- a policy that, despite its flaws, did much restore our prestige abroad in the
post-Vietnam years - to a policy of ideological bias that would turn human
rights into an anti-Soviet and antiradical crusade, and thus condemn the United
States to political overextension and to moral schizophrenia, is surely not the
way to begin.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Stanley Hoffmann, professor of French civilization, is chairman of the Center
for European Studies, at Harvard University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
