



Download Request: All Documents: 1-333
Time Of Request: Thursday, November 23, 2017  11:46:18 EST
Send To:

MEGADEAL, ACADEMIC UNIVERSE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
LIBRARY
CHICAGO, IL


Terms: ((Vietnam OR Viet Nam) and Date(geq(04/01/1987) and leq(06/30/1987)))


Source: The New York Times
Project ID:



                               1 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 1, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SLAIN ADVISER THE SOLE AMERICAN AT SALVADOR BASE

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 707 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 31


The Defense Department said today that the American military adviser killed in a
guerrilla attack on a Salvadoran Army base this morning was the only American on
the base.

The Pentagon identified the adviser as Staff Sgt. Gregory A. Fronius, 27 years
old, of Greensburg, Pa., assigned to the 3rd Battalion, 7th Special Forces
Group, based in Panama.

An Army spokesman said Sergeant Fronius's body was shipped out of El Salvador
late today for Panama. From there it was to be returned to the United States for
burial.

The Pentagon spokesman, Robert Sims, said that the adviser - called a trainer by
the Pentagon - was apparently inside the base compound at El Paraiso and was
therefore observing the restrictions imposed on the 50 American military
advisers now in El Salvador.

''There are general ground rules,'' Mr. Sims said. ''We do not have advisers,
trainers, go on land or sea patrol. We don't have them flying aircraft on combat
missions. They normally avoid situations where combat is likely. They are
stationed, for the most part, in the capital city of San Salvador and certain
other garrisons, such as this one, which was a major regional command post.''

Advisers Limited to 55

The slain adviser was part of a two-member team, Mr. Sims said. His colleague
was not on the base and was not hurt.

The Pentagon has limited to 55 the number of military advisers in El Salvador,
although the ranks are increased by sending additional people on temporary duty.

A Pentagon official denied that the adviser who was killed had any connection
with the Central Intelligence Agency, which has been funneling aid to the
Nicaraguan rebels, known as the contras.

The adviser, the official said, was a member of the armed services and part of a
military group that reports to the United States Ambassador, not to the C.I.A.

The advisory team is part of an American effort to help the Salvadoran Army
resist the guerrilla forces. The United States has provided $2 billion in
economic and military aid, and trains troops in marksmanship, weapons use and
equipment maintenance. Larger, tactical questions are addressed at higher
levels, the official said.

Anxiety in Congress

There was no reaction from the White House or the State Department, and members
of Congress were generally reluctant to make any immediate comment.

Many members of Congress have expressed anxiety that in sending military
advisers to Central America the United States is entering a quagmire similar to
Vietnam. The initial American involvement in Vietnam, in the late 1950's early
60's, came in the form of military advisers to the South Vietnamese Army and
grew eventually to a ground force of some 500,000 men at its peak.

The Reagan Administration has insisted that it has no intention of sending
combat troops to the region.

The adviser was the first killed in combat, although five other American
military men have died in El Salvador since 1983. In May 1983, Lieut. Comdr.
Albert Schaufelberger of the Navy was killed by a gunman on the campus of the
University of Central America in San Salvador. Four off-duty United States
marines were killed in an attack on a cafe in June 1985.

AMERICAN DIES IN COPTER CRASH

WASHINGTON, March 31 (AP) -An American employee of the Central Intelligence
Agency was killed last week in the crash of a Salvadoran military helicopter in
El Salvador, the State Department said Monday.

Neither the department nor the C.I.A. disclosed the man's identity, but a
Massachusetts newspaper, The Quincy Patriot Ledger, reported on Monday that a
former area resident, Richard D. Krobock, 31 years old, had died last week in a
helicopter crash in El Salvador.

The victim's father, Dr. John R. Krobock of Sacramento, Calif., was quoted as
saying he had been informed of his son's death, but he provided no details of
the incident. Dr. Krobock said he knew nothing about his son's work in Central
America.

A State Department spokesman, Greg Lagana, said on Monday that, ''An employee of
the C.I.A. assigned to the U.S. Embassy in San Salvador was killed March 26 when
a Salvadoran military helicopter in which he was a passenger crashed five
kilometers north of the town of Chinameca'' in San Miguel Province.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Staff Sgt. Gregory Fronius (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 2, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, APRIL 2, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words




INTERNATIONAL    A3-11



Security in the U.S. Embassy in Mos-cow may have been so compromised that
Secretary of State George P. Shultz may not be able to hold talks safe from
eavesdropping when he visits there on April 13.    Page A1



Senior Marine officers rarely visit the men posted as guards at American
embassies, regarding the operational supervision of the young men as a job for
the State Department, the elite battalion commander said.    A6



Israelis and Russians have agreed to exchange visits by consular delegations in
a breakthrough that could lead to an informal resumption of diplomatic ties,
according to Israeli officials.    A1



The U.S. has denied Iraq's request for C-130 cargo planes and artillery radar,
but is continuing to provide Baghdad with intelligence data on Iranian
deployments, according to American officials.    A1



Two large Soviet and Afghan groups are moving toward the Afghan-Pakistani border
to attack the major bases of guerrilla armies, according to an Afghan guerrilla
military commander.    A3



Chad's victory over Libyan forces was achieved with boldness, modern weapons and
traditional desert cunning, according to officials. The Libyans have been driven
from most of northern Chad.    A8



Loans to Brazil will be placed on non-accrual status by three American banking
companies, reducing the banks' net income for 1987 by tens of millions of
dollars apiece.    D1



Raisa Gorbachev's wardrobe is the subject of a critical underground videotape
circulating in Moscow. The videotape of unknown origin depicts Mrs. Gorbachev as
an extravagant, vain woman.    A1



New analysis: Missile diplomacy

    A3



Spy case may involve 3d American

    A7



Pinochet tells Pope he is seeking stability

    A8



Nicaraguan Indian assails rebel leaders

    A11



NATIONAL    A12-15, A18-28, B9



The Senate failed to override President Reagan's veto of a $87.9 billion highway
bill, but the Democratic leadership moved to force a second vote and a key
Democrat said he had changed his mind.    A1



Major savings in health care are predicted by Blue Cross/Blue Shield and the
American College of Physicians. They are issuing new guidelines advising doctors
when, and when not, to order 15 common diagnostic tests costing $30 billion a
year.    A12



2 Parkinson's victims have improved markedly after the transplantation of tissue
from their adrenal glands into their brains in what experts termed the most
dramatic development in efforts to treat the disorder.    A15



President Reagan urged abstinence by schoolchildren from sexual intercourse as
the best way to avoid contracting AIDS. He said he favored sex education for
students in the context of instruction in moral values.    A13



Democrats pushed a budget totaling $1 trillion through the House Budget
Committee, but the Senate Budget Committee later defeated a similar measure
proposed by its Democratic chairman.    B9



Man in the News: Gen. Carl Vuono, who has been nominated to be the Army Chief of
Staff and is the Army's youngest full general, commanded two battalions in the
Vietnam War as a field artillery officer.    A20



NASA urged a new shuttle rocket by the mid-1990's. Space agency officials
estimated that the cost of producing 160 such rockets from the fiscal years 1993
through 1999 at $2.4 million.

    A27



Hispanic workers are capturing a rising share of new jobs, Government figures
show, generating debate over whether this marks a breakthrough or suggests that
many of the jobs are marginal.    A26



AIDS, a key issue in '88 race

    A12



Clergy recruit parents for orphans

    A12



Drug test contract voided

    A18



Robertson used journalist for suit

    A25



WASHINGTON TALK    A28



Baker's relations with Congress

On amending the Constitution

REGIONAL    B1-8



Stanley Simon was indicted on a string of charges related to activities when he
was Borough President of the Bronx. The accusations included extortion of more
than $50,000 and a job for his brother-in-law from a military contractor.    A1



Dwight Gooden will have treatment for cocaine use for perhaps two months, with
the date of his return to pitching for the Mets in doubt. Gooden took the test
voluntarily to end assertions about his behavior last season.    A1



Both sides in a surrogate-parent controversey said the court ruling in the Baby
M case in New Jersey granting custody to her father had hardened their positions
on the legal and ethical questions of surrogacy.    A1



Greater participation by blacks in grass-roots politics is the single most
important step in improving race relations in the New York City area, according
to a wide range of politicians and experts.    B1



Families with much higher income than originally announced will be eligible for
apartments to be renovated in abandoned New York City buildings under first
phase of Mayor Koch's housing plan.    B1



Karl Linneas may be deported at once to face the death penalty as a war criminal
in Soviet Union, a Federal appeals court ruled. The Greenlawn, L.I., man is
accused of being a concentration camp chief.    B1

Air pollution has increased to dangerous levels along major streets of lower
Manhattan since tolls were doubled on the westbound Verrazano-Narrows Bridge,
according to a draft study.    B3



Cheap upstate electrical power would be made available to companies downstate to
spur jobs and economic development under an agreement reached by key legislators
in Albany.

    B8



A suspended judge pleaded guilty to racketeering and agreed to forfeit $150,000
in illegal proceeds.The Brooklyn judge, Samuel Weinberg, is 61 years old and
said he feared he could not survive a prison term.    B3



Park reclaimed from chop shops

    B1



Calls rise at surrogacy center

    B2



Orangemen are heroes at home

    B3



Evidence links Jewish Defense League to terrorism

    B4



New inquiry on state militia

    B4



State acts to improve Creedmoor

    B4



A.T.& T. reviews rental plan

    B6



Nursing home is cited

    B7


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 2, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SHIPPING OFFICIAL MAY GET F.A.A. JOB

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 1


The Reagan Administration has selected an executive of a major air freight
company as the new Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration,
according to his Congressman and company officials.

The reported nominee is T. Allan McArtor, a 44-year-old senior vice president of
the Federal Express Corporation. If nominated and confirmed by the Senate, Mr.
McArtor would lead the aviation agency through what is expected to be one of its
most turbulent periods yet.

Mr. McArtor, a former Air Force fighter pilot who was decorated for heroism in
Vietnam, would succeed Donald D. Engen, 62, a retired vice admiral of the Navy
who announced his resignation last month after repeated frustrations in his
dealings with the Administration, the airline industry and Congress. He has led
the agency for three years.

Mr. McArtor would take over at a time when airline passengers are experiencing
widespread delays and cancellations, major airlines are pressing the Government
to spend more on airport improvements and air traffic controllers are trying to
organize a new union.

'Significant' Issues Seen

''I am honored to be considered for Administrator of the F.A.A.,'' Mr. McArtor
said in a statement released by his Memphis-based company. ''The issues
currently before the agency are significant and will affect the airline industry
and the traveling public for many years. I look forward to assuming this
challenge upon approval of my nomination.''

Officials of the Department of Transportation, the parent agency of the F.A.A.,
and the agency itself said they could not confirm the report that Mr. McArtor
would be named to the $89,500-a-year post.

Representative Don Sundquist, a Tennessee Republican, said Mr. McArtor was
chosen for the post after impressing Transportation Secretary Elizabeth Hanford
Dole, with whom he served on a space travel panel.

''He's very bright and a good manager,'' Mr. Sundquist said of Mr. McArtor.
''Having been in air transportation most of his life, he's eminently
qualified.''

A Member of the Thunderbirds

Mr. McArtor, who was born in St. Louis, was graduated from the Air Force Academy
in 1964 and received a Master of Science degree from Arizona State University in
1971. As an Air Force major he received the Silver Star and the Distinguished
Flying Cross for his service in Vietnam. He also served for two years as a
member of the Thunderbirds, the Air Force precision flying team.

Mr. McArtor, who joined Federal Express in 1970, has held executive positions in
the company's aviation and advanced technology division. He is senior vice
president for telecommunications, responsible for the operations of its domestic
and international telecommunications networks.

If Mr. McArtor becomes the new F.A.A. Administrator, he will take over an agency
embroiled in conflict. Mr. Engen was frequently frustrated by his battles with
Mrs. Dole and with the Office of Management and Budget, colleagues said. They
cited as examples the the Transportation Department's repeated slashing of his
proposed budgets for the agency and the the budget office's insistence that the
agency use private contractors as air controllers at small airports and allow
airlines to buy and sell their landing rights at major airports.

Mr. Engen was also frustrated by flight delays that he said were partly
attributable to overbooking by the airlines. Delays and cancellations increased
by 25 percent last year, and predictions that the situation would worsen led to
a deepening dispute between the Administration and Congress.

''In the long run, it's going to get worse unless we build more airports, '' he
said of the flight delays in an interview last week. Members of Congress have
proposed various restrictions and penalties on the airlines but the
Administration has indicated that it would rather rely on the marketplace to
weed out inefficient practices.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 2, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
A RARITY FOR ARMY'S TOP POST: CARL EDWARD VUONO

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 704 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 1


Gen. Carl E. Vuono, who has been nominated by President Reagan to be the Army
Chief of Staff, is something of a rarity.

At the age of 52 he is the Army's youngest four-star general. And he has been a
full general for less than a year; only one of the Army's top 11 generals, James
J. Lindsay, who heads the Readiness Command in Tampa, Fla., has held that rank
for less time.

General Vuono, commander of the Army Training and Doctrine Command at Fort
Monroe, Va., has made his reputation as a trainer rather than as an operator or
planner. Moreover, unlike most of his predecessors since World War II, General
Vuono is an artillery officer. Most previous Chiefs of Staff were from the
infantry or armored corps.

Officers say he was picked for the Army's highest-ranking uniformed position
because he has a solid reputation as a commander; because he is experienced in
the ways of Washington, as an executive officer to a former Army Chief of Staff
and as a former deputy Chief of Staff, and because he rates high among his
peers.

A 'People-Oriented' Officer

Officer after officer described the general as ''people oriented.'' One officer
said of General Vuono, ''He's at ease in dealing with superiors and subordinates
alike.''

He is also known for his command of details. ''In most briefings,'' said another
officer, ''he knows more than the person briefing him - it can be awesome.''

Some of this mastery is probably the product of what many describe as the
general's voracious reading habits. ''He can go through a couple of fat
briefcases just for a weekend reading,'' an Army officer said.

General Vuono and his wife, Patricia, were descirbed as private people; at her
request, he asked the Army to scratch her name and those of their three children
from the announcement of his nomination.

A Period of Swift Change

General Vuono, whose nomination is subject to confirmation by the Senate, would
take office in June, succeeding Gen. John A. Wickham Jr. By law, the Chief of
Staff must leave office when his four-year tour ends.

Most of the other four-star generals are retiring or planning to retire soon.
Thus, if General Vuono's nomination is confirmed, he would be confronted with
the task of leading an Army that is entering a period of swift change among its
senior officers.

Carl Edward Vuono was born in Monongahela, Pa., on Oct. 18, 1934, and was
graduated from the United States Military Academy at West Point in 1957.

In the Vietnam War he commanded two different artillery battalions from December
1970 to July 1971. Later, he led the 82d Airborne Division's artillery, was
assistant division commander of the First Infantry Division at Fort Riley, Kan.,
and commanded the Eighth Infantry Division in West Germany.

'Sustainment Training' Stressed

An officer who served with General Vuono in West Germany said the general
emphasized ''sustainment training.'' Rather than reach a peak of efficiency for
a unit test once a year, he said, General Vuono insisted that soldiers practice
their individual and small unit tactics year round.

In 1983 he took command of Fort Leavenworth and the Army's Command and General
Staff College, where middle grade officers are trained. ''It had gotten far away
from the basics'' a retired officer said of the school, which oversees Army
instruction and educaiton, ''and he brought it back to life.''

Although he led the Training and Doctrine Command for less than a year, General
Vuono urged his staff to think of themselves as ''architects of the Army's
future,'' beyond the year 2000. He also looked to the past, taking officers of
the command on walks over Civil War battlefields.

''Those weren't tours,'' one officer said, ''they were study assignments.''
General Vuono assigned readings, map studies, the orders of battle of opposing
forces and biographies of leading generals. ''The crucial element was the intent
of the commander,'' the officer said. ''For a subordinate to understand that was
the key to success.''

Some officers said General Vuono's reputation as a trainer appeared to have
figured in his selection. ''That's the job of the Chief of Staff - to deliver
the Army to the President ready to fight,'' one officer said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Gen. Carl E. Vuono (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 2, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK;
ONCE AGAIN, SALESMEN ARE NOBODY'S HEROES

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 722 words


''I HAVE a lot of training in deceit. It's an occupational hazard.'' The
admission or boast comes from Richard Dreyfuss, playing a Baltimore salesman in
''Tin Men,'' so called because they sell aluminum siding. But the subjects of
Barry Levinson's comedy could just as well be peddlers of encyclopedias or
dubious dreamlands with names like Glengarry Glen Ross.

''Tin Men'' is built on our assumptions about salesmen, drawn not only from
close encounters of a disagreeable kind, but also from a half-century of shabby
appearances in books and plays. As a class, salesmen don't have classy
reputations.

It is not just their spiel; it's their style. All Mr. Levinson's tin men drive
big-finned Cadillacs. ''A Cadillac means you're dealin' with someone of
importance,'' says Danny DeVito, another of the tin men, and Mr. Dreyfuss's
nemesis. Whether they are slobs like Mr. DeVito or sharpies like Mr. Dreyfuss,
salesmen have a reputation for flash - and so it has been at least since
Theodore Dreiser described the elaborate outfit of Drouet, the ''drummer'' who
picks up the 18-year-old Carrie in the opening pages of ''Sister Carrie.''

Drouet, Dreiser lets us know at once, is a ''masher,'' a calling that has
inspired a multitude of salesman jokes, usually in conjunction with farmers'
daughters. When, in ''Tin Men,'' love begins to afflict Mr. Dreyfuss, he
confesses to discomfort at being with the same woman for two nights running. The
woman, played by Barbara Hershey, is too good for her husband, Mr. DeVito, who
prefers the company of the boys in the diner - just as Carrie is too good for
Drouet and Linda Loman is too good for her husband, Willy, America's most famous
salesman. All these women are more solid and sensible than their bedmates.

For the tin men, selling just doesn't seem to build character. ''If you can't
run scams, what's left?'' asks Mr. DeVito. David Mamet's salesmen in ''Glengarry
Glen Ross'' live by much the same rules, and they are funny, too. But our
laughter may be edged with the unpleasant knowledge that for so many real-life
operators, from Wall Street to your local muffler franchise, the world is
divided between hustlers and suckers.

The salesman himself, however, is often depicted as the ultimate sucker, who has
fallen for his own cheesy bill of goods. The highest tribute for a tin man,
delivered in the movie as an epitaph, is ''If he got in through the door, he'd
have a sale.'' But the famous epitaph for Willy Loman - ''when they start not
smiling back, that's an earthquake'' - is the other side of the tinny coin. When
Moe, a tin man with a plausible manner, is rolled away after a heart attack at
the completion of a big sale, he moans, ''I got nothin' to show for all this.''
Maybe it's time for a writer, in the spirit of a Shaw, who could create a
surpassingly admirable munitions maker, to do some image-changing and show the
salesman as a free society's free-swinging alternative to the rule-bound
bureaucrat - and a lot more fun.

Cinematic Warfare

The explosive appearance of ''Platoon,'' winner of four Academy Awards, calls up
comparisons with the movie treatments of wars past. Unlike World Wars I and II,
the Vietnam War went remarkably unremarked by American film makers while it was
being fought. There were no atrocity epics like ''The Little American,'' in
which plucky Mary Pickford stood up to the World War I Hun, nor, unless you
count John Wayne's clunky ''Green Berets,'' were there morale boosters like
''Action in the North Atlantic'' that burst from studio assembly lines in World
War II. And there were assuredly no comedies of the sort that both earlier wars
inspired.

Vietnam was not only uncomical, it was also controversial and confusing,
characteristics that Hollywood has never found congenial. Not until the end of
the 1970's did film makers begin to confront it in such nightmare-summoning
works as''Apocalypse Now,'' ''Coming Home'' and ''The Deer Hunter.'' It takes
time for a society to absorb an enormity such as Vietnam and for writers and
directors to re-create it in their own languages. It was not until 12 years
after the end of World War I that ''All Quiet on the Western Front'' offered a
meditation on the insanity of that war. Now less of a minefield than it once
was, Vietnam remains a field for exploring America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 4, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CARRIER-MUSEUM CALLED TARGET OF RACKETEERS

BYLINE: By SELWYN RAAB

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1015 words


Labor racketeering by a Manhattan gang called the Westies siphoned off extensive
funds from the air-sea-space museum on the aircraft carrier Intrepid,
investigators disclosed yesterday.

The racketeering, Federal and New York City investigators said, principally
involved the theft of box-office receipts by members of Local 1909 of the
International Longshoremen's Association who were employed as ticket-sellers and
through ''no-show'' jobs at the museum for members of the local.

According to investigators, most of the money that was stolen or obtained by
fraud through fake jobs was passed along to leaders of the Westies. The
executive director of the Intrepid, Wayne W. Schmidt, said the financial loss to
the museum was ''considerable, at least several hundred thousand dollars.''

Investigators said they were unable to pinpoint the amounts stolen or extorted
by the Westies through rackets at the Intrepid, which is docked on the Hudson
River, and other labor deals on the West Side. But the chief of the Rackets
Bureau in the Manhattan District Attorney's office, Martin Cherkasky, said,
''We're talking about millions of dollars'' over the last 10 years.

The not-for-profit Intrepid Museum Foundation Inc., which operates the museum,
filed for reorganization under Federal bankruptcy laws in June 1985, saying it
had debts of $28.4 million and assets of $16.5 million.

The developments at the Intrepid came to light in an article prepared for
tomorrow's issue of The New York Times Magazine. The inquiry is part of a larger
investigation by Federal and city authorities that, over the last year, has led
to convictions and indictments of most of the key members of the Westies on
murder or racketeering charges.

The investigation has been conducted by the United States Attorney in Manhattan,
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Manhattan District Attorney and the New
York City Police Department's Detective Bureau.

Mr. Schmidt said it was unclear how long ticket revenues had been skimmed to the
Westies. He said that the F.B.I. told him about the racketeering allegations
late last year and that agents told him they had obtained evidence through
''electronic surveillance and other means.''

Five Workers Dismissed

Five ticket-sellers, all of whom were members of Local 1909, were dismissed on
March 13, Mr. Schmidt said. The museum employs 39 members of the local, he
noted, as ticket sellers and in maintenance and engineering jobs.

The I.L.A. members, Mr. Schmidt said, were employed through a Manhattan
stevedoring company, Temco Services Industries. Under a labor contract, the
museum has no voice in the hiring of ticket-sellers and others in Local 1909 job
jurisdictions.

No one answered telephone calls to the office of Local 1909, at West 48th Street
and 12th Avenue, yesterday.

Last year, the Intrepid earned about $1.2 million in admissions. Mr. Schmidt
said losses through racketeering ''would only have minimally affected'' the
museum's current debt of about $15 million.

The Intrepid survived suicide attacks by Japanese kamikaze pilots in World War
II and saw service in the Vietnam War. Rescued from a scrapyard, the ship was
converted into a floating museum, opening in August 1982 at Pier 86 at West 46th
Street and the Hudson River.

The museum was financed by the sale of $14.2 million of bonds, a loan of $4.5
million from the city and private donations. Below-expectation attendance was
previously cited by Intrepid officials as the chief reason for difficulties in
paying off bondholders and meeting operating costs.

In another aspect of the Westies inquiry, investigators said they had uncovered
racketeering links between the gang and Local 817 of the International
Brotherhood of Teamsters, a union that delivers stage sets and props to theaters
and television and movie studios on the West Side. Members of the Westies,
investigators said, got payoffs from trucking companies through no-show jobs and
from extortion by promising labor peace.

A receptionist who answered the telephone at the offices of Local 817 in Lake
Success, L.I., said no official of the union was at the office yesterday or
reachable for comment.

Inquiry Is Continuing

''There is a broadscale, ongoing investigation still under way by the U.S.
Attorney's office and the Manhattan District Attorney,'' Dennison Young Jr., the
Deputy United States Attorney in Manhattan, said when asked whether Federal
prosecutors were looking into allegations of labor racketeering by the Westies.

Mr. Young and Mr. Cherkasky, the assistant district attorney, declined to say
whether officials in Local 1909 and Local 817 were targets of the inquiry. They
also refused to say whether union records had been subpoenaed.

But the accused leader of the Westies, James Coonan, and three of his
lieutenants, were accused of extortion concerning Local 1909 in a Federal
indictment in Manhattan on March 26. Specific acts of extortion were not
disclosed in the indictment, which accused Mr. Coonan and nine other men of
conducting a criminal enterprise.

In that indictment, obtained by the office of the United States Attorney,
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the gang members were charged with committing murders and
kidnappings and engaging in loansharking, extortion and drug trafficking.

Other Indictments

Last month, three members of the gang were also indicted by a state grand jury
in Manhattan on murder charges and three other people associated with the
Westies were indicted on charges of accepting a $20,000 offer from an undercover
detective to commit a murder.

The Westies evolved in the 1920's from a bootlegging mob of gangsters in the
Hell's Kitchen section of the West Side of Manhattan, an area that is now called
Clinton.

Prosecutors and detectives said that, in recent years, the Westies have been a
relatively small group of 30 to 50 members. But, according to the authorities,
the Westies are a particularly violent gang, having slain other members in power
struggles, performed contract killings for the Mafia and dismembered their
victims.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the aircraft carrier Intrepid(NYT/Larry C. Morris)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 4, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'RETURN TO THE RIVER' IN AFRICA

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 606 words


A few minutes after the lights go up on ''Return to the River,'' we know we are
in for a consciousness-going-up session as Al Gilroy, a black attorney for an
American oil company, arrives at the awareness that South Africa is his problem.
The play's problem is that of many problem-plays: characters tend to become
walking pamphlets and the stage becomes a lecture platform.

Al is introduced as a slightly up-tight up-and-comer at the CRT Corporation.
When he is given the disagreeable job of dealing with a black South African
hunger striker who wants CRT to stop doing business in his country, unsettling
opinions impinge from all sides. Al's best friend, Mike, is the voice of white
liberalism. His boss, Fred, is the voice of the corporation man. A career-minded
colleague, Sarah, is the voice of idealistic feminism. A couple of lower-level
employees are the voices of black solidarity. And most important for Al's
awakening, is the hunger striker himself, Odabi, the voice of black nationalism.

At the performance I saw, Al was played attractively by the playwright C. Dumas.
In 1980, Mr. Dumas quit his job as an attorney for International Business
Machines over the issue of investments in South Africa, but missing here is the
sense of a truly felt individual experience that would have given this earnest
play something more solid to rest on than edifying propositions accepted in
advance by the audience.

As conventionally directed by Douglas Farren on a desk-encumbered stage at
Theater Four, ''Return to the River'' consists mainly of predictable encounters
between Al and the emblematic figures around him. They are best when light. Mike
(amiably played by Michael Haney) is given to puns: ''For an oil company, it
would be crude.'' When Al reaches out to the jiving refreshment-cart man on the
grounds of color, Coffee Dan responds, ''Hey, man, you're not black, you're
corporate.''

But mostly, it's speechifying. ''I want freedom and dignity for my people,''
says Odabi (Jonathan Peck, doing nobly with a character who is a bit too noble
to be credible). ''You forget where you come from,'' the good-natured secretary
tells Al. ''Are you on the team or not?'' demands Fred, the martinet. When Odabi
is jailed and Fred calls him ''irrelevant,'' Mike, the liberal, remonstrates:
''Fred, you're talking about a human being.'' ''This place is structured so that
we're all at each other's throats,'' says Sarah, who also delivers a speech,
meant seriously, in which she likens the condition of the hunger-striker Odabi
to that of a corporation employee like herself.

The play's title comes from Odabi's image of humankind linked by a river that
has its source in Africa, and you will not be surprised when, after some awkward
Act II huggermugger about secret documents and a conveniently symbolic memory of
an experience in Vietnam, Al embarks on his return to the source. W. Allen
Taylor has now replaced Mr. Dumas in the leading role, but no actor can do much
for a character who serves as a blank blackboard for slogans of the time.

THE CAST

RETURN TO THE RIVER, by C. Dumas; directed by Douglas Farren; set design, B. B.
Burnham; light design, Dominick Balletta; sound design, Jo Farrell; costumes,
Marcia Belton; original music, John McCallum; production stage manager, Dominick
Balletta. The Loaves and Fish Theater Company, presented by RTTR Limited
Partnership. At Theater Four, 424 West 55th Street.  Mike Neal...Michael Haney
Al Gilroy...Mr. Dumas Fred Knight...Joe Viviani Angela Manley...Gail O'Blenis
Dukes Sarah Myers...Nikki Barthen Coffee Dan...Dan Kelley Odabi...Jonathan Peck

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Going On in the Northeast

BYLINE: By Joan Cook

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 66, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 724 words


ARTS AND CHANGE Philadelphia will be host to a national conference on ''The Arts
as a Force for Social Change'' next weekend at Drexel University. The three-day
conference, which begins Friday, is dedicated to ''the countless artists, known
and unknown, whose voices have been silenced by government repression.''

The participants in the conference, which is the cornerstone of a monthlong
citywide arts festival, ''Voices of Dissent,'' will include Sonia Sanchez, a
poet; Guy Carawan, Ronnie Gilbert and Utah Phillips, folk singers; Elizabeth
Catlett and Eva Cockroft, artists; Linda Gross, a storyteller, and John O'Neal,
Theodora Skipitares and Muriel Miguel, actors.

Panelists will share experiences and give demonstrations of their work as they
discuss how, when and why art can take an active role in shaping society. Panels
will focus on issues of ''Censorship and the Limits to Free Speech,''
''Flashpoints: The Art of Social Upheaval,'' ''Political Art in an Apolitical
Culture'' and ''Cultural Activism.''

Workshops are also scheduled, on such topics as ''Pop Culture and Politics,''
''Black Women in Song'' and ''Art out of the Vietnam Experience.''

Admission is based on income and ranges from $25 to $50; the fee includes
breakfast and lunch on Saturday and Sunday and discounts to evening performances
at the Painted Bride Art Center.

For information call (215) 627-4433.

OLD HOUSE IN DELAWARE

The George Read II House, situated on the bank of the Delaware River at New
Castle, Del., reflects the height of Federal fashion. The house, with its
elaborately carved woodwork, relief plasterwork and silver door hardware and
surrounded by a handsome garden, is open through December. Built from 1797 to
1804, its furnishings are well documented by correspondence and accounts of the
period.

It is situated in a well-preserved colonial town, with tree-lined, cobblestone
streets, an open green and period buildings, several of which are open to the
public.

The Read house and garden are open from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. Tuesday through
Saturday, and from noon to 4 P.M. Sunday. Admission is $3 for adults, $1.50 for
students and children.

For information call (302) 322-8411.

INFLUENCE OF QUAKER WOMEN

A daylong symposium tracing the influence of Quaker women from the English Civil
War to the present will be conducted from 9 A.M. to 4 P.M. tomorrow at Haverford
College, Pa. In ''Witnesses for Change: Quaker Women 1650-1987,'' 10 experts
will examine what the Quakers and their social programs can tell us about
women's encounters with contemporary society. Haverford, in conjunction with
Swarthmore College, has the largest collection of Quaker documents in the world.
An exhibit of some documents related to the symposium topics will be on display
through the end of April.

Quaker women held many of the leadership positions that led to social change in
the United States and England. They were in the forefront of many struggles
including those for abolition, equal rights, prison reform and disarmament.

Participants include Mary Maples Dunn, president of Smith College; Margaret Hope
Bacon, author of the recently released ''Mothers of Feminism: The Story of
Quaker Women in America.''

Admission is $10, which includes lunch and a reception at the day's end. For
reservations call (215) 896-1016.

HIGH FLYING, ALL OVER

What about a sailplane ride for a change of perspective? Soaring Adventure of
America Inc. will provide the pilot and the three-passenger sailplane, offering
rides in the gliders for two for 20 to 45 minutes from places in Boston,
Martha's Vineyard, Danbury, New Jersey, New York, Providence, Hartford,
Springfield, Stamford, Westchester and Washington, as well as elsewhere around
the country.

There are three price categories, starting with $39.95 per person for a
20-minute, low-altitude ride with no maneuvers; $59.95 for a 30-minute,
4,000-foot ride with smooth seagull maneuvers (swoops, dips and turns), and
$69.95 for a 45-minute, mile-high trip, with multiple maneuvers.

Rob Wilkinson, president of the concern, who is himself a pilot, said he
expected that about 40,000 people would soar this year. He advised first-timers
to bring a camera.

For a ticket to the nearest gliderport or further information, call
1-800-762-7464, except in Connecticut (203) 762-9583.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Hannah Witall Smith and Sybil Jones

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOME VIDEO: DOCUMENTARY

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 2; Page 30, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 162 words



Battle for Dien BienPhu
Written, directed and produced by Peter Batty. Narrated by Bernard Archard.
Evergreen Video Society. (Available through mail order (212) 714-9860). 49
minutes. $35.

The value of taking a second look at a historic battle, long after the guns have
been silenced, is that film can be found showing what was happening on both
sides. The French and Vietnamese newsreel and propaganda footage in ''Dien Bien
Phu'' is used to full advantage by Peter Batty, the writer-director of this
powerful documentary.

''Dien Bien Phu'' illustrates how a motivated peasant army, fighting on its own
ground, could defeat a trained, American-supported French military force. In
addition to the battle scenes, Mr. Batty gives us interviews with some of the
French officers who were there. They still seem shocked by their losses. The
film provides needed background to America's involvement in Vietnam, succeeding
the French in a hopeless war, for 10 years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: APRIL 5, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1479 words


$
               Weeks
This     Last     On
Week     Week   List FICTION
 1          1    3    FINE THINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
                      $18.95.) The vicissitudes of a son of the 60's on his
                      way to the 80's.

 2          2    9    WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow,
                     $18.95.) The nightmarish experiences that befall a woman
                     and her family after her appointment as Ambassador to
                     Rumania.

 3          3   10    THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
                      (Viking, $18.95.) A fairy tale, complete with an aged
                      king, two princes, an evil wizard and a mouse.

 4          4    4    BOLT, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $17.95.) The
                      jockey-hero of ''Break In'' has to contend with a
                      romantic crisis, a family feud and an international
                      arms-selling intrigue.

 5          6    2    DESTINY, by Sally Beauman. (Bantam, $19.95.)
                      The 30-year romance of a couple with diverse
                      backgrounds and ambitions.

 6          5   36    RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam,
                      $19.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians in
                      World War III.

 7         11   27    THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy.
                      (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family
                      relationships in South Carolina's low country and
                      New York City.

 8          7   12    NIGHT OF THE FOX, by Jack Higgins. (Simon &
                      Schuster, $17.95.) A mission to keep D-Day plans
                      from being discovered by the Germans.

 9         13   23    FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts.
                      (Naval Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over
                      Vietnam.

10         10    7    OUTBREAK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $17.95.)
                      Tracking down a mysterious disease that strikes
                      certain physicians and their patients.

11          8   30    IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood
                      horrors haunt six men and a woman who grew up in
                      a small Maine town.

12          9   11    THE PANIC OF '89, by Paul Erdman. (Doubleday,
                      $17.95.) A financial wizard undertakes to defuse the
                      crisis besetting Wall Street and the American
                      economy.

13 *      1
              SANTOR
              INI,
              by
              Alista
              ir
              MacLea
              n.
              (Doubl
              eday,
                      $16.95.) Espionage, treachery and retrieval of a
                      sunken atom bomb in the Aegean.

14         15   22    WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.)
                      Iran during the month following the Shah's
                      departure.

15         14    3    THE RED WHITE AND BLUE, by John Gregory
                      Dunne. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) America during
                      the past 25 years, seen through the lives of a rich
                      and powerful California family.

               Weeks
This     Last     On
Week     Week   List NONFICTION

 1          1   14    A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein.
                      (Macmillan, $16.95.) A chronicle of one season
                      spent with the Indiana University basketball team.

 2          2    6    COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber. (Beech Tree/
                      Morrow, $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the
                      visits of ''intelligent nonhumans'' to his family's
                      place in upstate New York.

 3         11    3    BOONE, by T. Boone Pickens Jr. (Houghton
                      Mifflin, $18.95.) The autobiography of an oilman
                      and corporation-takeover entrepreneur.

 4*         7   18    A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                      Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                      recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.

 5          3    7    THE FITZGERALDS AND THE KENNEDYS, by
                      Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.)
                      From the Boston slums of Irish immigrants to the
                      White House: three generations of a family.

 6*         4   48    FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/
                      Doubleday, $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations
                      from the television star and father of five.

 7          6    8    ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph
                      Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $18.95.) A case
                      involving the murder of a Pennsylvania high school
                      teacher and the disappearance of her two children.

 8*         5    8    THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf,
                      $24.95.) Australia from penal colony to its gradual
                      emergence as a flourishing nation.

 9          8    5    INTIMATE PARTNERS, by Maggie Scarf.
                      (Random House, $18.95.) Changing patterns in love
                      and marriage.

10          9    3    BETTY: A Glad Awakening, by Betty Ford with
                      Chris Chase. (Doubleday, $16.95.) A former First
                      Lady's recovery from alcoholism and drug abuse.

11         10   56    YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss.
                      (Random House, $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden
                      Years Clinic in pictures and rhyme.

12        1    LOVE,
              MEDICI
              NE &
              MIRACL
              ES, by
              Bernie
              S.
                      Siegel. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) A surgeon stresses
                      the importance of the patient's mind and emotions
                      in treating serious illness.

13         13   12    THE SEARCH FOR SIGNS OF INTELLIGENT
                      LIFE IN THE UNIVERSE, by Jane Wagner.
                      (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Acerb observations on life
                      today; script of the show starring Lily Tomlin.

14         15   26    THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam.
                      (Morrow, $19.95.) The crisis in the American
                      automobile industry and Japan's role in it.

15               1    JOHNSON V. JOHNSON, by Barbara Goldsmith.
                      (Knopf, $18.95.) The courtroom war between six
                      children and their stepmother over a half-billion-
                      dollar estate.

               Weeks
This     Last     On
Week     Week   List ADVICE, HOW-TO AND MISCELLANEOUS

 1          1   26    MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO
                      LOVE THEM, by Susan Forward and Joan Torres.
                      (Bantam, $16.95.) How to cope with overbearing
                      men.

 2          2   23    THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE,
                      by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be
                      prepared at moderate cost.

 3          5    2    HOW TO BE YOUR OWN NUTRITIONIST, by
                      Stuart M. Berger. (Morrow, $16.95.) Ways to create
                      a diet regimen for health and energy.

 4          3   42    THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn.
                      (Norton, $15.95.) A regimen based on the
                      Vanderbilt University Weight Management
                      Program.

 5          4   82    WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                      DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
                      standard reference work in a 1983 revision.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ARTFUL PARTNERS: Bernard Berenson and Joseph Duveen, by Colin Simpson.
(Macmillan, $22.50.) An international art world with all the moral nicety of an
underwater feeding frenzy, and the two biggest fish in partnership, one of whom,
Bernard Berenson, is indicted here for an appetite that unscrupulousness helped
sate.

BERNARD BERENSON: The Making of a Legend, by Ernest Samuels. (Belknap/Harvard
University, $25.) Greedy for exquisite sensations, B.B., the subject of this
official biography, failed to write the book of art criticism he owed his
generation, but would he have lived this life if he had?

SONG IN A WEARY THROAT: An American Pilgrimage, by Pauli Murray. (Harper & Row,
$23.95.) This posthumously published autobiography of a black woman writer (and
later lawyer) born in 1910 could be every black American's history to some
degree.

VISIONS AND NIGHTMARES: America After Reagan, by Robert Lekachman. (Macmillan,
$19.95.) An angry professor of economics sees an America bewitched by the magic
of self-enrichment, blind to the commonweal.

AN ARROW IN THE WALL: Selected Poetry and Prose, by Andrei Voznesensky. Edited
by William Jay Smith and F. D. Reeve. (Holt, $22.95.) Translated by a number of
hands (including W. H. Auden and Stanley Kunitz), this book represents the best
attempt so far to bring a contemporary Russian poet into a Western context.

IN THE CITY, by Joan Silber. (Viking, $16.95.) This second novel, about a
minimalist heroine in a room of her own in 1920's New York, has some of the
immediacy of a tale written in the 20's.

THE MISALLIANCE, by Anita Brookner. (Pantheon, $14.95.) As always, Ms.
Brookner's prose is crisp and unerring, her gifts as a psychologist of the
wounded woman's heart formidable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: APRIL 5, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 889 words


$
        Weeks
This       On
Week     List FICTION

 1        5    THE BOURNE SUPREMACY, by Robert
               Ludlum. (Bantam, $4.95.) A plot to seize Hong
               Kong and bring China into conflict with the West.

 2       10    I'LL TAKE MANHATTAN, by Judith Krantz.
               (Bantam, $4.95.) A rich, beautiful young woman
               conquers the world of magazine publishing.

 3        5    PRIVATE AFFAIRS, by Judith Michael. (Pocket,
               $4.95.) A couple's marriage is seriously strained.

 4        2    BREAK IN, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $4.95.)
               Mystery, melodrama and bitter family rivalry in
               the world of British steeplechase racing.

 5        5    JOANNA'S HUSBAND AND DAVID'S WIFE, by
               Elizabeth Forsythe Hailey. (Dell, $4.50.) Two
               sides of a marriage revealed in diary entries.

 6       11    THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood.
               (Fawcett, $4.95.) In the Republic of Gilead, men
               and women perform the services assigned them.

 7        1    STONE 588, by Gerald A. Browne. (Berkley,
               $4.50.) The pursuit of a stolen crystal with
               curative powers.

 8       55    THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom
               Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine driver
               brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

 9        5    TO TASTE THE WINE, by Fern Michaels.
               (Ballantine, $4.50.) An English beauty's
               passionate affair with a handsome Australian.

10        1    DESIRE IN DISGUISE, by Rebecca Brandewyne.
               (Warner, $3.95.) Fleeing the French Revolution, a
               Paris belle seeks revenge and finds romance.

11        1    MAGIC KINGDOM FOR SALE - SOLD! by
               Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $4.50.) A man
               copes with problems after buying a fantasy land.

12        4    THE GAMBLE, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove,
               $3.95.) The stormy romance of a saloonkeeper and
               a temperance crusader in a small Kansas town.

13        4    WORD OF HONOR, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner,
               $4.50.) A former officer is falsely held responsible
               for an atrocity committed by his men in Vietnam.

14       18    LIE DOWN WITH LIONS, by Ken Follett. (Signet/
               NAL, $4.95.) An Englishwoman in Afghanistan,
               caught between the C.I.A. and the K.G.B.

15        5    THE LEBARON SECRET, by Stephen
               Birmingham. (Berkley, $4.50.) Love and conflict
               among a wealthy family of California vintners.

Weeks
This       On
Week     List NONFICTION: GENERAL

 1        3    THE TOWER COMMISSION REPORT. (Times
               Books/Bantam, $5.50.) The full text of the
               President's Special Review Board.

 2        6    NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst.
               (Fawcett, $4.95.) Life is a series of losses, the
               author says, and we must confront them to grow.

 3       180   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
               (Touchstone/S&S, $9.95.) Psychological and
               spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 4       13    THE MAN WHO MISTOOK HIS WIFE FOR A
               HAT, by Oliver Sacks. (Perennial/Harper & Row,
               $7.95.) Strange neurological disabilities.

 5        1    ROCK HUDSON: His Story, by Rock Hudson and
               Sara Davidson. (Avon, $4.50.) An account of the
               actor's life written with his cooperation.

 6       22    WEST WITH THE NIGHT, by Beryl Markham.
               (North Point, $12.50.) A woman's experiences
               flying in Africa and across the Atlantic in the 30's.
        Weeks
This       On
Week     List NONFICTION: ADVICE, HOW-TO AND MISCELLANEOUS

 1       44    WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin
               Norwood. (Pocket, $4.95.) How to avoid or end
               addictive, unhealthy relationships with men.

 2       10    FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn
               Diamond. (Warner, $4.95.) A diet for weight loss
               and physical fitness.

 3       44    ADULT CHILDREN OF ALCOHOLICS, by Janet
               Geringer Woititz. (Health Communications,
               $6.95.) Advice about a family problem.

 4        4    GARFIELD: FOOD FOR THOUGHT, by Jim
               Davis. (Ballantine, $5.95.) Comic strips.

 5       21    RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States,
               Canada, Mexico. (Rand McNally, $5.95.) For 1987.

 6       26    DIANETICS, by L. Ron Hubbard. (Bridge
               Publications, $4.95.) Latest edition of a handbook
               by the founder of Scientology.

 7        3    WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE? by
               Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed, $8.95.) Job and
               career advice; 1987 edition.

 8        9    J. K. LASSER'S YOUR INCOME TAX. (Prentice
               Hall, $8.95.) The 1987 edition.

 9        9    THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith.
               (Ballantine, $4.95.) A television chef's dishes.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LOVE AMONG THE PEASANTRY

BYLINE: By RICHARD CRITCHFIELD; Richard Critchfield is the author of three books
on peasant life, ''The Golden Bowl Be Broken,'' ''Shahhat, an Egyptian'' and
''Villages.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1485 words



ONCE IN EUROPA
By John Berger. 193 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $14.95.

DO you ever awake happily from a dream about someone you love and then, in a
sudden rush of panic and grief, apprehend that they are gone and nothing will
bring them back? It is this sense of loss - both of loved people and a whole way
of life - that haunts this second volume of John Berger's projected trilogy of
French peasant life, ''Into Their Labors.''

Mr. Berger's fiction - he has also written in many other forms - is well known
in Europe and has gained a highly devoted critical and literary following in
this country. The present collection of stories, ''Once in Europa,'' contains
what may be his best writing to date - although ''The Three Lives of Lucie
Cabrol,'' the long central story in the earlier volume, ''Pig Earth,'' still
stands as his masterpiece.

The two books, about the same French Alpine village, ought to be read together
(a third volume on what happens when the villagers are uprooted to a city is
still to come). They beautifully convey - in poems and essays, as well as
stories - what contemporary peasant life is like. Much depends on Mr. Berger's
gifted ear for dialogue and his ability to make the language of the French
peasants sound authentic in English. There is also his choice of minutely
observed detail and how these reveal aspects of this changing, already vanishing
subculture. In the title story a woman looks back:

''There was a riddle I liked as a child: four point to the sky, four walk in the
dew and four have food in them; all twelve make one - what is it?

''A cow, answered Regis, my elder brother, sighing loudly to show he had already
heard the riddle many times before.''

That sigh is telling. Such detail provides the verisimilitude that makes us
believe in the father who won't sell his land, the menace of a manganese
factory, the Slavic migrant worker the narrator comes to love, her loss when he
is crushed in a slag heap. Once her father says, ''I'd give a lot, Odile, to see
the man you're going to marry.'' This tells us he will not. At his funeral the
village band plays a familiar hymn:

'' 'Amazing Grace' begins sad and gradually the sadness becomes a chorus and so
is no longer sad but defiant. For a while I believed he was there. Later the
music listens to itself and discovers that something has fallen silent.
Irretrievably. He had left.''

The originality of Mr. Berger in these stories springs, in part, from his being
an outsider. A Londoner much of his life (he has just turned 60), some years ago
he moved with his family to a French village near Mont Blanc. Mr. Berger's
search to find a form for his work has led him into many genres and media. He
has done broadcasting and journalism (he is known in Britain for his Marxist
views), art criticism (numerous books, including ''The Success and Failure of
Picasso'' and ''Ways of Seeing,'' based on his BBC series), screenplays (''Jonah
Who Will Be 25 in the Year 2000''), novels (''G'' won Britain's 1972 Booker
Prize), award-winning documentaries (on an English country doctor, migrant
workers in Europe) and Brecht translations. He has just completed a play on Goya
commissioned by the Royal Shakespeare Company.

In the village, he has spent those years laboring beside and listening to the
voices of his peasant neighbors. In one of the two essays in ''Pig Earth'' he
lists what he and his family have in common with them: child-bearing and
rearing, manual labor and a respect for it, mutual help, household comforts and
discomforts, taking part in weddings and funerals, the weather. What sets them
apart, he says, is their mother tongue, religion, economic prospects,
inheritance of land, lifetime spent in one place, the degree of physical
endurance and kinship.

Despite the differences, Mr. Berger plunges in. But his closeness to his subject
is never the reporter's or the anthropologist's; it is the more personal
closeness of the artist. He is totally absorbed in his characters, probing their
memories, fantasies and dreams. He jumps backward and forward in time, changes
moods with the stories. He is an excellent storyteller. So, like most villagers,
are his characters, and, in this collection, there are a number of stories
within stories. Indeed, Mr. Berger seems to have discovered the secret that life
is most readily observed in a peasant village. Gossip, where there is so little
else to do, is the chief entertainment, and villagers are fascinated by one
another's doings.

Some critics found Mr. Berger much swayed in ''Pig Earth'' by such great French
storytellers as Emile Zola, Guy de Maupassant and Alphonse Daudet. Yet the
contemporary feel of his fiction seems to come from the cinema and his sense of
visual drama. Mr. Berger, who is also one of Britain's best-known art critics,
began life as a painter. He has a painter's eye. In a story in ''Pig Earth,''
this is how he describes a hay mow:

''The last hay had not yet lain down. Stalks of it waved slowly in the dim light
under the roof timbers. Some of the wall planks had holes in them where their
knots had once been. Through these holes came beams of sunlight, narrow as
branches. When a stalk crossed a beam, it caught the light for an instant and
lit up like a spark.''

But most of the stories in ''Once in Europa'' are really love stories. Mr.
Berger writes with great sympathy and perception about women characters. In
love, he is less concerned with sex than the heart. In one of the most moving
stories, ''The Time of the Cosmonauts,'' a young woman, Danielle, and a widower
in his 70's, Marius, happen to be the last two villagers to keep to the old
custom of taking their cattle to graze in summer on a grassy plateau high in the
mountains. Though their small chalets are separated by a pass, and their time
together is marked by peasant decorum, the two become fast friends.

Then six Italians arrive to cut down trees. Danielle falls in love with one of
them, a young man her own age. She neglects Marius. One day, climbing up to the
pass to visit him, she sees his herd grazing below and Marius himself shouting
out words of passion to the mountain like a crazy man. She goes home, very
upset, and sobbing in her Italian's arms, tells him what happened. He responds
very gently:

'' 'Danielle,' said Pasquale speaking very slowly and weighing each word, 'it
was not to the mountains the old man was shouting, it was not to the mountains
he was offering himself part by part, it was to you and you know that, you know
that, don't you?' ''

It would seem that there is a contradiction between Mr. Berger's Marxism and his
love of peasant values. Marx himself attacked peasants as ''a class that
represents the barbarism within civilization.'' Lenin, with his guiding
principle of ''exploiting internal contradictions in the enemy camp,'' was happy
to use peasants, the poor people of East Europe and Asia, against landlords to
seize power (you could take back the land later). Mao Zedong in China and Le
Duan in Vietnam tried to destroy private property and the family, the basis of
all peasant societies. However, in some of his more polemical passages, Mr.
Berger tries to reconcile his sympathy toward both Marxism and the peasant
culture by making capitalism the prime force behind the destruction of village
life. Fortunately for us, most of the time the artist in him gets the better of
the dialectician.

Mr. Berger's express aim is to rescue a few present moments of French peasant
culture just before its disappearance or ''modernization.'' He does, admirably.
Since village values and their organic tie to nature have been at the core of
every culture, this matters to all of us. Surely one of the most gifted and
imaginative contemporary writers ought to get, at last, a wider readership in
this country.

WHAT USE IS MANGANESE?

Father was against any son of his working in the factory. Regis would do better
to go to Paris like men had done as long as anyone could remember. Long before
the Eiffel Tower, long before the Arc de Triomphe, long before factories, they
had gone to Paris to stoke fires and to sweep chimneys, and in the spring they
had come back, money in their wallets, proud of themselves! Nobody could be
proud of working - there. Father pointed with his thumb out of the window. . . .

First, they try to take our land, then they want our children. What for? To
produce their manganese. What use is manganese to us? . . .

One night I went out to lock up the chickens and I found Father by the pear tree
staring up at the sky and the flames flicking out of the top of the tallest
chimney stack, almost half as tall as the cliff face behind it.

Look, Odile, he whispered, look! It's like a black viper standing on its tail -
can you see its tongue?

I can see the flames, Papa, some nights they're blue.

Venom! he said. Venom!
  - From ''Once in Europa.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (page 10)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IT'S NOT ALL CAMELS AND CADILLACS

BYLINE: By JAMES F. CLARITY; James F. Clarity, an editor of The Week in Review
section of The New York Times, has reported extensively from the Middle East for
The Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 929 words



THE ARABS
Journeys Beyond the Mirage. By David Lamb. 333 pp. New York: Random House.
$19.95.

EVERY former foreign correspondent has at least one bad book inside him, trying
to get out.

It looks good on his shelf in the study, amid ceramic elephants from Vietnam,
vertical-roll Japanese parchments, Kurdish daggers and a camel saddle crafted
into a footstool. David Lamb is quite different. He is, indeed, a former foreign
correspondent, for The Los Angeles Times. But his first book, ''The Africans,''
was a good job, and so is his latest, ''The Arabs.'' Mr. Lamb has the first-rate
reporter's essential tools - his eyes and his ears - and he uses them to relate,
sometimes with compelling detail, who the Arabs are, why they act the way they
do and why the rest of the world, particularly the United States, has a stake in
what they do that goes beyond oil prices.

The book is both a primer on Arab culture and history, ancient and contemporary,
and a selective tour of the Arab world Mr. Lamb saw as a reporter. There are one
or two dull sections, easily skipped, and occasionally lumpy prose. But these
are small and tolerable flaws that dissolve instantly during the reading of this
intelligent and incisive book. It is not merely a shaking out of his notebooks
after another tour abroad. Mr. Lamb writes with compassion of the garbage-heap
and graveyard-dwellers of Cairo and the death-stink of Beirut, Lebanon, and his
descriptions are disturbing: ''I love war,'' exults a teen-age Beiruti with a
bazooka. But he also stops at vital crossroads to analyze, to name culprits and
suggest solutions, which are not always predictable, to the problems in the Arab
world that constantly erupt in killing - in Lebanon, in Israel, in the Rome
airport, in the streets of Paris. He says, for example, that ''the most
effective way to contain terrorism in the short term'' is not massive air
strikes against other countries but ''a covert, selective assassination campaign
against terrorist leaders.''

The book has particularly absorbing and provocative sections dealing with
Islamic fundamentalism, terrorism, the Palestinians and particularly their
leader, Yasir Arafat, who, if he never wins, never loses either. It even has
touches of humor, describing the itinerant Cairene ''fix-it'' man who makes a
good living in ''a system that has never rewarded competence,'' and the great
dispute about how fast the naked human eye can spot the new moon signaling the
start of the holy season of Ramadan.

Mr. Lamb does not pretend that this is a scholarly work. His bibliography is
heavy with books by other journalists rather than by academics, which is not
necessarily bad; his footnotes are skimpy, often resembling afterthoughts or
what correspondents call ''must inserts'' as they send them on to grumbling
editors on deadline back home. But ''The Arabs'' is not, by any means, an
idiot's guide to the Middle East. The professionals who observe, report and
shape opinions on the Middle East for their governments, foundations and
faculties should all be as sharp and concise and honest as Mr. Lamb.

''Those unfamiliar with the Middle East,'' he writes, ''may be surprised to know
that the majority of Arabs are poor, not rich; that Arabs as a group are as
anti-Communist, politically conservative and capitalistic as any redneck in the
heartland of America; that Islam -when it is not perverted by crazies in Iran
and elsewhere - is a tolerant, compassionate religion, not a radical one; that
rather than being gunmen and refugees, most Palestinians are educated,
middle-class, economically successful and politically moderate; that Israel, the
only democracy in the Middle East and the fulcrum of Washington's regional
policies, must share with the Arabs the blame for creating turmoil and making
peace impossible.'' MR. LAMB says that the Arabs cannot defeat Israel on the
battlefield, and that they are not seriously interested in helping the
Palestinians gain a homeland. ''For the Arabs,'' he writes, ''the real enemy
today is within. It is religious extremists, the fear of Iran's fundamentalist
revolution sweeping across borders, the rivalry between neighboring Arab states,
poverty and ignorance. As for Israel, the majority of Arab governments would, I
believe, be willing to cut an honorable deal that took into account the future
of the Palestinians and the return of occupied land.'' Yes, but how to achieve
this? Well, Mr. Lamb says, ''the superpowers could quite easily impose peace on
the Middle East. If Washington and Moscow told Israel and the Arabs that they
would no longer supply them with weapons or spare parts - a most unlikely
prospect - and put the belligerents in a locked room, I suspect they would find
a considerable amount of common ground and would decide rather quickly that they
were willing to make concessions.''

The United States, Mr. Lamb feels, will not be an effective Middle East
peacemaker ''as long as its elected officials are locked into the mind-set of
viewing the Middle East from the simplest of perspectives: one side is
inherently good, the other basically evil.'' He adds that neither in Congress
nor in American universities and think tanks is there open debate on the Middle
East. ''The deliberations and the agitation often stimulate policy shifts that
are beneficial to all concerned. But on the Middle East there is only silence.''
He concludes that ''by closing the door to debate, the United States is, I
think, maneuvering itself into a situation where it is in danger of losing the
whole Middle East.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Moslem with prayer beads (Gamma-Liaison/T. Hartwell)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DECLARATIONS OF VICTORY

BYLINE: By KATERINE EVANS; Katherine Evans is the editor of the Washington
Journalism Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1646 words



VIETNAM ON TRIAL
Westmoreland vs. CBS. By Bob Brewin and Sydney Shaw. Illustrated. 414 pp. New
York: Atheneum. $21.95.

BLOOD LIBEL
The Inside Story of General Ariel Sharon's History-Making Suit Against Time
Magazine. By Uri Dan. 270 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $18.95.

IN the fall of 1984, two army generals declared war on the American press. Both
lost. In separate libel suits, tried at the same time in the Federal courthouse
on New York's Foley Square, United States Army Gen. William C. Westmoreland sued
CBS and several individuals involved for more than $100 million for accusing him
of being part of a ''conspiracy'' to underestimate enemy strength in the Vietnam
War. Israeli Gen. Ariel Sharon sued Time Inc. for $50 million, charging Time
magazine with libel - a ''blood libel,'' he called it - for implying that he had
encouraged the massacre of Palestinians at the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps
in Lebanon.

When the dust settled, the generals discovered what American lawyers knew all
along (and the public may be beginning to understand): three key elements for
libeling a public figure - defamation, falsity and actual malice - are no cinch
to prove in court. General Westmoreland dropped his case before it went to the
jury; General Sharon lost his when Time was found guilty of defamation and
falsity but not of actual malice. What's more, these celebrated legal actions,
which were initially expected to have a chilling effect on the American press,
seem instead to have cooled potential plaintiffs. Their highly publicized
failures may be one reason the number of newly filed libel suits has dwindled in
the last two years.

Although the generals did not triumph in the courtroom, they caused a ruckus in
the world outside. Their cases provided the public with a rare look, and a
rather disheartening one, at the way some stories are reported and edited at
Time and at CBS. They raise disquieting questions about the standards of two of
the heaviest hitters in the news business. Before CBS even got to court, it had
been attacked by TV Guide, by a documentary on PBS and in at least one book -
not to mention its own in-house investigation. More recently, CBS and Time have
been savaged in Renata Adler's ''Reckless Disregard,'' a book about these very
same court cases. And there are doubtless more to come.

Two reporters, Bob Brewin of The Village Voice and Sydney Shaw of United Press
International, covered the Westmoreland trial from the selection of the first
juror to the general's final day in court. In ''Vietnam on Trial'' they have
written a determinedly evenhanded account of the trial and the documentary,
''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' that prompted it. They trace the
January 1982 broadcast from the origin of its theme - the suspicion in
intelligence circles that the military deliberately underestimated enemy numbers
in Vietnam - to its production and broadcast in which the correspondent Mike
Wallace vowed to show ''evidence of . . . a conspiracy at the highest levels of
American military intelligence'' and General Westmoreland said he had been
''rattlesnaked.''

In the uproar that followed, CBS was accused of many failings: using the loaded
word ''conspiracy,'' coddling friendly witnesses, stacking the deck against the
general, of being, in a word, unfair. Unfairness, however, does not constitute
libel. Defamation, falsity and actual malice do. When the general came to doubt
that he could prove all three to a jury, he left the field.

Mr. Brewin and Ms. Shaw report this drama in comprehensive detail and even add a
postscript on what happened afterward. In dozens of interviews with those
involved, they did not find a single villain. In fact, they did not look for
one. ''We do not care to sit in judgment,'' they write. Instead, they view a
large and colorful cast of characters with sympathy. They leave it to the reader
to identify the black hats and the white hats. In their hands, all the
protagonists come across as likable, if a bit obsessed. General Westmoreland,
for four years the commander of American forces in the only war the United
States ever lost, is obsessed by a need to explain the war and a determination
to restore his honor, that he claimed had been tarnished by CBS. Samuel A.
Adams, the bumptious, eccentric C.I.A. analyst, is driven by a conviction that
our military leaders in Vietnam lied about the size of the enemy. George Crile,
the ambitious CBS producer who turned Mr. Adams's theory into a documentary,
seems fired by a sense of moral outrage and a need to find skulduggery in high
places.

When, after two and a half years of litigation and legal costs estimated at $13
million, the suit was dropped, it had taught hard lessons to most of those
involved. Mike Wallace, for one, saw the need to ''be damned careful. . . . Put
it through your typewriter once again or put it through the screening process
once again to make absolutely certain that it can withstand the kind of scrutiny
that we give other people, other events - government, business.'' George Crile
now said the program ''could have had more voices. I could have put more voices
in.'' Even Samuel Adams came to believe that ''conspiracy'' was too strong a
word. And although General Westmoreland withdrew without obtaining a jury
verdict, money or apology, he claimed he had got exactly what he wanted all
along - a statement from CBS that it ''never intended to assert, and does not
believe, that General Westmoreland was unpatriotic or disloyal in performing his
duties as he saw them.''

''If that statement had been made after the CBS program was aired,'' General
Westmoreland said, ''it would have satisfied me,'' confirming one truth recently
discovered by media gurus - news organizations that react quickly and politely
to those who feel aggrieved by them, can save themselves a lot of pain. As Mike
Wallace put it afterward, ''There should never have been a lawsuit and there
wouldn't have been one if all of us at CBS had been more intelligent in handling
the reaction to that broadcast.''

To the authors, however, the Westmoreland case was more than just a libel suit.
They value it, above all, as a source of information about the Vietnam War.

They sifted through more than half a million pages of official documents that
were declassified in the pretrial discovery process and devoted a fifth of their
text to what they found. The cables, ''talking papers'' and memos may fascinate
historians, but they are awkward and out of place in a book about the trial - a
detour that disrupts its forward pace. That aside, Mr. Brewin and Ms. Shaw have
produced a refreshingly dispassionate account of one of history's most
contentious and emotional libel trials.

No desire to be impartial burdens Uri Dan in ''Blood Libel,'' his account of
Gen. Ariel Sharon's suit against Time Inc. over a story that ran in Time
magazine. Without apology, Mr. Dan sees the dispute only through the eyes of
General Sharon, his former boss. As press attache to the Israeli general when he
served as Israel's Minister of Defense, Mr. Dan occupied a ringside seat at some
of General Sharon's many confrontations. In fact, Mr. Dan was sitting ''slightly
to the right and behind Sharon [listening] intently'' at the very meeting in
1982 at which Time reported General Sharon had given the green light to
Phalangists in Lebanon to massacre Palestinian refugees.

Wrong, says Mr. Dan. Time, he writes, ''reported something that had never
happened.'' In a scrappy, fast-moving narrative, Mr. Dan describes General
Sharon's battles with Time, his American lawyers and nearly every politician in
Israel. Mr. Dan has harsh words for David Halevy, the Israeli reporter in Time's
Jerusalem bureau who orginated the damning paragraph in an interoffice
memorandum and who, under cross-examination, admitted he had no source. He had
inferred his incriminating news, he said, ''based on my 43 years of living in
Israel.'' Time editors take a beating here. They upgraded Mr. Halevy's
interoffice memo from Jerusalem into a cover story, ''slicking up the writing,''
Mr. Dan points out, to intensify the charge. On the way to the final verdict,
Mr. Dan also gives a gripping inside view of the hardball politics played in
Israel, where not even members of General Sharon's own Likud Party were willing
to help him clear his name. STANDING next to General Sharon in Uri Dan's
personal pantheon is Abraham D. Sofaer, the activist judge who presided at the
trial. Not only did Judge Sofaer conduct some of the crucial cross-examination
of Mr. Halevy and his bureau chief, he also persuaded the Government of Israel
(where Judge Sofaer, who speaks Hebrew, spends part of every summer) to disclose
the document that proved Time's assertions false.

Judge Sofaer's more important contribution to this and future libel cases,
however, may be his jury charge. Instead of asking for the usual single finding
- for General Sharon or for Time - the judge instructed the jury to come back to
the courtroom as soon as it had an answer to each of these crucial and separate
questions: Was Time's story defamatory? Was it false? Was it written with actual
malice? This three-part verdict made it possible for each side to claim
vindication -General Sharon when the jury found Time's story false, Time when
the jury found it not guilty of actual malice and, therefore, innocent of libel.

If Judge Sofaer's instructions are used by judges in other cases, they may make
the work of juries easier. They also raise the odds that both plaintiff and
defendant will come away at least partly satisfied with the outcome. And, if the
press and those they cover will take to heart the other lessons of those epic
cases tried on Foley Square, the two trials will have scored a double-header:
more careful reporting and fewer libel suits.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gen. William C. Westmoreland (AP); photo of Ariel Sharon,
former Israeli Defense Minister (Christopher Morris/Black Star)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MIND/BODY/HEALTH;
HERO OF THE LIFE CYCLE

BYLINE: By SHERRY TURTLE; Sherry Turkle, an associate professor of sociology at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is the author of ''Psychoanalytic
Politics: Freud's French Revolution'' and ''The Second Self: Computers and the
Human Spirit.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1620 words



A WAY OF LOOKING AT THINGS
Selected Papers From 1930 to 1980. By Erik H. Erikson. Edited by Stephen
Schlein. 782 pp. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. $29.95.

AMERICA is a psychoanalytic culture. In this country, Freudian ideas have been
taken up not only as the basis for a therapeutic technique, but as the
foundation for a more widespread sensibility. Since the publication of
''Childhood and Society'' in 1950, Erik Erikson has become emblematic of that
sensibility.

Mr. Erikson once described psychoanalysis as ''the principal modern form of
systematic introspection and meditation.'' In fact, the language he invented -
of ''identity,'' ''identity crisis'' and ''the life cycle'' - has become the
principal American form of thinking about adolescence and, beyond this, about
the widest range of adult trials and tribulations.

The publication of ''A Way of Looking at Things,'' a volume of Mr. Erikson's
previously uncollected papers edited by Stephen Schlein, a clinical psychologist
and a teacher at the Cambridge Hospital of Harvard Medical School, offers a
fresh occasion to reflect on why. Spanning 50 years of creative work, the papers
cover Mr. Erikson's major preoccupations. Some of these will be well known to
most readers: history, child development and identity. Other themes are less
familiar. The collection includes classic papers that never found the audience
they deserved - in particular, a set of essays that weave play with dreams and
dreams with life history.

In ''Configurations in Play'' and ''Studies in the Interpretation of Play,'' Mr.
Erikson develops the highly original technique of interpreting children's play
sequences the way an analyst interprets a dream. In observing the process of
play, he looks for cadence, structure, disruption and spatial configuration as
clues to its meaning. In ''The Dream Specimen of Psychoanalysis,'' Mr. Erikson
uses his idea of the life cycle to throw new light on Freud's most famous dream.
This is the ''Irma dream,'' a dream that Freud had about one of his own
patients, and in his own words, ''the first dream ever subjected to an
exhaustive interpretation.'' Mr. Erikson uses elements of Freud's biography, in
particular his letters to Wilhelm Fliess, to put the Irma dream in the context
of ''the moment in Freud's life when it was dreamed . . . the moment when
creative thought gave birth to the interpretation of dreams.'' In doing so, Mr.
Erikson finds more than the displaced conflicts of Freud's past. He finds
Freud's aspirations for his future, going so far as to suggest that the Irma
dream may carry ''the historical burden of being dreamed in order to be
analyzed, and analyzed in order to fulfill a very special fate.''

The questions that these essays pose for the reader in 1987 are not only what
was original and powerful in what Mr. Erikson wrote, but what made it easy for
people - particularly Americans - to take up what he had to say. What stands
behind the special love affair between Mr. Erikson and America?

The collection as a whole offers a view of Mr. Erikson as a modern-day
Tocqueville. In these essays, he uses his psychoanalytic sensibility to touch
base with 50 years of American cultural life (there are papers on American
Indian tribes, American youth, women and blacks) and with 50 years of American
political history. We read about his refusal to sign a loyalty oath during the
McCarthy era, about student protest during the Vietnam era and about the
American landing on the moon. Mr. Erikson had fallen in love with America and
Americans responded, not only because he wrote so movingly about them, but
because of a fundamental resonance between his philosophy and American dreams.

Whereas the orthodox Freudian ''stages'' -oral, anal, phallic - seemed
pessimistic, and were popularized in the adage that, ''All is decided by the age
of 5,'' Mr. Erikson's work - with its emphasis on adult development and on a
life cycle where early themes get a chance to be replayed at later stages -
suggested that we all get many chances. Americans wanted to hear that optimistic
message. It fit in with what they had made of psychoanalysis, with the
''therapeutic culture'' they had built.

Freud devoted most of his career to the study of the instincts, but toward the
end of his life he turned his attention to the ego, facing out toward reality.
Ego psychology began in Vienna, but it was in America that it found a spiritual
home. American ego psychology was directed toward an active adaptation of the
patient to reality - toward what came to be called ''coping.'' It brought
Freudianism in line with American beliefs about the virtue and necessity of a
positive approach.

There was a good fit between this therapeutic culture and Mr. Erikson's portrait
of a life cycle that gives ''second chances'' for opportunities missed and paths
not taken, just as there was a good fit between the American personality that
the sociologist David Riesman called ''other directed'' and Mr. Erikson's
portrait of an adolescence exquisitely permeable to outside influence. Mr.
Erikson's emphasis on the formative crisis of adolescence also captured the
American imagination: America is after all a nation that worships its young.
AMERICAN individualism represents each person as a virtuoso of his or her self.

Americans see themselves as making their fate (and remaking themselves) by
changing their social situation. Here, too, there was a congruence between
American ideals and the message of Mr. Erikson, an immigrant who had twice
remade his fate, first in Vienna and then in the United States.

Erik Erikson, who was born in Germany in 1902, came to Vienna in 1927 as an
itinerant artist with only a high school diploma. He left in 1933 as a
psychoanalyst, to settle permanently in the United States.

His theory of ''great men'' like Freud, Luther and Gandhi, is based on the idea
of a fit between their personal crises and the crises of their times. Their
solutions - in the form of their ideas - become cultural solutions. Out of Mr.
Erikson's own situation of marginality - as an artist, a foreigner, a man
without a college education in a profession that is usually open only to
physicians - he lived out, resolved and theorized a crisis of identity that
spoke to the hearts of Americans who so often feel displaced, uprooted, betwixt
and between.

Implicit in Freud's work there is another theory of why certain psychological
ideas capture the popular imagination. People like Freudian interpretations
because they offer a way to come closer to aspects of ourselves, like sexuality
and aggression, which we censor but want to be in contact with. Freud's theories
are ''evocative.'' For example, armed with the idea of the ''significant'' slip
of the tongue, you can play with your own mistakes (and those of your friends),
you can actively try to figure out new meanings. Slips are almost-tangible
ideas; they are ''objects-to-think-with.''

Mr. Erikson's theories, like Freud's, have qualities that allow people to take
them up and make them their own: his ideas are evocative, putting us in touch
with what disturbs, and they are also tangi-ble. For example, he has insisted on
the body as a template for the psyche. His research with children showed that
boys tend to use blocks to build towers while girls build enclosed and protected
spaces, reflecting their respective understandings of their bodies. The idea is
easy to appropriate: simple and evocative, powerful and manipulable. You can
watch children. You can watch yourself - as you doodle on the margins of a
notebook, or build sand castles at the beach.

A Harvard University student in the 1960's went so far as to write a paper on
the sexual integration of Lamont, a university library which had just been
opened to women. He took photographs of the wooden desks of Lamont before and
after women's arrival. The ''before'' desks had been scratched with pencil marks
of nervous or bored male students - there were arrows, darts and rockets. The
photographs of the ''after'' desks showed these same projectiles, now encircled
by flowers and curving laced patterns. The student glowed with triumph: he had
proved Mr. Erikson right.

What is important here is not the research project that illustrated what Mr.
Erikson had already demonstrated with far more rigor and grace, but the sense of
satisfaction the student felt from the re-demonstration. We want to be in touch
with our sense of our bodies; Mr. Erikson's theory offers a way that is concrete
and poses little threat.

The phrase ''a way of looking at things'' was originally Freud's. Freud was
cautious about ego-psychology, fearful that it might compromise what he
considered the core of psychoanalysis. And so he warned that in the exploration
of the ego, ''it will be difficult to escape what is universally known; it will
rather be a question of new ways of looking at things.'' At the end of
''Childhood and Society,'' Mr. Erikson says that he has ''nothing to offer
except a way of looking at things.'' But the valence of Freud's phrase has been
reversed. What is most powerful about reading Mr. Erikson is the experience of
recognition. But this does not mean that he merely restates what is
''universally known.'' He tells us what we knew but did not or could not say
-and that turns out to be a revolution in vision.

''A Way of Looking at Things'' allows us to watch Mr. Erikson as he developed
ideas that were to become cornerstones of American thinking about the self. His
language is so much in our culture that many people feel they ''know'' him
without having to read him. Perhaps the greatest contribution of this book is
that it will send us back to Erik Erikson.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HUNDREDS OF 'TRAINERS' ARE STATIONED AROUND GLOBE

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 273 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE 50 or so American soldiers stationed in El Salvador to train Government
forces represent just one kind of potentially dangerous military commitment.

Last week, one of them, Staff Sgt. Gregory A. Fronius, was killed during a rebel
attack. Because of Congressional fears of involvement in a Central American war,
the Pentagon has limited the number of military trainers in El Salvador to 55.
They are not supposed to engage in combat activities such as patroling on foot
or flying aircraft. Officially, they are not ''advisers,'' a term that recalls
the beginnings of American involvement in Vietnam.

Other American military men, none of them trainers, have been killed in El
Salvador. In 1985, four off-duty marine guards from the American Embassy were
machine-gunned to death at a sidewalk cafe. In 1983, a Navy officer with the
American military group, also off-duty, was shot and killed. The tasks of the
13-member military group include helping with the selection and purchase of
weapons and spare parts.

There are 597 members of similar American military groups stationed in dozens of
countries, the Defense Department says. Hundreds of American trainers are also
serving overseas. And several hundred other troops are assigned to peacekeeping
units, notably in the Sinai Desert, where infantrymen are on temporary
assignment under terms of the Egypt-Israel peace agreement. This is not
considered hazardous duty, but 248 were killed in a plane crash while on holiday
leave in December 1985.

In addition, the Pentagon supplied dozens of pilots and support people to
Bolivia last year to assist in anti-cocaine operations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Reservists Build Key Road in Honduras

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 828 words


IN a remote valley in northern Honduras, United States Army Reserve engineers,
supported by National Guard maintenance technicians and military policemen, are
working from sunup to sundown to build a gravel-topped road south from the town
of Jocon. With each mile pushed through the rough terrain, the road gives
Honduran peasants easier access to the port of Trujillo to the north. And when
it is driven through the rugged mountains to roads to the south, they will be
able to go directly to Tegucigalpa, the capital, in central Honduras.

The road is also important to the Pentagon's contingency planning. It is being
built to military specifications so that it can sustain heavy loads even though
unpaved. If Americans were sent to Honduras to fight the Sandinistas of
neighboring Nicaragua, they could use the road to move troops, arms and
supplies.

American military officers say 100,000 troops would be needed for a full-scale
operation against Nicaragua. But the airfields, ports and roads of Honduras
would be incapable of supporting such a force without extensive improvements.

It is projects like the road - and the maneuvers of American regular, reserve,
and National Guard forces - that President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua
points to when accusing the Washington of preparing to invade his country.
President Reagan has denied that an invasion is planned. Senior Administration
officials have asserted that the ''continuing presence'' of American forces in
Honduras is intended only to deter the export of Mr. Ortega's leftist influence.

That presence grew in February when 700 paratroopers from the 82d Airborne
Division at Fort Bragg, N.C. spent two weeks in Honduras carrying out
counterinsurgency exercises. In May, a brigade of 3,000 air assault troops from
the 101st Airborne Division at Fort Campbell and an amphibious unit of 1,800
marines are to land in Honduras. They will be the largest American combat force
deployed there since the maneuvers began in 1983.

The role of Army Reserve and National Guard troops, as distinct from Regular
Army, in the Honduran exercises has gradually expanded. It began in 1983 and
1984 with brief tours of small infantry and artillery units. Armored and Air
National Guard units were added in 1985.

In the last two years, engineering battalions have undertaken the road-building
project. Last year, the National Guard furnished engineers and the Army
Reserves, logistic support; this year, they switched roles. By late May, when
the deployment that began in January is scheduled to end, 4,600 reservists and
guardsmen will have been assigned to 17-day tours there.

The Army has sent the reserves and guard troops, the civilian ''weekend
warriors'' who put in two weeks of active duty each year, to Honduras as part of
their role in what the Pentagon describes as the ''total Army.'' As the big
growth in military budgets of the early Reagan era has come to a halt, defense
planners have increasingly turned to the reserves. About half of the Army's
combat support soldiers are in the reserves and guard.

A war in Central America could remove regular troops earmarked for crises in the
Persian Gulf or reinforcements in Europe or South Korea. To prevent that, the
Pentagon has been training reservists and guardsmen in Honduras and Panama.

The training also has a humanitarian aspect. Building the Jocon road, which
follows a route recommended by World Bank economic development specialists, is
having an immediate effect on the lives of peasants in the Aguan Valley.
American officers say medics who inoculate children, or engineers who dig wells
along the way, win support from the Hondurans.

More subtly, the Reagan Administration seems to be trying to avoid what many
military officers say was a mistake in Vietnam in the mid-1960's. Because
President Johnson did not call up the reserves and guard, they argue, the public
was not alerted early that the conflict was serious.

The political implications of sending Army Reserves and National Guardsmen to
train in Honduras has not escaped the attention of critics of the Reagan policy
in Central America. The governors of Maine, Massachusetts, Arizona, California,
Washington, New Mexico, Vermont and Nebraska have expressed varying degrees of
opposition to Honduran training for their National Guard units. The
Administration got Congress to pass legislation giving it control. But in
January, Gov. Rudy Perpich of Minnesota brought suit to overturn the
legislation. Replying last week, the Justice Department cited Article I of the
Constitution, which gives the Congress the authority ''to raise and support
armies.''

Meanwhile, reserve and guard training proceeded in Honduras. Last week, aviators
from the Army and Air Force Reserves and Air National Guard joined active-duty
flyers in exercises. Some of them flew over southern Honduras, where open
country offers a potential attack route for the Sandinistas' Russian-made tanks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of members of Texas National Guard (Black Star/Shelly Katz); map
of Honduras

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JURY'S POWER COMES INTO PLAY IN GOEZ TRIAL

BYLINE: By KIRK JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 818 words


THE chief attorney for Bernhard H. Goetz, Barry I. Slotnick, stood before a
panel of 18 prospective jurors the other day and asked a question that has
echoed through the legal system in this country for more than 300 years: ''If
you find that the prosecution has proved its case beyond a reasonable doubt . .
. and if the judge instructs you that you must convict on that basis, would you
feel obligated to do so?''

The question drew an objection from the prosecution and resulted in a long
conference with the judge. It pointed, as Mr. Slotnick freely acknowledges,
toward the often unacknowledged power of a jury to ignore the evidence that a
defendant has committed a crime and vote for acquittal.

Judges have rarely allowed lawyers to play to that power overtly, but Mr.
Slotnick said last week that he had asked Justice Stephen G. Crane for
permission to do so -for at least part of Mr. Goetz's defense - when testimony
begins in State Supreme Court in Manhattan later this month.

''It's the escape hatch for the people to speak - that the jury has absolute
power to nullify the law,'' said William M. Kunstler, who has written widely in
support of the nullification concept and attempted to use it himself as a
defense lawyer in some of the civil rights and Vietnam War protest cases of the
1960's. ''But it's a two-edged sword and you can't be totally consistent about
it. I don't think juries should be able to excuse violence.''

Mr. Goetz, who is 39, shot four young men on the subway in December 1984
because, he said, he feared they were about to rob him. He is charged with
attempted murder, assault, reckless endangerment and illegal weapons possession.
Mr. Slotnick said his request was limited to the last charge, in part because
Mr. Goetz has admitted having been denied a gun permit and in part because that
charge cannot be covered by Mr. Goetz's claim that he acted in self-defense.
Other legal experts say the nullification issue may be inevitable in Mr. Goetz's
trial as a whole, no matter how the judge responds to Mr. Slotnick's request,
because of the intense moral and emotional debate the case has engendered.

''Goetz may be one of those cases where jurors will exercise the power without
being told they have it,'' said Monroe H. Freedman, a professor at the Hofstra
University Law School. ''Whether it can be presented to the jury is another
issue.''

Legal experts say that nullification has most often arisen as an issue in eras
and cases in which public opinion has differed from established law. The most
famous case is probably that of John Peter Zenger, the New York newspaper
publisher who was acquitted in 1735 of seditious libel after criticizing an
official of the crown, even though he freely admitted his guilt.

It was also a factor in the pre-Civil War era, when many Northern juries refused
to convict people accused of violating the fugitive slave laws, and during
Prohibition, when prosecutors often found it difficult to persuade juries to
convict violators of the Volstead Act. Lawyers say that nullification has been a
factor in convictions as well as acquittals in race-related cases in the South.

Legal authorities maintain that judges in general oppose jury nullification
because it trivializes the judge's function and increases the possibility of a
hung jury. Justice Crane told prospective jurors last week, apparently in
response to the drift of Mr. Slotnick's questions, that if chosen, they would
have to swear to take their instructions about the law exclusively from him. To
do otherwise ''would be utter chaos - it would overthrow the rule of law
completely,'' he said, continuing, ''We can't have 12 different opinions of what
the law is.''

Balancing that view, however, is the tradition that a jury is the ''conscience
of the community,'' as various Federal Court decisions have defined it, and that
regardless of the jurors' reasoning, a jury's decision cannot be challenged -
nor can the jurors be forced to say why they ruled as they did.

''It's almost a schizophrenic approach,'' said Burt Neuborne, a professor at the
New York University Law School. ''We don't want to take the power away, but we
don't encourage them to exercise it.'' In the Goetz trial, Professor Neuborne
added, ''It's clear that it's going to have some role, but the jurors themselves
may have to decide how much they want to use it.''

A defense lawyer who dropped into Justice Crane's courtroom to observe the jury
selection process last week said he believed that, as a result of Mr. Slotnick's
questions, ''the genie was out of the bottle.''

''Slotnick was able to send a pretty strong message that the jurors may be
entitled to acquit even if the evidence proves guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt,'' said the lawyer, Joel B. Rudin. ''Whether anyone will remember it two
months down the road when they go in to deliberate, is another question
altogether.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bernhard H. Goez (NYT/John Sotomayor)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIEWS OF SPORT;
WHAT GOODEN TELLS US ABOUT OURSELVES

BYLINE: By HARRY STEIN; Harry Stein who created the ethics column in Esquire
magazine, is the author of ''Hoopla'' and ''Ethics and Other Liabilities.''

SECTION: Section 5; Page 12, Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 781 words


AS the news about Dwight Gooden spread the other afternoon, the same things were
being said all over, and it is hard to disagree with any of them. Yes, of
course, the poor guy merits sympathy. But, damn right, no one put a gun to his
head! Hey, on the other hand, he's still just a kid - 22! -and this is the kind
of mistake kids make. But how could the jerk do this to himself? To us?

Still, the most telling part of it all is that, once the initial shock had worn
off, not many of us were surprised, after all.

Partly it is simply the fact that over the previous year - from the mysterious
ankle injury to the car rental incidents, from the failure to show at the
victory parade to the surprise paternity, from the fight with the Tampa police
to the gun-toting ex-financee at La Guardia, from the suddenly hittable heater
to the dearth of K's in the K corner -Gooden himself had been littering the
universe with clues.

But, too, it has to do with the way we ourselves have come to view the world.
These days, when someone loses a bit of bat speed, when a couple of feet
abruptly vanish from a fastball, the question fairly leaps to mind: Him, too?

What is too easy to forget just now, what may actually soon be lost entirely, is
what has so endeared Gooden to us in the first place. For it was not merely his
prodigious talent and his remarkable bearing - that delicious sense, especially
during the '85 season, that we might well be watching the greatest pitcher who
ever lived, Tom Seaver's 40-year-old head on Bob Feller's 20-year-old body - but
his special innocence.

At times, indeed, Gooden seemed virtually a relic of turn-of-the-century
boyhood. How many of us, jaded as we might be, could help but be at least a
little touched by those postgame calls to his dad?

It is little wonder that blacks, in particular, took such pride in the man. He
was what Sandy Koufax had been a generation earlier for Jews, a one-man
annihilator of demeaning stereotypes.

More and more lately it is observed -Keith Hernandez, for one, is wont to say it
-that athletes ought not to be on pedestals, that it must be understood that
each of them comes our way with a full complement of frailties. Obviously. Who
can argue?

But, in another sense, such a proposition misses the point entirely. No, Dwight
Gooden never asked to be a hero. No, short of honest effort, he owes us nothing
at all.

It is, finally, a question of our own needs. We have in this culture, by the
millions, become reflexively cynical, victims of the era. The litany is longer
than ever - not just Vietnam and Watergate anymore, but the Iran-Contra thing,
and Boesky, municipal scandals and, yes, drugs in sports - and the conclusion is
ever easier to draw: There is nothing, no one, left to believe in.

And, yet, as John F. Kennedy used to say, that's just not good enough. For
cynicism is corrosive, a killer of the spirit. We can only be at our best, most
alive, if we keep it at bay.

It was 67 years ago, just before the end of the 1920 baseball season, that it
came to light that the previous fall the World Series had been fixed, booted
away by eight White Sox to the underdog Reds at the behest of gamblers. Back
then, for innumerable Americans, the world seemed to stop dead in its axis. No
less worldly a soul than Ring Lardner, whose reputation had been made by
baseball, walked away from the game and never looked back. The story about the
kid and Shoeless Joe Jackson - ''Say it ain't so'' -may have been bogus, a
newspaperman's fiction, but it got the feelings absolutely right.

Yet here are we, a couple of days before the start of a new season, a time
generally reserved for celebrating the game that has given us not merely so much
pleasure, but the fabled examples of Gehrig and Veeck, Robinson and Rickey. Only
this year, like last, the question is not ''who's on first'' or, for the Mets'
fan the customary ''who's on third? '', but rather ''who's next? '' - usually
asked in quiet resignation. We seem to have been stripped, many of us, even of
the capacity for appropriate reaction.

But, then, maybe that, too, is just cynicism. Keith Hernandez tells of his deep
apprehension a couple of years back, during the heat of the pennant race, at the
prospect of returning to Shea after testifying at the drug trial in Pittsburgh -
and of how surprised he was, and profoundly moved, to be met by a standing
ovation.

In late May or early June, if all goes well, the same thing will happen between
ourselves and Dwight Gooden, but it will be a moment even more memorable and
rare; an expression less of gratitude for past services rendered or even of
those yet to come, than of our common humanity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Dwight Gooden

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIEWS OF SPORT;
A SMALL TOWN, A TINY GYM, AND A HERO

BYLINE: By Tom Brokaw; Tom Brokaw is managing editor of the NBC Nightly News.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 12, Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1115 words


WHEN I was 8 years old and living with my family in two large rooms on the
second floor of a white frame house in a small South Dakota town, one of my
winter diversions was an imaginary basketball game played with a rolled-up sock
lofted toward the space between the top of a door frame and the ceiling.
Although that was almost 40 years ago I remember the inner voice that guided me:

''We're down to the final seconds of the South Dakota State 'B' basketball
championship, everyone, and Brokaw has the ball, his team trailing by a point.
The crowd is on its feet. You can't hear yourself think. Ten seconds, Brokaw
moves to the top of the key! Five seconds! He gives a little head fake, jumps,
shoots! It's GOOD!''

The rolled-up sock went in every time. My teammates never failed to carry me off
the floor. The little blonde girl who coolly ignored my overtures during second
grade alphabet recital by now realized what a fool she had been. It was all I
asked in life.

Alas, I never did win a state tournament; indeed, in the one state tournament in
which I appeared I managed to blow a layup, dribble off my foot and, finally,
suffer the ignominy of being benched for the semifinal because our uptight coach
caught me in the middle of some off-limits horseplay back at the hotel. That was
my junior year. The following year I was much more composed and having repaired
my relationship with the coach I was looking forward to a triumphant tournament.
Then, disaster. We were upset in the qualifying round by a smaller town led by
an aggressive guard named Joe Thorne. He was in my face all night long. My last
chance to fulfill a life's dream gone less than a month after my 18th birthday.
There isn't a year I don't recall that loss and the enormous hole it blew in my
expectations.

Anyway, the current hit film ''Hoosiers'' brings all this to mind. As soon as I
heard the story line I knew I must see it and persuaded my wife to come along.
She had been cheerleading captain at our high school but somehow managed to
leave behind whatever attendant basketball emotions that brought with it.

Once the film was under way, we were jointly swept up in the sappy
sentimentality played out there in the small gymnasiums on the big screen. Sure,
the romance between the coach and the pretty schoolteacher was a groaner. And
four minutes into the film who didn't know this rag-tag team would surely become
the David of Hoosier high school basketball, slaying a Goliath for the state
basketball championship, the Indiana equivalent of the Nobel Peace Prize, an
Olympic gold medal and an Oscar all rolled into one?

What impressed me, however, was the attention to detail: the shafts of filtered
sunlight illuminating the well-worn wooden floor of the tiny gym; the bare-pipe,
peeling-paint look of the basement locker room; the sweaty intensity of the
players as they huddled with their coach; their friends, family and neighbors
hovering over them in those close quarters; the loyal but boorish behavior of
the Main Street businessmen. All the harmonics of small-town Midwestern
basketball in the 1950's are there.

''Hoosiers'' triggered so many of my own memories. The gymnasium in Geddes,
S.D., was also the stage. It was elevated about 4 feet above the seating so if
you dived for a loose ball you were in danger of a serious crash landing. It
also had a large skylight that leaked after a heavy snow. I remember Sylvan
Highrock leading a fast break and sliding from midcourt to the foul line. The
referee called him for traveling.

Sylvan was a Sioux Indian, the only one on our team, and every year he was an
especially welcome presence when we played Marty Mission, an all-Indian school
along the Missouri River. He'd calm us as we entered what was for us a
foreboding environment: a small dark gymnasium encircled by a balcony.

It was there the Marty rooters would stand and chant as they looked down onto
the playing floor, where their team would run up big scores as players with
names such as John Two Hearts and Charlie Lone Wolf hit shot after shot.
Basketball was a year-round sport at Marty Mission and the players owned a
home-court advantage quite unlike any other. We didn't have a chance. The
greatest shot I ever saw? It was not in a game. One night a few of us stayed
behind in the locker room until the school had been locked up. Then we pushed
the bleachers against the far side wall. Chuck Gremmels crawled atop them at a
point about midway in the backcourt and launched a two-handed shot toward the
far basket, jumping from the bleachers as he released the ball. He didn't see
the result, but we did: It went straight in, touching only the bottom of the net
with that wonderful small, explosive sound.

Basketball is much more than gymnasiums and breathtaking shots, of course. It is
also a game of rituals and uniforms. Never have I felt more omnipotent than when
I pulled on my matching shorts and jersey, all-white tennis shoes and fleecy
warm-ups, tops and bottoms. This was much more than throwing a rolled-up sock
against a wall or playing h-o-r-s-e in someone's driveway.

The locker room door would swing open. The band would be playing the school
fight song. The crowd would be on its feet, cheering as the cheerleaders called
out our names: Whistler, Eide, Soulek, Pokorney, Brokaw. We'd swing into our
warm-up routines: layups, outside jumpers, offensive rebounding, now defense,
all very serious with barely a flicker of acknowledgement for the crowd, maybe a
glancing look at a girlfriend or a potential girlfriend. Then, the game. The
unalloyed joy of a victory, well played, no glaring, dumb mistakes, or the
weekendlong pain of a loss, a loss that brought on hard stares and no consoling
words from Main Street merchants.

Over the years I've been fortunate to attend a number of big deals: Presidential
summits and inaugurations, White House state dinners, World Series, Super Bowls,
Kentucky Derbies, Broadway openings and space launches. I've stood in the
Kremlin in Moscow and the Great Hall of the People in Beijing. ''Hoosiers''
reminded me that those long-ago high school basketball games hold their own
special place in the honor roll of my memory.

So does Joe Thorne, that tenacious guard who kept me from the state tournament
my senior year. Thorne went on to play footbal at South Dakota State College and
won a commission in the Army R.O.T.C. In Washington last week I looked up his
name. It's in those directories they have at the entrance to the Vietnam War
Memorial. Lieut. Josef Lloyd Thorne was killed in Vietnam in April 1965, just a
month short of his 25th birthday.

Tom Brokaw is managing editor of the NBC Nightly News.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE LORD'S OF HELL'S KITCHEN

BYLINE: By James Traub; James Traub is a writer living in New York.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 38, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3778 words


ON THE AFTERNOON OF MARCH 26, Robert Colangelo, chief of detectives of the New
York City Police Department, was in his office, posing for a celebratory
photograph with a detachment of his men. ''Let's put up a sign,'' shouted a
jubilant Colangelo. '' 'Westies - R.I.P.' Make it as big as you can!''

Colangelo had just come from a crowded press conference at which Rudolph W.
Giuliani, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York, and
Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, had announced the
indictment of 10 members of the Westies, a gang long known to law enforcement
officials, if not to the public, as one of the most savage organizations in the
long history of New York gangs. The group stands accused of a criminal
enterprise involving eight murders and dozens of other cases of attempted
murder, kidnapping, loan-sharking, extortion, gambling and drug dealing.

The Westies began to unravel exactly one year ago, when Francis T. (Mickey)
Featherstone decided to sing. Federal and state prosecutors had already been
investigating the gang - also known to the police as the Irish Mafia - when
Featherstone, the Westies' fearsome enforcer, was convicted of the 1985
gangland-style execution of Michael Holly, a construction worker.

Mickey Featherstone, a short, slight 38-year-old with a blond mop and an
almost-adolescent expression, had been charged with at least three other murders
during the previous 17 years, but he was innocent of this one.

In the spring of 1986, suddenly facing 25 years in prison, he approached the
District Attorney's office with an astounding offer: not only would he lead the
prosecutors to Michael Holly's real killers, but he would expose the criminal
activities of a gang that they had failed again and again to put behind bars.

THERE IS SOMETHING ALMOST QUAINT IN the image of Irish organized crime,
something that calls to mind old movies with Jimmy Cagney lording over a troop
of saucy wharf rats. That mythic era of Irish street glory appeared to end with
the opening of Manhattan's dark, secretive slums to the forces of development
and homogenization. But if the Westies seem like ghosts, they are harrowingly
real.

New York law enforcement officials hold the Westies responsible for more than 30
murders during the last 15 years. ''This is the most violent gang we've seen,''
says Michael Cherkasky, the head of the Rackets Bureau of the Manhattan District
Attorney's office.

Because the gang, until recently, has largely terrorized the insular world of
Manhattan's West Side docks, living off extortion from bookmakers and loan
sharks, the Westies never gained the notoriety of the Mafia. But in recent years
they have attracted increasing scrutiny from law enforcement officials. Over the
last decade, the Westies cemented an alliance with the far more sophisticated,
far more powerful Gambino family of the Mafia. During that time, officials
charge, gang members performed executions at the behest of the Gambinos, and
shared in profits from the mob's traditional control over New York's docks.

Suddenly, however, the Westies appear to be collapsing under the weight of a
series of fratricides and the bitterness of Mickey Featherstone. Working with
information provided by Featherstone, the District Attorney's office has
indicted members of the gang on charges of killing Holly. The gang's leader and
its principal members were charged with murder or attempted murder.

The Federal indictments, coming on the heels of the state's charges, marshalled
a staggering variety of criminal acts under the Federal Racketeer Influenced and
Corrupt Organizations, or RICO, Act - the same law used so successfully earlier
this year in the so-called Mafia Commission case. Between the Federal and state
charges, law enforcement officials hope to make the Westies the latest casualty
of their war on organized crime.

Already, detectives triumphantly report, the gang has virtually ceased to exist
on the streets of the West Side.

''Law enforcement,'' says Joseph Coffey, a former police detective who is now
the principal investigator with New York State's Organized Crime Task Force,
''has pretty much taken the heart out of the Westies.''

THERE IS NO HELL'S Kitchen anymore; the area bounded by 42d and 59th Streets,
Eighth Avenue and the Hudson River now goes by the genteel name of Clinton. The
Irish bars are rapidly being replaced by French bistros; the tenements are going
co-op.

Beneath the gentrified surface, however, lie generations of criminal violence.
By the early part of the century, when the el spread soot along the rat-infested
tenements of Ninth Avenue and the New York Central rattled up and down the
median of 11th, Irish gangs were firmly entrenched in Hell's Kitchen.

In those dim days, the neighborhood was in the grip of the Gophers, a
misbegotten army of 500 toughs who hid out in basements and emerged to raid
freight cars and crack the skulls of an occasional foolhardy policeman and rival
gang members. They were broken up by the authorities in 1910.

West Side crime regrouped during Prohibition when, it was said, there were more
speakeasies than children on many blocks of the neighborhood. By World War II,
when the crime of choice was the theft of weapons from battleships moored on the
West Side, the gangsters of Hell's Kitchen were known collectively as the
Arsenal Gang.

The Irish gangs never had the formal structure or initiation rites of the Mafia.
''The Italians had rules because they wanted to set up a major business,''
explains Ronald Goldstock, director of the Organized Crime Task Force. ''The
Irish never got to that level of organization or sophistication.'' Each
generation's leader was the bravest or craftiest member of the gang; a member
was simply a young man from the neighborhood who chose to pursue a life of
crime.

The gangsters, as neighborhood veterans recall, were a Hell's Kitchen cultural
institution: they protected the neighborhood and recognized unspoken rules. They
were extortionists and bookies, but they were not, in general, hired killers.

By the mid-1970's, the stable Hell's Kitchen in which the gangs had flourished
had ceased to exist. Many of the Irish families had fled to Long Island or New
Jersey; Hell's Kitchen was now a polyglot wilderness, a slum. A number of the
older gang members had left the fold -moved away or taken legitimate jobs. Those
who remained were open to challenge from a younger generation, which, perhaps
reflecting the decay of the neighborhood, were an exceptionally unstable and
violent group.

FEW MEN COULD have been more vicious and less self-controlled than Mickey
Featherstone. Born into a working-class family on West 43d Street immediately
after World War II, he looks, oddly enough, like a cherub. ''If you saw this
guy, you'd swear that butter wouldn't melt in his mouth,'' says an acquaintance
of his. ''But you'd hear the most horrible stories.''

In 1971, for example, a man named Linwood Willis made the mistake of saying to
the baby-faced Featherstone, ''You think you're a tough guy.'' The two stepped
outside the Leprechaun Bar on 10th Avenue. Featherstone drew a gun and killed
Willis. Hours later, the police found him wandering in a stupor, clutching his
gun. He was later found not guilty by reason of insanity.

On the street, Featherstone was known as a ''jungle killer.'' He was a Vietnam
veteran with a haunted mien. At age 17, he had lied his way into the Green
Berets and was sent off to war. ''It's a very emotional thing for him,'' says
Jeffrey Schlanger, an assistant district attorney, who has spent hours
interrogating Featherstone since last April. Schlanger says he is not sure
Featherstone ever went into battle, although ''he talks about seeing people
killed.''

Featherstone left the Army with a medical discharge in 1967, suffering from
hallucinations and disorientation. For the next eight years he was in and out of
mental hospitals. In between stays, he killed people.

''He'd do wild things,'' says Joe Coffey, a boyhood acquaintance of many of the
Westies. ''Like he'd walk into a gin mill on the West Side and spray the place
with machine-gun fire.'' Mickey Featherstone was a weapon waiting to be grasped
by someone shrewder than himself.

That man turned out to be James Coonan, now 40. Coonan, who was blond, chubby
and, like Featherstone, as innocent-looking as a choirboy, was known and feared
on the West Side as a murderer and kidnapper, as well as the bodyguard and
apprentice of Charles (Ruby) Stein, a powerful loan shark. Coonan wanted to set
himself up as the lord of West Side crime. Several neighborhood thugs had
already begun to gather around him. Mickey Featherstone, Coonan believed, was
just the sort of strong-armed lieutenant who could help him muscle his way to
the top.

BY THE MID-1970'S, CONTROL over Hell's Kitchen crime had passed to the
mythically named Michael (Mickey) Spillane. A bookmaker, loan shark and
murderer, Spillane was one of the last of the old-fashioned gangsters, handing
out turkeys at Thanksgiving and paying visits to the elderly.

In 1976, Coonan and his group began killing their way toward Spillane. Three of
the gang leader's lieutenants were murdered. On the evening of May 13, 1977, he
was summoned to speak with someone in a dark sedan parked outside his home in
Woodside, Queens. Stepping out to the street, he was stitched by a string of
bullets. The police arrested Featherstone for Spillane's murder. He was
acquitted.

At about the same time Spillane was killed, Ruby Stein disappeared. Several
weeks later, his torso floated to the surface of Jamaica Bay. Law enforcement
officials now say that both the Spillane and Stein murders are the first signs
of collaboration between the Westies - as the police came to call Coonan's gang
- and the Gambino family.

Near the time of the killings, Paul (Big Paul) Castellano, head of the Gambino
faction, let it be known that he wanted to meet with Featherstone and Coonan. A
session was set for Tommaso's, a restaurant favored by mobsters in the Bay Ridge
section of Brooklyn.

Castellano offered the two a deal they couldn't refuse. The Gambinos ''wanted to
have some say in who was killed and who was not killed'' on the West Side, ''and
they were willing to pay for this,'' says Jeffrey Schlanger.

The deal they allegedly struck was that the gang would become an appendage of
the Gambino family, carrying out approved killings and kicking back a percentage
of earnings from their bookmaking and loan sharking. In return, the Westies
would enjoy Castellano's protection and some sharing in West Side mob activity.
The Westies became, as Schlanger puts it, the Gambino family's ''Coonan crew.''

Every Wednesday, according to Gambino informers, Coonan's group met with Roy
DeMeo, a Gambino lieutenant, to parcel out profits from the week. Castellano
essentially handed over control of several low-level organized-crime figures to
the wild young Irishmen.

For example, Castellano allegedly ''gave'' the Westies Vincent Leone, a loan
shark and bookmaker and the secretary-treasurer of Local 1909 of the
International Longshoremen's Association, a union with longstanding links to
organized crime. Leone's local controlled employment at the U.S.S. Intrepid, an
aircraft carrier converted into a museum and moored at West 46th Street. Profits
from no-show jobs and skimmings from ticket revenue were allegedly kicked backed
to Coonan.

FOR THE MOST PART, the Westies bore little resemblance to their new partners.
Unlike the Mafia, they have never had the sophistication or manpower to run
legitimate businesses. The core of the gang rarely numbered more than a dozen
men. Most gang members and associates hold union cards, either from one of the
construction trades unions, or one of the theatrical unions, especially the
stagehands or the theatrical truckers, members of Teamsters Local 817. (Thomas
O'Donnell, head of the local, says there is no systematic involvement by the
gang in 817's affairs, adding that, to his knowledge, only two Westies are
members.) The Westies served as a hit squad for the Gambino family. Several of
the dozens of murders they allegedly committed were planned executions. As
recently as last May, a Westie member, Kevin Kelly, was sent to kill a
carpenters union official who had heavily damaged a restaurant frequented by
Gambino associates. Kelly was indicted last August for the botched murder
attempt.

But at the same time the Westies were cementing their relationship with the
Gambinos and tightening their control over the West Side, they were becoming
more and more chaotic, brutal and self-destructive. In 1975, Patrick (Paddy)
Dugan, a gang member, killed his best friend, Dennis Curley, after a fistfight.
Coonan and Edward Cuminsky, a non-Irish member of the gang, killed Dugan out of
revenge. Cuminsky, according to police officials, then paraded through the
neighborhood holding Dugan's severed head aloft. (While in prison, Cuminsky had
learned to be a butcher, a skill he later practiced on human corpses.) A year
later, Cuminsky was dead -hit in the back by a volley of bullets while sitting
in his favorite bar.

The Westies' savagery permitted them to murder with virtual impunity - no one
would testify against them. In 1978, Coonan and Featherstone were accused of
killing Harold Whitehead - for calling a friend of theirs ''a fag'' - in the
middle of a crowded bar. One witness committed suicide just prior to testifying
before a grand jury in the Whitehead case, and another went completely mute on
the witness stand.

THE PROSECUTORS' inability to make murder indictments against the Westies stick
was a source of tremendous frustration for them. In 1979, Featherstone was
charged with the Spillane murder, and then acquitted. Then there was the
unsuccessful prosecution for the Whitehead murder. In the bitterest loss of all,
Jimmy McElroy, who had publicly boasted about murdering his own best friend,
Billy Walker, was found not guilty.

But the United States Attorney succeeded where the District Attorney's office
had failed. Featherstone and Coonan had tipped two girls in a massage parlor
with counterfeit $100 bills. One of the girls had seen ''Mickey'' tattooed on
Featherstone's arm, and the fake money was traced to him. It was also determined
that the two men had been together in Coonan's car, which had been impounded as
a result of a traffic violation. In the trunk of the car the police found a gun
with a silencer, and a bulletproof vest. In 1979, Coonan pleaded guilty to a gun
charge, and Featherstone to counterfeiting. Both went to prison.

Coonan continued to run the Westies from his jail cell. According to an
indictment handed up last December (based on information provided by
Featherstone), Coonan ordered three other Westies to kill Vincent Leone, the
gang's Gambino associate; Coonan felt Leone had cheated him out of $30,000 in
bookmaking profits. On Feb. 11, 1984, two Westies drove Leone to New Jersey,
pulled over to offer him a hit of cocaine, and shot him in the head.
Investigators assume the killing had Gambino approval.

When he was paroled, in September 1984, Coonan apparently realized that the
Westies' days as a territorial gang were numbered. Coonan, Featherstone and
other gang members had already moved to northern New Jersey. The old life was
over.

''Gentrification may have more to do with the demise of the Westies than
anything law enforcement can do, because it cuts off the base of supply of
manpower,'' observes Michael Cherkasky, the head of the District Attorney's
Rackets Bureau. ''Without these poor, tough boys from the gutter, with that
anger and desire, you don't have these kinds of violent people.''

Taking a page from the book of Mafia tactics, Coonan attempted to expand into
legitimate businesses. Prosecutors say that he laundered his sizable income by
investing in a construction company called Marine Contractors, in Tarrytown,
N.Y., a company that is now the object of a joint Federal-state-city
investigation into the Westies. (Repeated calls to company officers were not
returned.) Robert Morgenthau says that his office is also investigating Westie
links to a real estate concern with holdings in New York and New Jersey.
Morgenthau declines to identify the concern.

PERHAPS NOTHING would have stopped the Westies had Michael Holly not been
murdered. It was yet another Westie revenge killing. The gang held Holly
responsible for the 1977 shooting death of one of its members, John Bokun.
Fearing for his life, Holly left Manhattan for two years, but returned and found
a job as an ironworker at the site of the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center. On
April 25, 1985, as Holly was walking down 35th Street near 11th Avenue, a man
stepped out of a brown station wagon, screwed a silencer onto a gun and fired
five shots at him.

Witnesses described the killer as short and slight, with light-colored hair. The
car was quickly traced to Erie Transfer, the theatrical trucking company where
Featherstone, who was making something of an effort to live a normal life,
occasionally worked. When the police arrived at Erie several hours later, they
found the car, its engine still warm. As they were interviewing employees,
Mickey Featherstone sauntered right into their midst - short, slight and
light-haired. The evidence seemed overwhelming, and the next day Featherstone
was booked.

For once there were witnesses. The driver of a dry-cleaning van described the
sequence of events, and identified Featherstone as the killer. In March 1986,
Featherstone was found guilty, and faced a sentence of 25 years to life.

He was shocked. His lawyers, Lawrence Hochheiser and his partner Kenneth
Aronson, had always brought home either a verdict of not guilty or a
comparatively short sentence, even when Featherstone had committed a crime. This
time, he was innocent. What's more, he knew the guilty party: the night before
the murder, he was told by Kevin Kelly, a gang member, that Holly was going to
be killed. So Featherstone fully expected to get off. ''He had this naive belief
that the system really works, in a sense,'' says Hochheiser.

Featherstone concluded that he had been framed by the gang and betrayed by his
lawyers. He learned that John Bokun's brother Billy had confessed the crime to
the attorney, Aronson, who represented both Bokun and Featherstone. Yet Bokun
was never called to the stand. Hochheiser and Aronson contend that the
attorney-client privilege prevented them from putting Bokun on the stand.

A week after his conviction, Featherstone called the prosecutors to claim that
he had been framed, and he fingered Bokun. With his slight build and a
light-colored wig supplied to him by Kevin Kelly, a gang member, Bokun could
easily have been mistaken for Featherstone. Once prosecutors conceded that
Featherstone might be telling the truth about his innocence, his wife, Sissy, in
cooperation with the District Attorney's office, devised a plan to exonerate
him.

Armed with a concealed tape recorder, Sissy Featherstone drew Bokun and others
into conversations, sometimes when they came with regular payments for the
family - the traditional organized-crime inducement to loyalty.

On one tape, Bokun can be heard enthusiastically re-enacting the hit: ''Boom! I
just shot him. One-two-three-four-five. Back in the car. Ten seconds! No more!''

Mrs. Featherstone also got Bokun to state his belief that Kevin Kelly had
provided him with the wig in order to frame Mickey, presumably to clear the
field of a powerful rival - one of the last moves, perhaps, in the Westies'
never-ending internal warfare.

Last September, in an extraordinary event, Jeffrey Schlanger asked Justice Alvin
Schlesinger of the New York State Supreme Court to overturn the conviction that
Schlanger had been so gleeful about winning; Judge Schlesinger agreed.

FROM THE POINT OF view of law enforcement agencies, everything changed the
moment Mickey Featherstone decided to talk. New York Police detectives had been
gathering evidence against the Westies since 1983, and had arrested 14 members
on drug charges the following year. But Featherstone provided fresh leads, and
helped to tie many investigative threads together. The District Attorney's
Rackets Bureau, whose performance in recent years had been disappointing, had
just been reorganized under a new chief. The Westies became one of the re-formed
bureau's first big cases.

The gang, says Michael Cherkasky, was now ''not just a bunch of thugs killing
each other, but an organized group that was self-perpetuating, that had much
more impact than we thought; and it was a group that we could break up.'' A
Westies task force was organized, bringing together Federal and state
prosecutors, as well as New York Police detectives and agents of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation.

Working with information provided by Featherstone, another gang member, Anton
Lucich, and others, the task force began to gather the physical evidence needed
to make solid charges against members of the gang. Featherstone, for example,
described to prosecutors the 1978 murder of a loan shark customer, Ricky
Tassiello, in Lucich's 10th Avenue apartment. Investigators discovered bullets
embedded in the apartment's walls and found dried blood that had seeped between
the floor boards.

By December, the Manhattan District Attorney had enough information to obtain
indictments against six Westies and their confederates, including the gang's
leader, Jimmy Coonan, who was arrested for the 1975 murder of Paddy Dugan. And
last month, the District Attorney obtained indictments against four other gang
members and associates. Those few Westies, including Kevin Kelly, who are not in
jail, are fugitives from justice. Their contacts on the West Side are said to
have vanished.

With the March 26 Federal indictment, the Westies seem poised on the brink of
extinction - a supremely satisfying success story for law enforcement officials.
But Cherkasky, the head of the Rackets Bureau, for one, is not ready to
congratulate himself. In December, he notes, a group of teen-agers, several of
them blood relatives of Westie members, were arrested for murdering a homeless
man - he was stabbed 19 times - in a Hell's Kitchen park.

Cherkasky worries that the forces that created the Westies have not yet played
themselves out; a new generation may take over from the old. West Side Irish
crime, he says, ''has been going for the last 60 or 70 years. Hopefully, we'll
send a message by putting people in jail for long stretches of time. But we're
not naive about it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Mug shot photos of Mickey Featherstone and Jimmy Coonan, late 1970's
(Courtesy of WNBC/Ricardo Salas); photo of Featherstone in custody (The Daily
News)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MIND/BODY/HEALTH;
IN SHORT

BYLINE: By THOMAS DEPIETRO

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 311 words



THE FUTURE OF IMMORTALITY: And Other Essays for a Nuclear Age. By Robert Jay
Lifton. (Basic, $21.95.) These 20 morally urgent, intellectually rigorous essays
by the psychiatrist Robert Jay Lifton encourage us to hope for the future, even
though nuclear weapons pose an unprecedented threat of total destruction. The
demonstrated capacity of mankind for evil and ''our misguided relationships to
technology'' - both of which Dr. Lifton has explored at length in his books on
Vietnam, Hiroshima and the Holocaust - have never led him to despair, but to
some lessons for our time. The Nazi doctors at Auschwitz taught us that
professional healers may participate in mass murder by creating another self (a
''double'' in the literary sense of the term). Survivors of Hiroshima, having
been immersed in death, experienced an ''emotional desensitization'' that, in
another form, allowed the creators of the bomb to inure themselves
psychologically to the horrors they wrought. Vietnam veterans often transformed
their ''psychic numbing'' into ''animating guilt'' - inarticulate rage became
principled opposition as they bore witness to the human waste in an unwinnable
war. Understanding victims and victimizers helps us understand that ''unlimited
atrocity'' in which we could become both: the self-extermination of the species
in nuclear holocaust. The ''imagery of extinction'' pervades our lives and our
literature, as Dr. Lifton argues in persuasive essays on such seemingly
disparate subjects as religious cults, the strategic defense initiative and
contemporary theater. Having diagnosed our fears of futurelessness, Dr. Lifton
prescribes an end to our dependency on and worship of nuclear weapons. For only
if we heed his measured call to disarmament can we reaffirm human continuity -
the ordinary cycle of life and death that, in the past, gave us faith.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AQUARIUS REVISTED

BYLINE: By LAURA SHAPIRO; Laura Shapiro writes about books, dance and food for
Newsweek

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1089 words



DO YOU BELIEVE IN MAGIC?
The Second Coming of the Sixties Generation. By Annie Gottlieb. 418 pp. New
York: Times Books. $19.95.
PART history, part handbook, part manifesto and part bugle call to action, Annie
Gottlieb's ''Do You Believe in Magic?'' takes a stern but affectionate look at
the 1960's and then tries hard to reconcile that era with the present. In the
course of her research, Ms. Gottlieb traveled throughout the country
interviewing men and women who came of age in the 60's and remember the time
well, from the yurt-dwellers Otter and Morning Glory G'Zell to the best-selling
horror novelist Stephen King.

These voices permeate the text; as Ms. Gottlieb analyzes the past and considers
the future she quotes again and again from her talks with Sy, Mudra, Donna, Marc
and all the rest. Their earnest, rambling recollections (''I finally wound up in
Oregon,'' one of them says, ''at Julian Beck's son's commune, called the Rainbow
Farm. . . . I figured maybe this is where I should just stay. Then I met this
quite daft, crazy couple who thought they had discovered an organic enzyme cure
for heroin addiction. The CIA had gotten wind of that. . . .'') bring back the
flavor of the times, but they make pretty thin reading. More important, they
don't provide the author with enough substance to mount a convincing or even
provocative argument in support of her main hunch, which seems to be that
millions of older, wiser flower children are readying themselves at last to take
over the country.

Ms. Gottlieb, the co-author of ''The Carpathian Caper,'' a novel, and of
''Wishcraft: How to Get What You Really Want,'' divides the ''Sixties
generation'' into two groups - a first wave (born between 1944 and 1949) that
she calls ''visionary'' and ''traumatized,'' and a second wave (born between
1950 and 1957) that she sees as ''low-key.'' The work of Stephen King, Steven
Spielberg and Jonathan Schell represents to her the Zeitgeist of the first wave;
John Sayles and Ann Beattie, she says, characterize the second. Obviously the
millions of kids reaching adolescence in the 60's and 70's experienced what is
now called ''the Sixties'' in different ways, and at different times - for many,
the 60's didn't begin until the decade was almost over, and lasted well into the
70's. But Ms. Gottlieb senses in this generation as a whole a kind of family
feeling that sets it apart from people born just a few years outside the
boundaries. Introducing each person, she adds in parentheses the year of his or
her birth, building by implication a gigantic ''us.'' And, indeed, much of the
book is written in the first-person plural, as if Ms. Gottlieb (1946) felt
herself to be the voice of a mystically united multitude.

Certainly some readers born between 1944 and 1957 will identify with Ms.
Gottlieb's ''us''; others will gag. ''Sixties-generation taste runs to lots of
plants, Eliot Porter and Ansel Adams photographs, good maps of favorite places,
political posters in Polish or Spanish, and folk art,'' she reports. And the
wide-eyed quality of some of her observations really is pure 60's, such as the
revelation that ''we'' like to visit our friends. ''I stay with my friend in
California, she stays with me in New York,'' Ms. Gottlieb marvels. ''Friends who
have summer houses invite friends who don't. Visiting, we merge easily into a
friend's family, wash dishes, cook.'' Like, wow. Despite the ardent simplicity
of her reportage, Ms. Gottlieb's assessment of 60's politics is not uncritical.
In fact, she seems eager to distance herself and her generation from the
passions that most infuriated their elders 20 years ago. She credits the antiwar
movement with ending the Vietnam War, for example, but strongly decries the
''anti-Americanism'' that inspired activists to burn flags and throw their
sympathies to the Vietcong. Indeed, she admits finding ''just enough truth'' in
President Reagan's evil-empire theory to ''confuse and tempt.'' She doesn't
quite blame the victims at Kent State for getting themselves killed, but she
analyzes the confrontation between student demonstrators and the armed National
Guard as a clash between equals. ''We were cultural guerrillas . . . throwing
psychic shock grenades,'' she writes, and argues quite seriously that the
guardsmen were driven over the edge of reason by hearing young women shout
obscenities. At the same time, however, she keeps faith with aspects of 60's
ideology that lacked credibility even in the 60's. ''Did marijuana make us more
intelligent?'' she wonders. PERHAPS her deepest allegiance is to the 60's-style
religious quest, in which she sees the potential for an 80's-style political and
moral activism. After their bouts with gurus, Zen masters and a slew of
charlatans, Ms. Gottlieb's interviewees have settled down to a pleasant
assortment of devotional practices, including tantric ritual, attendance at
synagogue, worship at home altars, ''directed dreaming'' and vegetarianism. Ms.
Gottlieb's favorite is ''Neo-Paganism,'' which she sees in action at a commune
called the Magick Land; and she reverently lists its tenets (ecological
awareness, ''natural psychic powers'' and an attitude of general benevolence) in
the belief that they constitute a credo for ''our generation's 'religion.' ''
And our religion, she emphasizes, is ''the same as our politics.'' None of those
interviewed can readily define the new political order that they, with Ms.
Gottlieb, can glimpse just over the horizon; but socially conscious mutual funds
and the ''resacralizing of life'' seem to be its cornerstones.

This sprawling book makes an unsatisfactory portrait of a generation for many
reasons, chief among them a deadly lack of irony. If ever a history begged for
perspective, it is the history of the 60's, an era defined overwhelmingly by
adolescence. Listening to Ms. Gottlieb and her interviewees reflecting on their
hitchhiking adventures, their drug trips, their spiritual quests and their sex
lives is simply embarrassing, as if they were all reading aloud from their
youthful diaries. Ms. Gottlieb's use of vulgarisms, as well as a wholly
uncritical attitude toward the stupefying stories she has elicited, makes one
suspect she identified so deeply with her material she was never able to gauge
its inanity. By the time I finished ''Do You Believe in Magic?'' there was only
one person in it I could bear: the author's niece. Born to 60's-era parents, the
luckless child was named Paloma; these days, she apparently calls herself Kelly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of anti-war demonstrator and National Guardsman (Magnum
Photos/Roger Malloch)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 899 words


WHERE IS NICARAGUA? By Peter Davis. 349 pages. Simon & Schuster. $18.95.

AMONG the many striking images in Peter Davis's useful and informative new book
''Where Is Nicaragua?'' is one inspired by the conclusion of Henry A. Kissinger
and his Bipartisan Commission on Central America that, in Mr. Davis's
paraphrase, ''if we cannot control a strictly local affair in what we have
properly regarded as our backyard, our word will be seen everywhere to have been
uttered from a toothless mouth.''

In the image, Mr. Davis views America as a house with many small windows at its
back, all looking out on Nicaragua. But each window shows a different country.
In one, Nicaragua looks like Cuba, a satellite of the Soviet Union. In another,
there is Mexico, ''last domino before the Rio Grande.'' In another, there are
refugees coming in an avalanche to overwhelm us. In others, there are ''Vietnam,
Chile, Afghanistan, as an example of class war, Christianity under siege,
economic anarchy, revolutionary export.''

But none of the windows show Nicaragua as itself; ''with more light inside the
house than outside,'' the windows are essentially mirrors. What Mr. Davis sets
out to do in this book is to find the Nicaragua behind the mirrors. So the
question in his title is not intended to insult our geographical intelligence,
but rather to ask, ''Where is Nicaragua in relation to our fantasies of it?''

Mr. Davis - whose previous book was ''Hometown,'' but who is probably better
known for his two film documentaries, ''Hearts and Minds'' and ''The Selling of
the Pentagon'' -traveled in Nicaragua extensively in December 1983, and
revisited the country in April 1986. Preparing to write what Richard Hofstadter,
identifying a new genre of reportage, once described as a mixture of
''narrative,'' ''personal essay,'' ''systematic empirical inquiry'' and
''speculative philosophy,'' Mr. Davis explored not so much systematically as
where his instincts took him.

He watched American newsreel footage of Nicaraguan history. He visited the
country's major cities and provinces. He talked to people of every profession
and class. He interviewed the leaders of the Sandinista Government, as well as
to its political, religious and military opponents. He met with Americans in
Nicaragua, some opposed to the revolution, others sympathetic, a few, like
Ambassador Anthony Quainton - who, according to Mr. Davis was relieved from his
post for telling unwelcome truths to Mr. Kissinger - somewhere in between.

He records that if Joan Didion could write of El Salvador that ''Terror is the
given of the place,'' then in Nicaragua, ''the given is uncertainty.'' But what
he chronicles in ''Where is Nicaragua?'' is mainly contradictions. There are the
brothers Chamorro, Pedro Joaquin and Carlos Fernando, the former the editor of
the oppositionist La Prensa, at least until the Sandinistas shut it down; the
latter editor of the Sandinista paper, Barricada. There is the retired United
States Marine who spent his youth futilely hunting the father of Nicaragua's
revolution, Augusto Cesar Sandino, yet who remains in the country living on a
Sandinista pension.

There are the moments that offer opportunities ''to observe the dirty little
secret of revolution - that revolutionaries on winning power become precisely
what they claim to abhor, an elite class.'' There is Daniel Ortega Saavedra, in
1983 still coodinator of the ruling junta, defining freedom as being ''for the
people here, not for the individual,'' to author a definition of ''unfreedom,''
at least until he comes to understand the Catholic and Spanish roots of Mr.
Ortega's political thinking.

So which side does Mr. Davis finally end up on, the American or the Nicaraguan?
Neither, really. True, he clearly disapproves of certain extreme positions, on
the one hand putting in a bad light Mr. Kissinger's confrontational
recommendations, and on the other hand disapproving of the extent to which the
Sandinistas run a police state. But almost to a fault he keeps his feelings and
opinions to himself, trying instead to give us a camera's-eye view of Nicaragua.

Choosing sides is really irrelevant to Mr. Davis's search for context. What he
does make clear is the tragic degree to which each country's policies toward the
other have become self-fulfilling prophecies. The Sandinistas bristle at the
threat of American military intervention; the more they bristle the more they
seem to invite that intervention, at least in the eyes of the Reagan
Administration.

''What a missed opportunity the Nicaraguan revolution was becoming,'' Mr. Davis
concludes when he finally indulges his feelings. ''A missed chance for the
United States to befriend revolutionaries with anticapitalist roots before they
became dependent on the programs and ideology of the Soviet Union. A missed
chance for the Sandinistas to have a powerful neighbor helping with their
country's transformation from feudalism to an approximation of a contemporary
agri-industrial state. A missed chance for American conservatives to see
economic progress in some model other than what can be produced by savings and
loan associations. A missed chance for what remains of the American left to
debate the relevance of the socialist ideal.''

What hasn't passed is a chance to understand the two countries' tragic
relations. For that Mr. Davis's book is essential reading.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Peter Davis (Susan Meiselas)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Head of Ciba Vision Expects New Gains

BYLINE: By Daniel F. Cuff

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 436 words


Ciba-Geigy Ltd., the large Swiss pharmaceutical company, has been aggressively
building a worldwide vision-care business in the last few years under an
American manager, James D. Macdonald.

Mr. Macdonald, who is 46 years old, has been head of Ciba-Geigy's vision-care
business since 1982, and starting almost from scratch has built the business
into what he estimates is the No. 4 position in the industry behind Bausch &
Lamb, Becton Dickinson and Coopervision.

Ciba-Geigy's unit, called Ciba Vision, has seen its sales more than triple every
year since 1982, and the company gives the credit to Mr. Macdonald. The products
are contact lenses and lens-care items. About half the growth was generated
internally and half by acquisitions.

Last week, Ciba-Geigy elevated Ciba Vision into an operating group and said it
was the first time that it had developed such a group internally - its other
groups having been acquired. A group, Mr. Macdonald said, is smaller than a
division but it has a similar amount of independence and reports directly to the
senior management committee.

Mr. Macdonald, president and chief operating officer of the group, is nothing if
not an aggressive marketer. ''We expect to be No. 3 by the end of this year,''
he said confidently.

Mr. Macdonald has had some earlier business successes. After graduation from the
Harvard Business School, he went to work for Lever Brothers in a small
subsidiary, Glamorene, and helped to run its sales up eightfold in three years,
mainly through introductions of new products.

Then he joined Hydron, a European vision-care company that he helped to turn
around. He was there from 1976 to 1980, returning to the United States in 1981
to join the Cadence Corporation, a small conglomerate, as vice president of
marketing, for a short time before going back to Europe with Ciba-Geigy.

He is adept at languages, speaking German, French and Spanish, and attributes
the skill to the fact that his parents were musicians, his mother a pianist and
his father a singer. He grew up in Chicago and majored in languages at the
University of Illinois before entering the Army.

Mr. Macdonald is currently based near Frankfurt, West Germany, a country in
which he was stationed when he was in the Army. He was also with the Special
Forces in Vietnam, leaving the service as a major and applying for Harvard
Business School while he was in Na Trang.

He has spent 17 out of the last 25 years outside the United States. ''It sort of
worked out that way,'' he said. ''I am fascinated with the challenge of entering
new cultures and being successful in them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 7, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A report in the Business People column yesterday listed one company erroneously
among those that are leaders in vision care. The SmithKline Beckman
Corporation's Allergan unit belongs in the group, but not Becton, Dickinson &
Company.

GRAPHIC: photo of James D. Macdonald of Ciba Vision

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 7, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JURY SELECTION BEGINS FOR 15 ANTI-C.I.A. PROTESTERS

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: NORTHAMPTON, Mass., April 6


Jury selection began today in the trial of 15 protesters who were arrested on
charges of trespassing and disorderly conduct at the University of Massachusetts
in Amherst last November in a demonstration against the Central Intelligence
Agency.

The defendants, including Abbie Hoffman and Amy Carter, the daughter of former
President Carter, say they plan to turn the proceeding into a trial on the
legality of actions by the agency in Central America and elsewhere.

Among the witnesses they plan to call are Daniel Ellsberg, the man who turned
the Pentagon papers over to the press; John Stockwell, a former C.I.A. agent who
has spoken out against the agency; Ramsey Clark, the former Attorney General;
Edgar Chamorro, a former leader of the Nicaraguan rebels, and others who are
expected to testify about C.I.A. support for the rebels and other covert
activities.

Defendants' Strategy

The defense is being led by Leonard I. Weinglass, who nearly 20 years ago
defended Mr. Hoffman and other members of the ''Chicago Seven'' on charges
arising from antiwar demonstrations at the Democratic National Convention in
1968. He said the defense would concentrate on the necessity doctrine,
maintaining that the protesters were violating a law to prevent a greater wrong.

''If we win,'' Miss Carter said in a news conference this morning, it would mean
''the jury has decided the C.I.A. is guilty of larger crimes than what we
committed.''

The ''C.I.A. on Trial Project,'' which organized the defense, maintains that the
agency has violated several acts of Congress to limit aid to the Nicaraguan
rebels, known as contras, and violations of the Geneva Convention and the United
Nations Charter.

Charges All Misdemeanors

At the news conference Mr. Hoffman said the C.I.A. was seeking to drag the
United States into war in Central America through its involvement with the
contras.

Miss Carter, a 19-year-old sophomore at Brown University, and 59 others were
arrested Nov. 24 in a protest against C.I.A. recruiting activities on the
University of Massachusetts campus. The charges, all misdemeanors, carry
penalties of up to six months in jail. Of those arrested, 31 chose to present no
defense and have received fines or suspended fines. Other cases have been
postponed, pending the outcome of this trial.

Although they have pleaded not guilty, the defendants whose trial began today do
not dispute having engaged in a sit-in at the university's Monson Hall or, in
the case of Miss Carter and two others, blocking a road outside the building.

They are also using the occasion to conduct a lecture series in colleges in the
area on activities of the C.I.A., beginning tonight with Ralph McGehee, who says
he served with the agency for 25 years in Thailand and Vietnam, and Mr.
Ellsberg.

Jury Selection Not Finished

The two men are scheduled to be the first witnesses after jury selection and
opening statements are completed. At the end of the day today, the pool of
potential jurors had been exhausted after 25 people had been rejected by one
side or the other. Three men and three women had been found acceptable to the
defendants and had not as yet been rejected by prosecutors.

The jury will have six members and probably two alternates.

Outside the courthouse this morning, a small group of demonstrators hanged Mr.
Hoffman in effigy and carried signs supporting the right of the C.I.A. to
recruit on campus.

''It's not a pro- or anti-C.I.A. issue, it's a freedom of choice issue,'' said
W. Matthew Whiting, a freshman who is vice president of the Republican Club on
campus. Mr. Whiting and some of the other demonstrators wore buttons reading
''Oliver North, American Hero,'' with a photo of the Marine lieutenant colonel
who was dismissed from his job as an aide to the National Security Council last
November because of his role in Iran-contra affair. $15,000 for the Defense Mr.
Hoffman, a 50-year-old author and radical community organizer, said that $15,000
had been raised to aid in the protesters' defense, including $7,000 of his own
money.

The other defendants are seven University of Massachusetts students and one
recent graduate; two students from nearby Hampshire College; one from Brandeis
in Waltham, near Boston, and two Amherst area residents. Four, including Mr.
Hoffman, are defending themselves.

Miss Carter and three other defendants will testify in the trial, Mr. Weinglass
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Abbie Hoffman and Amy Carter (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 7, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY SETS UP HOT LINE TO COUNTER ESPIONAGE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 33, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 744 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 6


The Army is setting up a program with a toll-free telephone number that is
intended to help catch spies, discover possible security risks and train
soldiers to identify both, Army officials said today.

The officials acknowledged that the program had a potential for abuse by
soldiers making false accusations. ''We're mindful of that,'' said William M.
Dwyer, the Army civilian counterintelligence official in charge of the program,
the CALL SPY hot line.

He said legal and procedural safeguards had been devised in an effort to prevent
abuses. Agents trained to recognize genuine signs of espionage take the calls
and prepare reports that are reviewed by two superiors before an investigation
is started, he said.

Mr. Dwyer said reports of inquiries that failed to turn up evidence of illegal
behavior would be destroyed after 90 days. The Army was widely criticized in the
early 1970's for compiling dossiers on civilians protesting the Vietnam War.

'We've Gone Bananas'

The program got off to a premature start in early March when an article
describing it appeared in The Army Times, an unofficial publication. Information
from the article was used by newspapers and radio stations near Army posts.

''We've gone bananas since then,'' Mr. Dwyer said. In less than a month, the
toll-free number that began operating last year on a test basis, has received
more than 2,000 calls. The number, 1-800-CALL SPY (225-5779), is answered 24
hours a day at a counterintelligence office at Fort Meade, Md.

Mr. Dwyer said the idea for the counterespionage number came up in October 1985
in the wake of charges that a Navy warrant officer, John A. Walker Jr., as well
as relatives and a friend, had spied for the Soviet Union.

Each of the military services reviewed its security measures at that time and
senior Army officers reported an increase in attempts by Soviet and East
European intelligence services to recruit American soldiers.

Other cases involving members of the armed forces, including one in which two
Marine guards assigned to the United States Embassy in Moscow are suspected of
spying for the Soviet Union, appear to have heightened that concern.

A Low-Cost Operation

As part of a campaign to make soldiers aware of possible espionage, the
toll-free number was tested at four Army posts from March through November 1986.
Mr. Dwyer said the tests showed the program could be operated with existing
personnel with the only added cost being $2,000 a year for telephone service.

Mr. Dwyer said that as a counterespionage action, the response was ''not
overwhelming,'' because none of the tips led to an investigation. But he said
the number turned up more cases than expected of questionable behavior that
might make a soldier susceptible to an approach by a spy.

Members of the Army who drank too much, boasted about access to secret
information or fell deeply in debt were reported on the number. Allegations were
referred to commanding officers with recommendations that the offender be warned
or counseled.

While the tests were being conducted, Mr. Dwyer said, the Army consulted with
officials in charge of a Defense Department toll-free call-in service set up
seven years ago to help uncover waste and fraud in military spending or
procurement.

Suspicion List Planned

Benjamin J. Simon, the supervisor of that program, provided guidance on how to
process the calls, keep records and handle crank calls or callers who just
wanted to chat, Mr. Dwyer said.

At the end of April, when the new program goes into full operation, the Army
plans to give each soldier, along with his monthly pay statement, a list of
things that could be linked to spying. They include short trips out of the
country, returning secret documents to safes early in the morning or living
beyond one's means.

Mr. Dwyer said anonymous calls would be accepted but that people who identified
themselves tended to be more credible. The identity of informants will be kept
confidential, he said.

Mr. Dwyer said that tips from civilians would be taken only at the insistence of
a caller and then would be turned over to the Federal Bureau of Investigation or
the local law-enforcement agency with jurisdiction. Tips pertaining to another
service would be turned over to that service.

If the Army's investigation turns up evidence of espionage, Mr. Dwyer said, the
F.B.I. would be called in, since it has jurisdiction over such cases in the
United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 7, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NAVY NOMINEE HAS RESERVATIONS ON ROLE OF WOMEN AT ACADEMY

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 33, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 572 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 6


James H. Webb Jr., the Reagan Administration's nominee to replace John F. Lehman
Jr. as Navy Secretary, said today he still had doubts about the presence of
women as midshipmen at the Naval Academy.

But he said he has come to accept women in the school for naval officers. ''I
accept that,'' he said at his confirmation hearing. ''It's history.''

Appearing before the Senate Armed Services Committee, Mr. Webb, himself an
Academy graduate and former Marine officer, said he believed there had been a
decline in the quality of Annapolis-trained Marine Corps officers, which he said
might be due in part to their training and indoctrination alongside women.

Mr. Webb came under questioning by several members of the all-male committee
because of an article he wrote in Washingtonian magazine in 1979. Entitled
''Women Can't Fight,'' the article argued that the Academy was a place to train
men as combat leaders, and that consequently women did not belong there.

Says Question Is Moot

Asked if he would prefer that the academy revert to all-male enrollment, he
said, ''I think it's completely moot.'' Pressed on the question, he added, ''I'm
not really sure any more.''

Committee members inquired sharply into Mr. Webb's views on women but seemed
mollified by his statement that there was no longer any question about the
admission of women to the Academy, and that part of the Academy's mission now is
to train women for noncombat assignments.

Almost every member of the committee, which must vote on his nomination before
the full Senate considers his confirmation, publicly expressed support for Mr.
Webb, a highly decorated officer and acclaimed novelist.

Status of Athletes Discussed

He said that he would consider carefully whether a current officer, Ens.
Napoleon McCallum, and a current academy student, Midshipman David Robinson,
should be allowed to play professional sports.

Ensign McCallum has an active duty assignment that allows him to play for the
Los Angeles Raiders of the National Football League.

Midshipman Robinson, a basketball star, reached an agreement with Mr. Lehman
that would allow him to serve two years' restricted active duty and four years
in the Reserves, rather than the customary five years' active duty. Such an
arrangement would presumably allow Midshipman Robinson to try out with a
National Basketball Association team while on active duty.

Mr. Webb indicated that he probably would not interfere with the status of those
athletes. Regardless of whether he allows them to play sports while they serve
out their time as naval officers, he said, future students should be told that
the academy was no place to prepare for a career in sports.

Defends Use of Honduras

Mr. Webb is currently Assistant Secretary of Defense for Reserve Affairs, a post
in which he has defended the use of Honduras as a training ground for National
Guard and reserve military forces. Some state governors have opposed this
policy.

Mr. Webb, 41 years old, is a 1968 graduate of the Academy. He served in Vietnam
as a Marine company commander, turning his experiences there to use as a
novelist in the best-seller ''Fields of Fire.'' He has written several other
books.

Mr. Webb earned a law degree at Georgetown University in Washington after
leaving the military. He worked for Republican members of the House Veterans'
Affairs Committee before joining the Reagan Administration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of James H. Webb Jr. and Sen. Sam Nunn (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 8, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THAI WOODCRAFT SHOP AIDED BY AN AMERICAN LOAN PROJECT

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 518 words

DATELINE: CHIANG MAI, Thailand


The morning the bank president arrived for an inspection tour of Banyen, one of
northern Thailand's fastest-growing woodcraft studios, dozens of people were
busy carving, sanding, painting and polishing the small company's biggest order
ever: 5,000 pieces of Thai art headed for Bloomingdale's.

Banyen - a family craft enterprise run by a 27-year-old woman, her 22-year-old
sister and their mother, who is 56 - is one of a number of small industries in
Thailand developed with ''private'' American aid.

The visiting banker, Pakorn Thavisin, president of the Thai Danu Bank in
Bangkok, had chosen Banyen as one of several pilot projects he is backing
through a loan-assistance program devised by the United States Agency for
International Development.

The program links American financial institutions with foreign counterparts - in
Banyen's case the Rainier Bank of Seattle and Thai Danu - in a joint guaranteed
loan program for small-scale borrowers.

Americans have long been contributors of nongovernmental development aid to
poorer nations, through religious or charitable organizations or international
agencies.

Unofficial aid may also underline a political view. Several American church
groups assist Vietnam and Cambodia, whose Governments have no diplomatic links
with Washington.

As official United States aid to the developing world has shrunk - and it may
shrink further this year, through Congressional budget cutting - the Reagan
Administration has been trying to expand the role of the American private sector
and nongovernmental institutions in aid projects.

''Collaboration with our private sector in trying to stimulate the Thai private
sector and Thai private voluntary organizations is one of our main emphases
here,'' said John R. Eriksson, director of the United States aid program in
Thailand.

Projects paid for by American businesses, financial institutions, universities,
churches or voluntary agencies now include vocational education for Thailand's
minority Moslem population; technical, managerial and marketing training for
small-scale Thai industries; a consulting program staffed by volunteer American
executives and the loan-guarantee plan.

Mr. Pakorn said his bank had made 36 small loans under the plan, using $1
million from the United States and matching it with $1 million.

Most of his loans are made to borrowers in Thailand's depressed northeast or the
more rapidly developing north. The loan recipients range from agricultural
projects to an expanding guest house.

''They are trying to present an image of Chiang Mai,'' he said of the Aksornsri
family, who are behind the woodcrafting business. ''We don't only look at the
trade; we look at the people.''

The mother, Banyen Aksornsri, for whom the woodcrafting company was named, began
the business 25 years ago, cycling to Chiang Mai from Fang, on the Burmese
border northwest of here, to sell handwoven fabrics and other handicrafts from
the hills.

Boonyaluk Aksornsri, the 27-year-old managing director of the company and a
graduate of Chiang Mai University, runs the company from the original site.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 8, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
Gooden and Society

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 734 words


Not since Muhammad Ali lost his boxing title for refusing the draft during the
Vietnam War has so much hypocrisy and self-righteousness swamped the press and
the airwaves as in the sad case of Dwight Gooden, baseball's boy wonder, who
recently tested positive for cocaine use.

I am too old to be part of a drug generation and have no use for stimulants or
depressants that can be smoked, sniffed, injected or swallowed in capsule. My
indulgence has been alcohol, a far more widely used and equally addictive poison
that knows no limits of age or era.

Therefore I have no inclination to condone Dwight Gooden's foolish offense. But
the tides of condemnation, innuendo, moralism, holy outrage and pious preaching
that have surged from his failed urine test make me want to throw up. In a
society that provides the world's largest and most avid market for drugs and
liquor, let him who is without sin cast the first stone.

There is no evidence, for example, that Dwight Gooden is a cocaine addict, or
even a seriously troubled user. His teammates, including those familiar with
cocaine, noticed no signs of it. The test he failed was presumptive evidence
only that cocaine traces were present. Even if accurate - and these tests can be
misleading - it didn't disclose how much of the drug had been used, or how
often. But the doom-shouters and finger-pointers have not scrupled to wait upon
evidence that Dwight Gooden may have a serious problem.

There is no evidence, either, that cocaine caused his pitching performance to
fall off last year. It may have; but plenty of athletes follow superb seasons,
like Dwight Gooden's 24 victories for the Mets in 1985, with merely good ones,
such as his 17 in 1986. Nor is there proof that some troublesome off-field
incidents involving him were drug-related; they may have been, but, as with his
pitching, accusations ought to be based on facts, not assumptions.

As for the charge that this athlete ''failed'' or ''let down'' his fans, that's
merely true. But whether because he thought he could pass it or because he
wanted to be caught, he volunteered for the test he failed. And the greater
question - how he conducts himself over a career and in his longer life -cannot
be answered by a single drug test. If Dwight Gooden now overcomes whatever
problem he may have, and conducts himself sensibly and honorably in the years
ahead, he will be a better example to his fellow human beings than many of those
in baseball and its press boxes who as eagerly condemn as they once praised him.

Beer is an alcoholic beverage; alcohol is a drug; and baseball is heavily
supported by beer - both the beer sold at the park and often spilled or poured
all over unsuspecting people in the lower stands by rowdies from above, and the
beer hawked like so much popcorn on broadcasts of the games. How many baseball
men who religiously deplore drugs profit from beer sales and beer-sponsored
broadcasts? How many who write about baseball, or who watch it on the field or
the tube, down two martinis before lunch, or dinner, or both?

Babe Ruth and any number of the sport's greatest players - as any competent
history of the game discloses - were hard drinkers and roisterers. They're in
the Hall of Fame, voted there by writers not known to be models of temperance.
At almost any Old Timers' Game, some revered former center fielder or second
baseman will be lionized, despite the fact that he played many a game with a
hangover or booze on his breath. Grover Cleveland Alexander, who sometimes slept
it off in the dugout, was respectfully portrayed in the movies by a future
President.

Dwight Gooden, some say, should be a ''role model'' for youth. Why? Athletes are
only human beings, gifted at throwing or catching or running, or - in football
and boxing -hitting other people. If youngsters admire Dwight Gooden's fastball,
well they might; but off the field, young athletes all too often lack education,
maturity, restraint, responsibility. Only on the sports pages would they be
hailed as ''models,'' or expected to act as such.

Dwight Gooden's huge salary and his failure to be a miracle pitcher for two
years in a row may have had something to do with the anger and hypocrisy that
greeted his failed drug test. If so, his worst crime was to gain too much money
and glory, too soon. For that, in America, you have to keep on giving the fans
what they want.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 8, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING;
Lyndon Who?

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 162 words


''Lyndon Johnson,'' the latest offering in a Public Braodcasting System series
on 20th-century leaders, will air tonight, and, it seems, not a moment too soon.

General Dynamics, which is underwriting the series and distributing related
material to thousands of junior and senior high school students around the
country, has polled the children and discovered some gaps in their knowledge of
recent history.

Asked who was President after John F. Kennedy, 41 percent of the 1,000 16- to
18-year-olds who were polled correctly identified Johnson, who is portrayed in
the program by Laurence Luckinbill. But nearly as many, 36 percent, thought it
was Richard M. Nixon, and 20 percent thought it was Gerald R. Ford.

And although 59 percent of the students surveyed knew that Johnson was the
President most closely associated with the Vietnam War, 28 percent answered the
multiple choice question with the name of Franklin D. Roosevelt, and 10 percent
said Jimmy Carter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 8, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE MAN AND THE IMAGE IN 'LONDON JOHNSON'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 701 words


THERE'S a ''television theory'' about Lyndon Baines Johnson. Instead of being
his own bigger-than-life, irascible self on camera, the theory goes, he kept
giving the public an earnest, soft-spoken statesman. The image adjustment may
have cost him an enormous amount of crucial support. Television viewers might
well have preferred a down-home Lyndon to the decidedly artificial Mr. Johnson.
What might have been possible can be glimpsed in ''Lyndon Johnson,'' starring
Laurence Luckinbill, a 90-minute, one-man show on Channels 13, 21 and 49 at 9
o'clock this evening.

This play, based on the book ''Lyndon'' by Merle Miller, was written by James
Prideaux (''Mrs. Delafield Wants to Marry'') and was done as a stage production
starring Jack Klugman. The credit for executive producer belongs to the late
David Susskind, whose distinguished television credits are liberally sprinkled
with dramas involving his political heroes, from Franklin Delano Roosevelt and
Harry S. Truman to John F. Kennedy. In depicting Mr. Johnson, earthy language
and all, this portrait is unblinking about the fatal error of Vietnam but is
nevertheless sympathetic. It gives us one of the more tragic figures in American
history.

Shortly after announcing in March 1968 that he will not run for re-election,
President Johnson tells his story from the Oval Office. He is supposedly talking
to a group of loyal supporters. ''We're going to have a little straight talkin'
here,'' he promises, helping himself to a glass of bourbon and recalling the
rule for reporters to ''never quote anybody after two drinks.'' Mr. Luckinbill
has taken to special makeup with a vengeance. Using everything from a longer
nose to bigger ears, the actor has concocted a remarkable resemblance to his
subject, giving his Texas-drawl performance all the more conviction and clout.

His Mr. Johnson begins more or less at the beginning, recalling that he was a
poor cotton-picking boy, quite literally. Later, as a teacher, he would find
Spanish-speaking youngsters and, recalling their faces, he observes that ''you
never forget what poverty and hatred can do.'' Yes, Lady Bird, his wife, helped
him financially in his early campaigns (but there is no further mention or
exploration of that often-raised issue). Yes, he was a fervent admirer of F.D.R.
(''the only man I ever knew, anywhere, who was never afraid''). And yes, setting
out to be the most powerful man in Congress, he survived by being keenly aware
of the powerful oil and gas interests in Texas. Civil rights were not a priority
in his early career. Politics is timing, he says, and it was too soon. Adlai E.
Stevenson, he adds sarcastically, was a master of timing -bad timing.

Then, of course, came the Kennedys and Mr. Johnson's election as Vice President.
''I was never so depressed in my life,'' he says. He speaks contemptuously of
Robert F. Kennedy as ''a runt'' but insists that ''Jack bent over backwards to
give me dignity.'' The assassination in Dallas is treated at length, threatening
for a while to push Mr. Johnson out of the spotlight once again, but then there
is the Great Society, with its war on poverty and stunning advances in civil
rights legislation. A landslide election victory in 1964 left him in ''hog
heaven,'' as he puts it. By themselves, these accomplishments should have
guaranteed President Johnson's continuing popularity. But then there was
Vietnam, leaving him determined to ''do what Jack would've done.'' By 1968, he
would, in effect, be hounded out of office by the protesters.

It is a fascinating story, well told by Mr. Luckinbill, under the direction of
Charles Jarrott. As in any dramatization, the use of facts has been highly
selective but, in this instance, not distorting in any major way. The mechanics
are occasionally awkward, using brief flashbacks that are more disruptive than
illuminating. But the essential Johnson personality comes through clearly - big,
brash, loud, sometimes threatening, sometimes cajoling, always playing the
political game shrewdly and with relish. Except, of course, when he had to go on
television and most of the color faded to a drab gray. He probably
underestimated the medium and the audience.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Laurence Luckinbill (Gerard Murrell)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 9, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DANIEL Z. HENKIN, TOP PRESS AIDE FOR PENTAGON IN THE VIETNAM ERA

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 27, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 486 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 8


Daniel Z. Henkin, chief spokesman for the Defense Department in the tumultuous
days of the Vietnam war, died Tuesday of complications after surgery for a
kidney transplant. He was 63 years old.

Mr. Henkin, a strapping man 6 feet 5 inches tall, was a journalist since he was
18 years old and took part in six amphibious landings as a combat correspondent
in World War II. He was later editor of The Journal of the Armed Forces before
joining the Defense Department.

Widely respected by journalists and government officials alike for his candor,
integrity and good humor, Mr. Henkin served as a press spokesman in the
administrations of both Lyndon B. Johnson, a Democrat, and Richard M. Nixon, a
Republican.

Daniel Zwie Henkin was born in Washington on May 10, 1923, was educated in
public schools here and graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
He first worked in the Washington bureau of The Buffalo Evening News, then
joined the Army-Navy Journal, which later became The Journal of the Armed Forces
and is now Armed Forces Journal International.

Made Cover of Life

When the United States entered World War II, Mr. Henkin enlisted in the Coast
Guard and took part in the landings on Saipan, in the Mariana Islands and the
Philippines. His picture, , showing him scribbling notes in an amphibious
assault, was once on the cover of Life magazine.

After the war, Mr. Henkin worked as a reporter for The Oakland Tribune in
California, then returned to Washington in 1948 to rejoin the staff of The
Journal of the Armed Forces as an assistant editor. He later became editor.

In October 1965, Mr. Henkin became the director of operations for the Pentagon's
press office. He was promoted to Deputy Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs
in March 1967, to Acting Assistant Secretary in January 1969, and to Assistant
Secretary in May 1969.

At a time when members of the press and government officials often distrusted
and snarled at one another, Mr. Henkin urged that checks and balances be applied
without rancor. ''Not only our constitutional system but also news
professionalism,'' he said, ''often may require that we be adversaries, but
neither the Constitution nor professionalism demands that we be antagonists.''

Joined Air Transport Association

''We can be adversaries,'' he said, ''without being antagonists.''

When Mr. Henkin left the Pentagon in 1973, he was awarded the Meritorious
Civilian Service Medal. He then joined the Air Transport Association and became
senior vice president for public affairs, a position he held until his death.

Mr. Henkin is survived by his wife, the former Hannah Ronen, of Chevy Chase,
Md.; a son, Doron, of Philadelphia, and two daughters, Leora Feldman of Durham,
N.C., and Tamar, a student at Duke University.

A memorial service will be held at Fort Myer, Va., at 3 P.M. Thursday. Burial
will be in Arlington National Cemetery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING;
Pravda on James Webb

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 197 words


James H. Webb, who won Senate confirmation yesterday to succeed John L. Lehman
Jr. as Secretary of the Navy, got the usual questions about who and what he is
as he went through confirmation hearings. In the for-what-it's-worth department,
Pravda, the Soviet newspaper, thinks it has some of the answers.

After looking over Mr. Webb's record as a much-decorated veteran of the war in
Vietnam, an acclaimed author of a Vietnam novel, ''Fields of Fire,'' and an
amateur boxer at the Naval Acacdemy, Pravda has concluded that he is ''Rocky,''
''Rambo'' and ''American Samurai'' all in one. It sees him as ''a troubadour of
chauvinism, jingoism, aggression and violence'' and rates his book ''a
'literary' continuation of the aggression against Vietnam'' and ''an apology for
violence and barbarianism.''

Actually, these characterizations of the new Navy Secretary, who has been an
Assistant Defense Secretary in charge of reserve affairs, first appeared some
months ago. But they went all but unnoticed in the United States until a
publication at his alma mater over in Annapolis ran a translation, tongue
seemingly a bit in cheek, and that translation began to make the rounds.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
While Zealots Slept

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 744 words


For six years President Reagan and his Administration have carried on an
obsessive campaign for secrecy in government, trying to keep information from
the press and the American public. Meanwhile, real secrets - intelligence
secrets - were pouring out to the Soviet Union in a flood.

That is the wonderful irony in the Russian spy scare that now grips Washington.
The zealots who thought up new ways to keep Administration policies secret,
hounding suspected leakers and threatening the press, sat by in seeming
indifference or incompetence as espionage reached record levels.

The penetration of the U.S. Embassy in Moscow is the latest in a series of
humiliating American security failures. Over the last three years this country
has seen 26 espionage convictions.

Edward Lee Howard worked for the C.I.A., handling critical material about
operations in the Soviet Union. The agency put him in that job despite
indications that he was a heavy drinker and might be using drugs.

Finally Mr. Howard was fired - instead of being eased into a non-sensitive post,
a step less likely to arouse resentment. When he said he had contemplated going
to the Soviet Embassy, the C.I.A. did not pass that alarming fact on to the
F.B.I. for nearly a year. Nor, after he was fired, did the agency recover his
regular passport or a phony one it had given him. The F.B.I. had just one man
watching his home in New Mexico when he slipped away. He surfaced in Moscow on
Aug. 7, 1986.

Mr. Howard is believed to have betrayed the C.I.A.'s ways of reaching its
''assets'' in the U.S.S.R. At least one such source was executed after Mr.
Howard's flight. ''He wiped out Moscow station,'' an intelligence official said.

Some of Washington's current in-dignation at Soviet tactics has to be taken with
a good deal of salt. Bugs in our new embassy building in Moscow? We tried to
plant bugs in the new Soviet Embassy in Washington. And we used to preen
ourselves on overhearing conversations among Kremlin leaders in their cars.

But the Howard case shows there have been genuine blows to our security. Other
examples include spies in the U.S. military and even in the super-secret
National Security Agency, which intercepts communications around the world.

The problems did not start in the Reagan years. Concerns about the present and
future U.S. Embassy buildings in Moscow, for instance, go back a long time. But
urgent warnings to the Reagan Administration produced no effective action.

Mr. Reagan, his Attorneys General and his White House staff were busy, instead,
trying to close down legitimate sources of information to the American public.

The Administration told officials to respond less generously to requests under
the Freedom of Information Act. It tightened classification rules to let
bureaucrats keep more documents secret longer. It has asked the courts to expand
the Espionage Act so it covers leaking. The President tried by executive order,
until Congress made him pull back, to impose lifetime censorship on more than
120,000 officials so they would have to clear books and articles even after
leaving the Government.

Officials also worked zealously to enforce censorship of the one American on
whom the Supreme Court has imposed, for life, a system of prior restraint. He is
Frank Snepp, a former C.I.A. official who angered the agency by publishing a
book on the last days in Vietnam without submitting it for clearance as he had
promised to do. The Court, in addition to enjoining Mr. Snepp for life, turned
his gross earnings from the book over to the Government - about $180,000 so far.

When Frank Snepp makes a speech, he has to submit a text to C.I.A. censors
first. When he wrote a book review for The Los Angeles Times, he had to show it
to the agency before he sent it to the newspaper, and when the editor asked for
a change, he had to show that to the censors, too.

That is how officials defend our security: by censoring the comments of Frank
Snepp, a patriot who wrote his book to deplore U.S. abandonment of our friends
in South Vietnam. And by trying to stop leaks, most of which tell the public
about policy debates on which we should be informed.

To preserve essential security, Justice Potter Stewart wrote, we must avoid
''secrecy for its own sake'' - because when too many things are made secret,
nothing is. It is time to stop trying to keep policy criticism from reaching the
public -time to focus on protecting the real secrets.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

'POLICE ACADEMY 4' FIRST IN BOX-OFFICE SALES

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 34, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 89 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, April 7


''Police Academy 4'' sold $8.5 million in tickets during its first weekend of
release to take top spot at the box office for the week.

''Blind Date,'' starring Bruce Willis, was in No.2 place with $5.7 million in
ticket sales in its second week of release.

The Academy Awards gave a boost to ''Platoon,'' recipient of four Oscars,
including best picture. The Vietnam War drama earned $4.7 million for the week
to gain the No. 3 spot at the box office and increase its gross receipts to $109
million in 16 weeks of distribution.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JAMES WEBB WINS SENATE'S APPROVAL AS NAVY SECRETARY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 268 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 9


The Senate voted today to confirm James H. Webb as Secretary of the Navy,despite
criticism of an article he wrote in 1979 saying that women in the armed service
academies were poisoning the atmosphere there.

Mr. Webb, who won approval on a voice vote, was the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for reserve affairs until President Reagan nominated him to succeed
Secretary John L. Lehman Jr., who resigned to return to private business.

The nominee came under fire this week for the magazine article, in which he
wrote that ''by attempting to sterlize the Naval Academy environment in the name
of equality, this country has sterilized the whole process of combat leadership
training, and our military services are doomed to suffer the consequences.''

On Monday, Mr. Webb told the Senate Armed Services Committee that he accepted
legal changes allowing women into the service schools, including his alma mater
the Naval Academy, but that he believed the institutions were no longer
effective in training men for combat and that women should not serve in combat.

''I believe that the service academies no longer exist purely to train combat
leaders,'' he said. ''That used to be true. The mission changed once the law
changed. I accept that.''

The new Secretary was a highly decorated Marine officer in Vietnam, winning the
Navy Cross and two Bronze Stars. He is also the author of three novels and holds
a law degree from Georgetown University.

Mr. Lehman had been the civilian chief of the Navy since 1981, guiding the
service as it built toward the 600-ship goal set by Mr. Reagan when he took
office.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TRIAL OPENS FOR AMY CARTER AND 14 OVER A PROTEST

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 332 words

DATELINE: NORTHAMPTON, Mass., April 9


Amy Carter and others arrested at rally against the Central Intelligence Agency
committed minor crimes to avoid the greater one of allowing agency recruiting,
an attorney for the daughter of former President Carter told a jury today.

The attorney, Leonard Weinglass, told the Hampshire District Court jury, ''The
students' reaction in that incident was the reaction any right-thinking
American, peace-loving American, would have in the face of the serious harm the
agency has done.''

The 15 defendants were among hundreds of protesters at a Nov. 24 demonstration
at the University of Massachusetts. The protesters had flocked to the Amherst
campus from several states to lend support to 11 students arrested a week
earlier at a similar demonstration. They included Miss Carter, a 19-year-old
Brown University student, and Abbie Hoffman, 50, a prominent opponent of the
Vietnam War.

Mr. Hoffman was among a dozen defendants who faced trespassing charges for
reportedly occupying a university building past closing hours. Miss Carter was
among three defendants who were charged with disorderly conduct for reportedly
blocking a bus taking the arrested protesters.

Opening Arguments

The prosecutor, Diane Fernald, said in opening arguments that the case was a
simple one of whether the defendants were guilty of trespassing and disorderly
conduct.

But Mr. Weinglass described the trial as historic and unprecedented. ''Was this
lawlessness or an act to stop lawlessness?'' he asked.

He promised testimony from experts on the C.I.A. would detail ''heinous acts and
other criminal activities that included murder and killings.''

Witnesses expected to testify for the defendants included former Attorney
General Ramsey Clark and a former Nicaraguan rebel leader, Edgar Chamorro.

The university's vice chancellor, Dennis L. Madson, testified today that as a
result of the demonstrations the faculty senate was reviewing the university
policy that allowed C.I.A. recruiters on campus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 11, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

LEVEL OF WORLD ARMS SALES TO IRAN REGARDED AS LARGELY UNCHANGED

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1141 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 10 WASHINGTON, April 11 (Special to The New York
Times)


Contrary to expectations, the disclosures of Washington's secret arms sales to
Iran do not appear to have increased Teheran's ability to obtain military
equipment from Western and Communist countries, according to American officials.

But at the same time, intelligence analysts say, the State Department's efforts
to dissuade other countries from permitting weapons deliveries have not curbed
the flow of arms significantly.

''I'm really more struck by what hasn't changed,'' said an Administration
official who monitors intelligence reports on the situation. ''There was a lull
after the revelations for about a month, and then things went back to normal.''

Since the American arms sales came to light in November, the State Department
has lodged nine diplomatic complaints with foreign governments about sales to
Iran, most of them in the last few weeks, officials said. The form of the
complaints, known technically as a demarche, was less severe than a formal
protest.

Portugal and South Korea Cited

This week, Portugal was asked to stop shipments of 155-millimeter artillery
ammunition to Iran, and South Korea was urged to halt sales of four-wheel-drive
vehicles.

It was the second appeal to South Korea, according to State Department
officials. Earlier, a cargo of ammunition from South Korea was recalled before
it reached Iran.

The other recent complaints were made to Israel, which was asked to dissuade an
Israeli arms dealer from shipping unspecified weapons from a third country;
Brazil, which was approached over a Brazilian company's arms deal; the
Netherlands, approached over plans to export Fokker aircraft to Iran, and
Austria, approached over artillery ammunition. China received complaints from
Secretary of State George P. Shultz during his visit to Beijing last month and
more recently from Michael H. Armacost, Under Secretary for Political Affairs.

But officials in Washington acknowledged that the effort was being hurt by
several factors, including Iran's increasing use of middlemen to buy small lots
of items that are hard to trace.

Intelligence information, as sketchy as some experts say it is, shows the
weapons trade to be diverse and durable, not very susceptible to shifting
policies in Washington.

The Administration has compiled a list of 41 nations, excluding the United
States, from which Iran has been able to buy military equipment since the
beginning of its war with Iraq in 1980. The list includes practically all the
significant arms manufacturers in the world, most of which have sold relatively
small amounts of ammunition, small arms and spare parts for the mainly
low-technology, infantry-oriented war, officials say.

Smaller Items Hard to Track

Unlike the major weapons systems that have been provided mostly by China and
North Korea, these small-scale items are difficult to track with the customary
intelligence-gathering techniques of satellite photography and interceptions of
telephone and electronic communications.

To spot these smaller items, a former intelligence official said, ''you have to
have people on the ground constantly validating your estimates to see if weapons
have changed in performance; you have to analyze shell fragments, look at
emissions from radar, radio or guidance systems, which can be tracked only for
brief moments if you're in the line of sight.''

He added that Iraq, which has provided some of its intelligence information to
the United States to help identify Iran's weapons suppliers, had not permitted
direct American inspection of shell fragments or other items, recovered from the
battlefield, that could bear serial numbers or other markings. And the
Administration has apparently not pressed for such access.

When the secret American arms deliveries to Iran became known, diplomats and
academic experts speculated that the news would encourage a rush by other
countries to make sales and would undermine Washington's effort to discourage
them. Although a few analysts believe it is too early to tell if a surge of
deliveries will materialize, most see evidence of little change.

''I've tried to be realistic,'' said Edward J. Derwinski, who supervises the
effort to discourage sales as Under Secretary of State for Security Assistance,
Science and Technology. ''When I've called in ambassadors to discuss problems
with them, I preface it by saying, 'Look, regardless of what you've heard and
read, we are serious, we do mean business.' If anything, there's a sort of
sympathy. They say, 'We realize this whole thing is more difficult, but we wish
you well in the effort.' ''

Chinese a Major Supplier

Washington has practically no leverage over Communist countries, however. The
Chinese have become a major supplier of weapons systems, analysts say, both for
the money and for strategic reasons.

Despite plummeting oil revenues, ''Iran will cheerfully pay two or three times
the going price,'' a Government analyst said. And China sees Iran as a counter
to Soviet influence and wants increased Iranian support of the rebels fighting
Soviet troops in Afghanistan.

A private analyst, Anthony H. Cordesman, estimates that China has sold $2.4
billion worth of weapons to Iran since the war began. Together, China and North
Korea are believed to have provided about half the dollar value of Iran's arms
purchases in 1986.

China has reportedly sold Iran its version of the Soviet Styx or Silkworm
missile, which can hit oil tankers in the narrow Strait of Hormuz.

In addition, intelligence analysts say, Iran has begun receiving Chinese-built
surface-to-surface missiles similar to the Soviet Scud, with range for attacks
on Baghdad, the Iraqi capital. The missiles, they say, may be coming from either
North Korea or China.

                                     ----

LIST OF 41 NATIONS WITH IRAN SALES

Following are countries in which weapons deals with Iran were made - or from
which arms were shipped to Iran - between 1980 and 1986, according to the Reagan
Administration. The list does not include the United States. Officials said that
some cases involved a single sale several years ago and that the governments
might have been neither involved in nor aware of the deal. Countries with an
asterisk are believed to have made sales in 1986, the Administration said.

 Argentina
 Austria
 Belgium
 Brazil
 Britain
 Bulgaria*
 Canada
 Chile
 China*
 Czechoslovakia*
 Denmark*
 East Germany
 Ethiopia
 France
 Greece
 Hungary*
 India
 Indonesia
 Israel
 Italy
 Japan*
 Kenya
 Libya
 Netherlands*
 North Korea*
 Norway
 Pakistan
 Poland
 Portugal
 Rumania
 Singapore*
 South Korea*
 Soviet Union
 Spain*
 Sweden
 Switzerland*
 Syria
 Taiwan*
 Turkey
 Vietnam
 West Germany*

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 11, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Escape and Memory

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 947 words



FAST LANES. By Jayne Anne Phillips. 148 pages. E. P. Dutton. $15.95.

''Don't drive in the fast lane unless you're passing,'' says a character in the
title story of this collection.

''Why not?'' the narrator asks. ''I pass everything anyway, so I might as well
stay in the fast lane. I like fast lanes.''

Certainly, many of Jayne Anne Phillips's people share this sentiment. They like
the sensation of moving -they want to leave the small towns of their youth,
jettison the unhappy past, and escape the circumscribed world of their parents.
''They stayed in one place and sank with whatever they had,'' says one
character. ''But us -look at us. Roads. Sensation, floating, maps into more of
the same. It's a blur, a pattern, a view from an airplane.''

Another declares, ''I'm sixteen and Escaped: school, family, house, and got what
I want after all that time of bad-boy guilt trips.'' And a third remembers
wanting ''to physically escape the fields of feed corn fanning out from the
boundaries of the two-lane road, escape the valley and the worn hills.''

''In my memory,'' she goes on, ''the town stays moistly humid, green, stifled
with the summer fragrance of flowering weeds. I was afraid I would watch my
father and Billy speak to each other forever while the dense, mustard-bitter
flowers tangled in roadside ditches. Always, my father would wear his summer hat
and white, short-sleeved shirt, Billy his earnest, young face.''

In most cases, physical escape proves easy enough, but Ms. Phillips's characters
remain haunted by memories of their youth. Each is to become ''the one'' in the
family ''who would remember everything''; and with the slippage of time, each
will come to regard his or her small-town childhood as a kind of touchstone, a
still point in a world of random change. They will remember the empty fields
that predated the ranch houses with backyards, and they will remember the rooms
in their parents' homes that echoed with the voices of aunts and uncles and
cousins, before everyone moved away.

Like Bobbie Ann Mason, Mona Simpson, Marsha Norman and the late Breece D'J
Pancake, Ms. Phillips is concerned with people who grew up in isolated regions
of the country where land and family and small town traditions have only
recently given way to the homogenizing effects of mass-market, fast-food
culture, where old-fashioned mores still cast vestigal shadows of guilt over the
hectic imperatives of the new. Here, within the space of a generation,
rootlessness has become the price of freedom, alienation the cost of
self-fulfillment. The old certainties have drifted out of reach for many of
these people, and they are no longer able to pay lip service to their dreams.

In an earlier collection, the highly acclaimed ''Black Tickets,'' (1979), Ms.
Phillips addressed these themes through two sorts of stories - edgy, almost
hallucinatory portraits of disaffected, drugged-out survivors of the 60's and
more conventional examinations of family life. The latter gave birth, in turn,
to ''Machine Dreams'' (1984), a seamless, magical novel that chronicled four
decades of American life through the story of the Hampsons - a story told from
the perspectives of various family members, beginning in the Depression with the
romance of the parents, Jean and Mitch, and ending during the Vietnam War with
the departure of their children, Billy and Danner.

One of the extraordinary things about ''Machine Dreams'' was Ms. Phillips's
ability to give voice to each of these characters' thoughts and actions and to
express them with such sympathy and understanding of language that the reader
actually heard them talking. This same interest in point of view lies at the
heart of ''Fast Lanes.'' Each of the seven stories in this volume is a
first-person narrative or monologue delivered by one of the central characters,
among others, a high-strung drifter scared by the prospect of a visit home
(''Fast Lanes''), an unmarried soon-to-be mother addressing her unborn child
(''Bluegill''); a woman (actually a version of Danner in ''Machine Dreams'')
recalling a sequence of events in high school that would initiate her brother
and herself into the sad complexities of the grown-up world (''Blue Moon'').

Ms. Phillips's ear is almost unerring in nailing down the cadences and idiomatic
peculiarities of individuals' talk - it would be interesting to see what sort of
play she might create -and as ever, she writes beautifully, capturing elusive
moods with startling images and scenes (a glimpse of teen-age girls in a high
school pageant moving a tinfoil moon between candles in a gym; a boy covering
his sometime lover with a sheet that billows out ''like the rectangular flag of
some pure and empty country.''

The problem with this collection, however, is that half the stories -especially
''How Mickey Made It,'' ''Bluegill'' and ''Something That Happened'' - feel like
little more than virtuosic exercises meant to show off the author's
ventriloquial talents. Yes, we agree, Ms. Phillips is good at impersonating a
middle-aged woman troubled by ulcers, an anxious pregant woman, even a cocky,
would-be rock star; and yet these pieces remain shiny tributes to her skills
-they rarely open out in ways that might move us or shed light on history the
way that, say, ''Machine Dreams'' did.

Perhaps the achievement of that novel has spoiled us. From many young writers,
''Fast Lanes'' would stand as a glittering, if somewhat slight, testament to
their talents; from Ms. Phillips, it seems like a somewhat half-hearted practice
run for something larger and much finer - a sort of space-filler between
projects, intended to remind us of her presence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jayne Anne Phillips (Thomas Victor)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 11, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
Contras: A No-Win Policy

BYLINE: By tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 784 words


From President Reagan on down, those who preach that we must rely on the
so-called contras to stop ''Communist expansion'' in Central America are
deluding themselves - or the rest of us. Either way, they point to the eventual
involvement of U.S. forces in Nicaragua.

All the tried-and-true scare words are being resurrected to smear those who
resist this dangerous policy: ''McGovernite,'' ''dovish,'' ''betray the
Nicaraguan resistance,'' ''U.S. irresolution.'' We are even accused by innuendo
of believing the Sandinistas are only ''agrarian reformers.'' Shades of the
China Lobby! The use of such terms discloses a certain desperation; now that a
Democratic Congress is beginning to stand up to Mr. Reagan, the contra-funders
are worrying that the fountain of U.S. taxpayers' dollars might be turned off.
Why, the ''resistance'' forces might even have to account for the $20 million or
so that disappeared somewhere on the way to ''democracy'' in Nicaragua.

There's also evident here a cavalier disregard for history. The threat of
''Communist expansion'' from Guatemala in 1954 led the Eisenhower
Administration, for instance, to overthrow a Government no one now thinks was
even close to being Communist, or a Soviet puppet. The use of a U.S.-organized,
-paid and -trained proxy army to achieve U.S. goals also got a thorough trial in
Vietnam.

By contra standards, the Army of the Republic of Vietnam was positively
Napoleonic; but it couldn't defeat the Vietcong or the North Vietnamese Army,
not least because the Vietnamese considered the ARVN tainted with French and
U.S. control.

The contras aren't just tainted; they might as well have ''C.I.A.'' tattooed on
their foreheads. The C.I.A. organized this ''resistance,'' trained and supported
it, then - as near as the tangled story has been told - turned the job over to
Colonel North, his fund-raisers and his air and shipping fronts. Not only are
the contras known to Nicaraguans as U.S. tools; some of them once wore the
uniform of the dictator Somoza's hated National Guard.

That's why, for all the U.S. effort and money - accounted for or vanished - the
contras have never taken and held territory, never won a significant victory,
never converted any significant numbers of Nicaraguans to their support, and
never convinced any serious military authority, including those in the Reagan
Pentagon, that they have the slightest chance to win power in Nicaragua.

That's also a major reason that the contras, if catapulted by some miracle into
the Sandinistas' place, would not bring democracy to their unhappy country. They
would bring anti-Communism, which is a different thing (witness Guatemala after
1954) and the kind of cooperation the U.S. could count on from Somoza - both of
which are what the Reagan Administration and the contra-funders really want.
Those anti-Sandinistas who might have sought democracy for Nicaragua more than
power for themselves -Edgar Chamorro, for instance, or Arturo Cruz - have had to
dissociate themselves from the contras.

The laughable argument that the U.S. must back the contras to keep the Russians
and the Cubans from concentrating support on the anti-Government guerrillas in
El Salvador falls of its own lack of weight; those guerrillas seem recently to
be doing quite well, contras or no contras. If the contras pose no real threat -
only a nuisance - in Nicaragua, which is the dominant military assessment of
their role, why should they seriously divert the Cubans or the Russians from
whatever they're doing in El Salvador?

As for the Kissingerian geopolitical malarkey that if the U.S. should ''betray
the Nicaraguan resistance'' (the one it created), it would send the world a
message of ''irresolution,'' would Americans think the Russians were irresolute
if they admitted they could not win in Afghanistan and pulled out?

What's needed is not the contras but a U.S. declaration - preferably embodied in
a pact with Central American nations - that Nicaragua will not be allowed to
provide the Russians a military base or to subvert its neighbors. That could be
verified and enforced by the U.S. and other Latin nations, with support
throughout the hemisphere.

The right-wing charge that the U.S. would not support the enforcement of such a
policy, if violations were proven, is refuted by history. Is Cuba a Soviet base
that threatens the U.S.? Not since 1963. The fact is that, even with more U.S.
dollars, the contras can't win power in Nicaragua. So those who insist that,
unless they do, ''Communist expansion'' posing a threat to the U.S. is
inevitable are really making the case for the ultimate use of U.S. forces to
stop that threat. Maybe that's what some of them want.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words

DATELINE: HELSINKI, Sunday, April 12


Secretary of State George P. Shultz took a swipe at critics of his Moscow trip
Saturday as he embarked on a search for progress on arms control and other
elements of the Soviet-American relationship.

He accused Soviet authorities of creating ''a very hostile environment'' for
American diplomats in Moscow, a topic he pledged to raise forcefully with Soviet
leaders. But despite the spying incidents in the American Embassy in Moscow, he
emphasized the importance of showing that the United States Government could
maintain a steady course.

He asserted that those who wanted him to cancel the talks would be doing do so
even without the embassy affair.

''Those who want to criticize will not be inhibited by a very secure
atmosphere,'' he told reporters during a refueling stop at Shannon, Ireland. ''I
think the idea that we should just throw up our hands and drop out is just
wrong.''

Mr. Shultz's talks with Soviet leaders, scheduled for Monday through Wednesday,
come after an intense struggle in the Reagan Administration over arms
negotiating positions. And they follow an uproar in Washington over charges that
Marine guards allowed Soviet agents into the American Embassy in Moscow.

In response to a nonbinding Senate resolution last week calling for a
postponement or relocation of the talks if privacy and security could not be
guaranteed, Mr. Shultz said he had been assured that secure meeting places and
telephone and cable communications had been established. A cargo plane with a
van for meetings, a car and other equipment arrived in Moscow Friday, an
official said.

In preparation for the trip, officials said, Mr. Shultz lost most of the
arguments to those who hold a harder view in the Defense Department, led by
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger. One official described the confrontation
''the most acrimonious'' ever.

How much latitude Mr. Shultz will have is said to remain a subject of dispute,
with some in the Pentagon demanding that he be given strictly prepared ''talking
points'' and not be permitted to depart from them or to react to Soviet
proposals. Mr. Shultz fought this and is said to have gained some
maneuverability. But how much was not clear.

President Reagan's instructions to Mr. Shultz reportedly back away from two
commitments made during the Iceland summit meeting in October. There, Mr. Reagan
agreed to eliminate all offensive ballistic missiles over a period of 10 years,
meaning to 1996, an idea he is now said to have abandoned.

He also agreed to observe for 10 years the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty,
which bars the deployment of additional weapons that could destroy incoming
ballistic missiles, an accord that would prevent the deployment of any ''Star
Wars'' space-oriented missile defense system.

Now, the President has reportedly sent Mr. Shultz to Moscow with a less generous
offer - an observance of the ABM treaty until 1994, which is the earliest the
''Star Wars'' technology is expected to be ready for deployment anyway.

Although Mr. Shultz plans to discuss a full range of issues in Moscow, officials
expect arms control to overshadow the other matters, including human rights,
Afghanistan, embassy security and the like.

An accord on the elimination of medium-range missiles seems to be the only
agreement within reach, and Mr. Shultz is described as eager to leave at least
that treaty as an accomplishment of his term as Secretary of State.

He also plans to attend a United States Embassy seder with Jewish dissidents. He
had hoped to meet with Andrei D. Sakharov, but the physicist will be in Gorky
during Mr. Shultz's stay.

As in past meetings, Mr. Shultz intends to present three lists of Soviet
citizens wishing to emigrate: those who are married to or wish to marry
Americans, another of those who possess dual citizenship, and a third of those
with relatives in the United States.

Mr. Shultz also plans to raise additional human rights questions, such as the
imprisonment of religious dissidents, an official said.

Mr. Shultz has been careful to praise the releases of political prisoners and
the other steps toward liberalization under Mikhail S. Gorbachev. And Soviet
authorities have been increasingly responsive to expressions of concern on civil
rights issues.

In addition, Soviet officials have reportedly told the leaders of Western Jewish
groups that Jewish emigration from the Soviet Union may rise significantly this
year, although Soviet spokesmen have denied that a specific commitment has been
made.

Human rights, administrative matters and consular affairs were explored with
Soviet officials in a recent two-week session in Washington, but Mr. Shultz said
he intended to raise charges that Soviet agents had entered the American Embassy
in Moscow with the help of Marine guards.

One agreement that could be signed in Moscow, an official said, would renew an
exchange of data from space flights. The program was allowed to lapse after the
Soviet move into Afghanistan in 1979 and the declaration of martial law in
Poland in 1981. The new accord has been waiting for signature since it was
renegotiated last fall.

Afghanistan a Key Issue

Among regional conflicts, officials say, the Afghanistan issue looms largest,
especially in the light of Mr. Gorbachev's statements that the Soviet Union
wants to withdraw its forces under a negotiated settlement.

The problem, in the view of American officials, is that the Russians insists on
a friendly Afghan Government.

''They want to insure a stable government still susceptible to their
manipulation,'' an official said.

On other regional conflicts, Mr. Shultz is scheduled to discuss Soviet support
of Nicaragua and Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia.

Officials say they doubt that the Middle East will be addressed in detail,
because the United States is wary of inviting Soviet participation in Middle
East diplomacy through an international conference, an idea being promoted by
Jordan.

The Israeli Government is divided on such a conference, and the United States
has said that it would support such a device only if it leads to direct
Jordanian-Israeli negotiations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WARSHIP CLEARED FOR DUTY OFF IRAN

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 32, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 10


After a 38,000-mile test voyage, the battleship New Jersey has been declared
ready for the first time to operate without air cover off the shores of
countries of the third world such as Iran, according to Navy officers.

Since the battleship was recommissioned in late 1982, military analysts have
questioned whether the ship, built in World War II, could be defended from air
attack without fighters based on a nearby aircraft carrier.

Now, after six months of drills in the western and northern Pacific last year,
and an evaluation just completed here, the battleship's ability to defend
herself with missiles against moderate air attack has been found to be better
than expected, the officers said.

On the other hand, the officers said procedures for defending the ship with
land-based aircraft from the Air Force, Navy and Marine Corps were deficient. In
particular, a lack of aerial tankers meant that fighters could stay overhead
only a short time and thus could not protect the battleship from heavy attack.

Accompanied by Cruiser

In the test voyage, the battleship not only tested her own antiaircraft missiles
but also relied heavily on a cruiser, the Vincennes, that has been equipped with
the advanced Aegis antiaircraft system of sensors, computers and missiles.

Some tests were conducted with United States warplanes simulating enemy
aircraft, the officers said. In other tests, the battleship simulated defending
herself from attack by Soviet aircraft actually flying nearby.

In addition, the ship fired a Tomahawk cruise missile, a jet-powered winged
bomb, the officers said. The missile enables the ship to hit targets on land
from more than 1,500 miles at sea.

The officers said the evaluation cleared the way for deployment of a battleship
to the Arabian Sea, near the Persian Gulf, where Iran has placed land-based
missiles that threaten the Strait of Hormuz at the entrance to the gulf.

Iran Still Has U.S. Weapons

Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger has ordered the Navy to deploy a
battle group of six to eight warships centered on an aircraft carrier or a
battleship in the Arabian Sea in an effort to fulfill President Reagan's pledge
to keep oil flowing from that region.

The officers said a battleship could protect itself from the Iranian Air Force,
which has periodically flown surveillance missions with relatively slow
American-built P-3 Orion reconnaisance planes over United States warships in the
Arabian Sea.

The Iranians, using older American-built F-4 Phantom jets, have mounted air
strikes against Iraq, with which Iran has been fighting for seven years. Iran
has a few high-powered American-made F-14 Tomcats but officials doubt they have
been effective because of a lack of pilot training and spare parts.

Within the Navy, the officers said, some skeptics have been converted by the
battleship evaluation. Some have even argued that a battleship might be more
effective than an aircraft carrier if the Navy was ordered to attack the Iranian
missiles on the Strait of Hormuz.

Recent Casualties Recalled

The Navy lost three aircraft hit by Soviet-built antiaircraft missiles in
attacks on Syrian forces in Lebanon in 1983. Similarly, the Air Force lost a
plane in the raid on Libya last year.

The officers said a battleship would not be at risk by standing well out of the
50-mile range of the Iranian missiles and firing cruise missiles at the
emplacements. After the raid on Libya, some American military officers suggested
that cruise missiles might be used there in the future to avoid risks to
aircraft. Iran has Soviet-built antiaircraft missiles similar to those in Syrian
forces.

The 16-inch guns that were fired when the New Jersey was patrolling off Lebanon
in 1983 would not be useful against the Iranian missile emplacements, the
officers said. Those guns must be within 23 miles of their target, which would
put the warship within range of the Iranian missiles.

Moreover, the Lebanon bombardments accomplished little more than killing
civilians and sheep, Pentagon officials said, because the Navy lacked on-shore
or aerial observers to direct fire. That would also be true against Iran.

In a much-debated decision, the Reagan Administration brought the New Jersey out
of storage at a cost of $326 million to help build its fleet to 600 ships. The
battleships Iowa and Missouri have also rejoined the fleet, and Wisconsin is
currently being refitted.

The primary criticism, both in and outside the Navy, was that the battleships
would be 58,000-ton targets for enemy aircraft and would be of limited use
unless protected by an aircraft carrier.

The battleship's ability to fight off air attacks had not been tested since
World War II. In the Korean and Vietnam wars and duty by New Jersey off Lebanon,
battleships were used when the United States had air superiority.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'A STAR AIN'T NOTHIN,' IN BROOKLYN

BYLINE: By D. J. R. BRUCKNER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 70, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 498 words


A DYING old woman teaches a young girl the excitement, and painful necessity, of
hope in ''A Star Ain't Nothin' but a Hole in Heaven'' by Judi Ann Mason. And the
girl learns without instruction that the opportunities won for young blacks in
the civil rights movement of the 1960's cost something of inestimable value in
the loss of traditional cultural values.

Miss Mason fills her play with laughter, but her exploration of loss and gain is
as serious as it is in any of the works about the 60's being written by a
growing number of black playwrights.

Pokie Cotton, an orphan, wins a scholarship to a college in Ohio in 1969, but if
she accepts it, the fragile, childless aunt and uncle who raised her will be
left alone on their Louisiana farm. But what really troubles her is leaving her
little rural community, the traditional values of which are defended not only by
her uncle and his neighbors, but even by her boyfriend and her best friend's
young brother.

Miss Mason has created captivating characters and given them wonderful lines to
express familiar emotions. The seven beautifully matched actors under Mikell
Pinkney's direction, in the production at the Billie Holiday Theater in
Brooklyn, speak this colloquial talk-back dialogue like a kind of rich poetry,
and they often get talked back to by the audience.

The play is overloaded with incident and the story line is tangled by
irrelevant, if often amusing, diversions into tired portrayals of personal
rivalries and generational conflicts. And there is a serious flaw in the plot;
when Miss Mason has Pokie's boyfriend drafted for duty in Vietnam, she forfeits
the chance to let Pokie, who has grown up fast in a few days, face the choice
between her first romance and her dreams of a better life.

But the heart of the story, the understanding that grows between Pokie and her
dying Aunt Mamie, is so powerful that nothing could distract one from it. Pokie
is the only one who really believes that the confused, often hilarious,
monologues of her aunt throughout the play conceal a deep wisdom. And in the end
her faith is magnificently rewarded as the old woman reveals how bright is the
hope that has survived the long, narrow and barren experience of her life. You
leave the theater lighted up by it, as if by the glow of the great distant star
she tells Pokie to reach for.

GAIN MEANS LOSS

A STAR AIN'T NOTHIN' BUT A HOLE IN HEAVEN, by Judi Ann Mason; directed Mikell
Pinkney; scenic and costume design by Felix E. Cochren; lighting design by Tim
Phillips; production stage manager, Avan. Presented by Brooklyn's Professional
Resident Black Theater Company, Marjorie Moon, producer. At the Restoration
Center, 1368 Fulton Street, Brooklyn.

Bernard Washington...Michael Jefferson

Pokie Cotton...Alexria Siglinda Davis

Lemuel Beckett...Clarenze Jarmon

Joretta Washington...Cynthia Henderson

Mamie Beckett...Gwendolyn Roberts-Frost

Sonny Gilliam...Rome Neal

Pearl Delanhoussey...Sharon Hope

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM;
'THE ASSAULT': THE LONG TRAIL TO AN OSCAR

BYLINE: By MYRA FORSBERG

SECTION: Section 2; Page 18, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1656 words


IT IS JANUARY 1945 IN THE Dutch city of Haarlem. While most of Europe is sipping
the libations of liberation, Haarlem is shivering under a blanket of gray as its
starving inhabitants patiently wait for the war to end.

In a modest bourgeois house on a quiet street live the Steenwijks. On this
dreary evening, they take out a board game for amusement before curfew, and the
younger son, Anton, is about to throw the dice. But before he has the chance,
fate randomly rolls its own deadly pair. Several shots ring out and a cruel
collaborator who has been bicycling home is killed in front of the house next
door. The seaman and his daughter who live there quickly tramp out into the snow
and move the body - right in front of the Steenwijks' home.

The Nazi retaliation that follows is swift and savage; the Steenwijk dwelling is
torched and the innocent family murdered - only 12-year-old Anton is spared by
the Germans. The questions that follow - who really killed the collaborator?;
why was the body moved in front of the Steenwijks' home? - and the impact of
that surreal night on the adult Anton are what shape ''The Assault,'' the movie
by the Dutch director Fons Rademakers that recently won the Oscar for best
foreign film and is now playing at the D. W. Griffith Theater.

This is not ''Diary of Anne Frank'' territory: the family is not Jewish, nor is
it hiding Jews from the Gestapo. As the dazed mother says tearfully after the
shooting, ''Nothing went wrong all this time, and now near the end. . . .'' More
surprising, the plot does not turn on the venerable theme of the determined
hunter and his despicable prey - the grown-up Anton never considers scouring
Europe for the seaman to demand an explanation or to exact retribution. Rather,
it is the story of a man of inaction; his inner voice does not repeat ''lest we
forget,'' but ''lest we remember.''

And, as Mr. Rademakers sees it, therein lies the power of the intricate
narrative: ''This is a story about how do you cope the rest of your life when
such an event happens in your youth. In the meantime, it shows Anton is not
seeking answers for the assault -on the contrary, he wants to suppress it.

''But it comes back at certain periods of his life - as he runs into witnesses
of the event - and it's important to show the political framework of those
times: it's '52 and there's Korea, or '56 during the Budapest uprising, or the
60's when there is a war in Vietnam or now, when there are anti-nuclear rallies.

''There is always a war on somewhere - that's the normal situation. The
exceptional situation is peace. And that is what the movie is about -how do you
cope with it? What is guilt and innocence; what is design and accident? All
those layers - which are presented in terms of a whodunit - I like very much.''

What Mr. Rademakers also likes very much is the book that the film is based on,
by the distinguished Dutch author Harry Mulisch. Also titled ''The Assault,''
Mr. Mulisch's novel was critically acclaimed in the Netherlands and the United
States. Born in 1927, the writer embodies the war's polarities: The family of
his Jewish mother was killed in concentration camps, while his father was jailed
for collaborating with the Nazis. As the novelist once said, ''It isn't so much
that I went through the Second World War; I am the Second World War.''

Mr. Rademakers, who was born in 1920 and has his own wartime memories, sought
the film rights for the novel as soon as he read it: ''When I told Harry I was
interested in doing it, he liked the idea. But he said from the beginning, 'This
is my novel, it's going to be your picture. I don't want to be involved.' ''

So the director drew on the book's characters and his own recollections: A
soldier in the Dutch army when the Nazis invaded the Netherlands, Mr. Rademakers
was placed in a prisoner-of-war camp. An actor by profession, he was eventually
released and started performing on the Amsterdam stage.

''But in 1943,'' he recalls, ''I was arrested by two SS people, a Gestapo man
and an Amsterdam policeman, for helping some Jewish friends. I had a lead in a
play, and the theater had to cancel the performance because I was in jail. The
Burgemeester had me released because he didn't like the idea that the theater
was closed. Unbelievable, huh?''

However, the Burgemeester's influence apparently didn't last long: ''A few days
later, the bell rang in the middle of the night again. It was the Amsterdam
policeman, telling me to run away because they were coming to fetch me again. So
I escaped to Switzerland.''

While the rest of Mr. Rademakers's family led a relatively calm existence during
the occupation, the director has Dutch friends with searing emotional wounds
similar to Anton's: ''I have a Jewish friend who during the war had gone to the
store and when he returned he saw that his father, mother and brother were being
taken by the Germans. His first reaction was to run at them and shout, 'No,
stop.' But he realized that would not help, and he hid in another house.

''He never saw them again. Can you imagine the depression that he has faced?''

It is shared nightmares such as these that have made Mr. Rademakers, whose long
career in the Dutch cinema began in the late 1950's, avoid delving extensively
into World War II in his films. ''The only other movie I've made with the war as
a backdrop was 'The Spitting Image,' '' he says. ''And even when I first read
Harry's novel, I thought, 'No, no, no. I don't want to film a war situation,
because it's too sad.' Because if you dress someone up as a German soldier, you
always get the fear that this could happen again.''

But the larger psychological and political threads of the novel pulled the
director into the project: ''Here you have a man who wants to forget his past,
otherwise he can't live anymore. He becomes an anesthesiologist, someone who
gives patients drugs so they can't feel. And that's what he wants. But by
accident, people get in his way. He meets the old woman who lived on the same
street in Haarlem, and talks about the assault. The night of the Budapest
upheaval he meets the son of the collaborator and they have a discussion about
guilt and innocence. The collaborator's son says his father didn't know about
the Jews - as if that could be possible - and that his father didn't join the
Nazi party until the famous Fifth of September, when all the other Nazis
temporarily ran off because they thought Montgomery would liberate Holland. He
says his father wanted to take a stand against the Communists. Putting this sort
of political debate on the screen for a country that lived through the Nazi
occupation is something.''

''The Assault'' marked the second time Mr. Rademakers was nominated for an
Academy Award. His first film, ''Village on the River'' -about an eccentric
doctor at the turn of the century - was up for the 1959 best foreign film Oscar,
but did not win.

Mr. Rademakers, who assisted Vittorio De Sica and Jean Renoir on films before
embarking on his own, says he had always sought a directing career, but felt
that he had to learn the acting craft: ''How could I tell actors what to do if I
hadn't learned it first myself?''

This goal led him to stage acting in Amsterdam and Switzerland and later to
stage directing and apprenticeships with film makers. However, when he started
on ''Village on the River,'' some of his financial backers weren't so sure he
could complete a movie on his own.

''Before I began shooting,'' he recalls, ''one of the financiers said, 'This is
all very nice that you are a famous stage director, but making a picture is
quite different. Don't you think it would be wise to find a supervisor?' ''

An admirer of Ingmar Bergman, Mr. Rademakers decided to ask the Swedish director
for help: ''Bergman read the script and liked it. And he said, 'I'll tell you
what we're going to do - I'll give you a letter that says it's a pleasure for me
to supervise. Then you tell me the date you will begin shooting and I'll send a
cable that I'm ill and cannot come. Nobody will say now we will stop the
picture.' And that's exactly what happened.''

Since that debut effort, Mr. Rademakers has in succeeding decades made such
films as ''The Knife,'' ''Mira,'' ''My Friend'' and ''Max Havelaar.'' The next
film he is planning is ''An Instant in the Wind,'' a historical drama about an
affair between a white woman and a black man in South Africa. ''It is a story
about racism, set in 1750,'' he says. ''And it will be shot in English.''
Looking back on his nearly 30 years in films, he laughingly dubs himself ''the
grandfather of Dutch cinema'': ''When I began, there were not many Dutch film
directors. Now we have the younger generations finding commercial success -
people like Paul Verhoeven, who directed 'Soldier of Orange,' and Dick Maas, who
made 'The Lift.' For many years my films were critical successes but not
commercial hits in my country. 'Mira,' in 1971, showed that a Dutch movie could
draw crowds in Holland.''

At the Academy Awards ceremony, Mr. Rademakers was an ebullient presence who
implored American audiences to be more tolerant of foreign films with subtitles.
''The kind of films that I prefer to make would be difficult for me to do in
English or any other foreign language,'' he says. '' 'An Instant in the Wind' is
an exception because it is a period drama. But doing a picture set in modern
times in the United States and not having your mother tongue is not easy. I mean
how should I direct a good American actor to play an American?''

It was his desire to distill the Dutch experience on the screen that nourished
his career. ''I was once a stage director, but being a Dutchman and not having a
great dramatic literature, I had to do a French play or an English play or a
German play. I said, 'My God, I want to do something from my own world.' And
that's why I went into films - I can do that in the cinema.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mark Van Uchelen as a 12-year-old Dutch boy

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE MORALITY OF 'PLATOON'

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 356 words


To the Editor:

In response to David Halberstam's paean to ''Platoon'' [''Two Who Were There
View 'Platoon,' '' March 8], let me speak the unspeakable: I hated the movie.
Contrary to Bernard E. Trainor's lump-in-throat reaction to the movie's
dedication (''to those who fought and died in Vietnam''), I believe the dead
would be horrified to witness the amoral manner in which they were portrayed.

What I saw in ''Platoon'' were soldiers whose chief concerns were to shirk duty,
blame the next fellow for one's own dereliction, get high, assassinate and rape
the innocent, disobey orders and murder either one's fellow soldier or one's
superior. What I found so suffocating, depressing and ultimately disgusting was
not so much the stifling jungle air and the isolation of this platoon, but the
moral vacuum in which its members lived and breathed.

Mr. Halberstam argues for the brilliance of ''Platoon'' by casting it as the
voice of reality, seen against the flag-waving, jingoist ''Rambo,'' whose voice
is that of the avenging and the righteous. Is there not a third voice to be
heard, however faint, yet every bit as realistic as Oliver Stone's or Sylvester
Stallone's? What about all the dead heroes? What about those who leapt on
grenades to save their buddies? Did no helicopter pilots risk their lives to
evacuate the wounded? Did no surgeon or nurse face death by mortar attack while
operating in the field? What of the carrier fighter pilots who executed
treacherous night landings?

Mr. Stone's vision of war is indeed closer to the historical reality of Vietnam
than is Mr. Stallone's. ''Platoon'' shows a brave and competent enemy, the
limitations of American superiority in arms and the resignation of soldiers who
have abandoned hopes of glory. These are all points aptly illustrated by Mr.
Halberstam.

More difficult to accept, however, is Mr. Stone's portrayal of the American
soldier as a venal, amoral, sadistic murderer whose first and last thought is of
himself. If ''reality'' is that bleak, then those who really fought and died in
Vietnam are better off.

RICHARD A. SORGEN
  Scottsdale, Ariz.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ART;
PHOTOJOURNALISM LAYS CLAIM TO THE REALM OF ESTHETICS

BYLINE: By ANDY GRUNDBERG

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2435 words


FIFTEEN YEARS AFTER THE DE-mise of Life as a weekly magazine, photojournalism is
reclaiming its former glamorous, legendary status. Pictures that were taken on
assignments for magazines and newspapers now regularly reappear - in frames - on
the walls of museums and galleries. The photojournalists of yesteryear are being
enshrined in biographies and celebrated with retrospective exhibitions. Today's
photojournalists are big draws on the photography lecture-and-symposium circuit.
Meanwhile, college-level programs designed to produce the photojournalists of
tomorrow are growing at a rapid rate.

The signs of photojournalism's new cachet extend to the bookstores, where the
patriotic anthology ''A Day in the Life of America'' has been on the best-seller
list since before Christmas, and to the movies, where photojournalists have
become the newest breed of Hollywood protagonist. In Oliver Stone's 1986 film
''Salvador,'' James Woods plays the role with considerable panache and a sliver
of accuracy; he is a dissolute, macho, reckless and conniving Quixote. But when
he sees government brutality against the peasantry, he is filled with moral
indignation. Woods's photojournalist is the modern-day, male equivalent of the
hooker with the heart of gold.

The resurgence of interest in photojournalism as a genre, and in
photojournalists as moral actors on the stage of world events, coincides with
the development of a new breed of photojournalism itself - what is being called
the New Photojournalism. This notion of newness has been the subject, explicitly
or implicitly, of a number of recent exhibitions and accompanying symposia. Two
current examples are ''Contact: Photojournalism Since Vietnam,'' at the
ICP/Midtown gallery (77 West 45th Street, through Saturday) and ''On the Line:
The New Color Photojournalism,'' organized by the Walker Art Center in
Minneapolis and now at the Spencer Museum of Art in Lawrence, Kan.

To some minds, what is new about the New Photojournalism is a matter of its
style or, in the case of the show ''On the Line,'' its choice of film. Be that
as it may, a fresh and experimental spirit now prevails in the genre, fueled by
a generation of photographers in their 30's and early 40's who are dissatisfied
with the conventions they inherited from such patron-saint figures as Robert
Capa and W. Eugene Smith. They want their pictures to convey more complex and
sophisticated meanings, of both a social and personal sort, and to this end they
want to control the contexts in which their images are presented. They also want
to receive recognition as creative photographers.

Curiously, however, the New Photojournalism has arisen without any new vehicles
for its propagation. If anything, the number of magazines and newspapers willing
to run committed, hard-hitting photo essays in the tradition of Smith and Capa
has declined here. This change in the marketplace, due in large part to the
impact of television, has had an effect on both the form and presentation of
photographic reportage. One of the most obvious and ironic characteristics of
the New Photojournalism is that it is to be found in books and exhibitions as
frequently as it is reproduced as news.

Perhaps the most significant token of this shift from journalistic to esthetic
presentation was the establishment, last year, of the Life Gallery of
Photography in the Time-Life building. That the long-pre-eminent magazine
devoted to photo essays should market photographs as works of art worth buying
and collecting on their own merits surely says something important about its
current relationship to photojournalism, and about photojournalism's
relationship to photography as a whole. So does the gallery's current
exhibition, which is devoted to the work of John Loengard, a former Life staffer
who has been the magazine's picture editor since its reincarnation in 1978.

One could date the emergence of the New Photojournalism to the publication of
''Nicaragua,'' Susan Meiselas's 1981 book of photographs chronicling the
Sandinista revolution. Not only did Meiselas's pictures lack captions underneath
them to guide the viewer's responses (explanations were provided only at the end
of the book), they were in color. They were not the first war pictures in color,
nor even the first in which the color actively served to heighten our emotional
responses to war - that honor belongs to the Vietnam pictures of Larry Burrows
and John Olson, which were published in Life. But they used the vivid, saturated
qualities of the Kodak rainbow in a way that struck some observers as artistic,
if not decorative. Even their compositions seemed esthetically premeditated.

As a consequence, Meiselas's book had an unsettling effect. The pictures looked
like art - and especially like the color art photographs of William Eggleston,
whose work the Museum of Modern Art had exhibited five years earlier. But they
were of distinctly non-art subjects; indeed, they were highly charged
politically, having been taken from the point of view of a rebel cause that our
Government has consistently opposed. Because of this combination, the pictures
seemed to float away from the established moorings of photojournalism. Instead
of condensing an event in a way that explained it, ''Nicaragua'' made the
Sandinista revolution seem complicated and ineffable.

''Nicaragua'' has since been joined by Gilles Peress's ''Telex: Iran'' (1984), a
book that describes the Iranian revolution of Ayatollah Khomeini essentially in
terms of the photographer's own confusion over the events he was recording, and
Alex Webb's ''Hot Light/ Half-Made Worlds'' (1986), consisting of
super-saturated color photographs taken in tropical locales. Both books are
problematic - Peress's because its invocation of confusion comes close to
incomprehensibility, Webb's because it uses the third world almost as a prop in
a formalist exercise - but both are representative of the new attitude in
photojournalism. Significantly, Peress's Iran pictures were first published in
Afterimage, a small monthly published in Rochester, not in any mass-market
venue.

Meiselas, Peress and Webb, coincidentally, are all members of Magnum, the
pre-eminent agency for photojournalism since World War II. It is due to
celebrate its 40th aniversary a year and a half from now with - what else - a
traveling museum exhibition, which is being organized by the Minneapolis
Institute of Arts.

Like these three photographers, today's most stimulating photojournalists seem
more interested in the complexity of issues and events, and in conveying the
flavor of their experience of them, than in producing easily digested,
simple-to-understand images. Disaffected with most magazines (even though they
continue to sell their work to them), they gravitate toward the book form, which
allows them greater control and more space in which to get their messages
across. Mary Ellen Mark, Eugene Richards and Miguel Rio Branco are among the
photojournalists whose images achieve their ultimate expression in books.
Richards's 1986 ''Exploding Into Life,'' an illustrated journal of a cancer
patient, is an example of the New Photojournalism's penchant for personal points
of view; his co-author, Dorothea Lynch, was both the subject of the book and
Richards's girlfriend.

But the current generation of photojournalists is not the first to seek to
expand their genre with personal points of view, or to adopt the formal syntax
of art photography in their work. Bruce Davidson, Charles Harbutt and Abigail
Heyman, for example, independently developed a hybrid form of photojournalism in
the early 1970's, choosing to display their work in books and galleries.
Davidson's ''East 100th Street,'' Harbutt's ''Travelog'' and Heyman's ''Growing
Up Female'' tested the line between reportage and personal expression, and they
were influential among today's younger photojournalists.

Within the last year all three photographers have produced long-awaited
follow-ups. Harbutt's ''Progresso,'' depicting a town in Mexico's Yucatan, is as
psychologically allusive as ''Travelog''; Davidson's ''Subway'' examines another
metaphor of urban life, and Heyman's ''Dreams and Schemes,'' subtitled ''Love
and Marriage in Modern Times,'' again uses a first-person narrative to help
pierce another social fantasy. What separates these photographers from their
younger colleagues is less a matter of style than of content: they still seem to
believe that a well-organized photograph automatically communicates a certain
meaning about its subject. Meiselas, Peress and Webb seem more acutely and
self-consciously aware of the abyss between photographic appearances and the
events they portray.

Not surprisingly, much of the New Photojournalism is of little use to the
magazines that depend on photography to explain the world to their readers. In
the realm of news, clarity, brevity and objectivity are held to be the guiding
virtues, and images that express overtly personal points of view are unwelcome.
At least that is the way it has always been. But just as the New Journalism of
the late 60's injected first-person narratives into the bloodstream of American
journalism - as in the ''gonzo journalism'' of Hunter Thompson in Rolling Stone
- the New Photojournalism may succeed in infiltrating magazines and newspapers.
In both cases, the aim is a higher truth than conventional objectivity is
thought to provide.

The ICP/Midtown exhibition, while essentially an uncritical celebration of the
10th anniversary of Contact, a commercial picture agency, serves as a ready
gauge of how far the New Photojournalism has extended its influence into the
world of reportage. By the evidence, the influence is substantial, at least in
terms of style. For one thing, the pictures are in color. Indeed, thanks to the
Cibachrome materials on which the pictures were printed, color is the show's
main attraction, and it helps make the mostly newsworthy events depicted
unnaturally vivid. In many cases it is used with a skill and sophistication more
in keeping with National Geographic-style travel pictures than breaking news
stories. On occasion, the prints even resemble art photography. Of the
photographers represented in the show, David Burnett stands out as the most
refined colorist, and his compositions often are as vibrant as his colors.

The pictures on view also are exceedingly, and sometimes excruciatingly,
explicit. We are shown the disfigured skin of men with AIDS, the exhumation of
four nuns slain in El Salvador, stages in the slow death of a Colombian girl
trapped by debris. Such graphic frankness would be unusual in many publications,
which tend to spare their readers from some of the world's worst horrors. But on
the gallery walls, photographers can set their own standards of propriety and
taste.

Additionally, the pictures suggest a renewal of ''concerned'' photojournalism's
traditional advocacy role, and a willingness to risk sentimentality in the name
of humanist, liberal values. Like James Woods in ''Salvador,'' photographers
such as Burnett apparently manage to dispel any symptoms of worldly cynicism - a
disease often thought to be an occupational hazard - when confronted by
suffering and injustice. Judging from the evidence of this show, if
photojournalism since Vietnam has a subject, it is precisely suffering and
injustice.

Yet for all their other merits, the pictures by Contact's photographers are only
superficially new. Unlike the best New Photojournalism, they reflect no
individual points of view, no sense of complexity about world events, no
self-consciousness about the role of the photographer in shaping those events
for public consumption. They are colorful, explicit and humanist in spirit, but
they lack any critical sense of themselves. Not surprisingly, these are the
kinds of pictures that are widely published in the traditional venues of
photojournalism, because they still adhere to photojournalism's traditional
subjects and functions. Their style is merely new icing on old cake.

What is new about photojournalism since Vietnam is not to be found in the
pictures in the exhibition but, paradoxically, in the very fact of the
exhibition itself. By virtue of its name, photojournalism has long defined
itself according to what appears in organs of the press. What can we make, then,
of pictures calling themselves photojournalism that appear in an exhibition
setting? Or, more to the point, why is it that, in the 1980's, photojournalism
is increasingly seen in contexts other than magazines and newspapers?

It would be easy to blame the magazines and newspapers themselves, to criticize
them for relying on images of a sensational sort, for preferring pictures that
are big, graphic and easy to understand -''stoppers'' in the jargon of the 50's
picture magazines. Even in the hands of practitioners like Capa and Smith, who
were partisans of social change and to an extent rebels against the publishing
system, photojournalism boiled down to the need to produce clear and immediate
images that the average reader could readily grasp. Limitations such as these
are precisely what today's highly educated photojournalists aim to challenge, so
it is not surprising that they have to go outside the system.

Yet it may turn out that photojournalism's turn to less ephemeral and more
esthetic ways of being seen has little to do with the desires of magazines and
newspapers and everything to do with their archrival, television. More and more,
the news remains news only until the next network news update; television
cameras exhaust the image potentials of a subject long before photographers get
their film back to their offices. As video cameras designed to take still
pictures reach the marketplace, news photography will have to be redefined.

The specter of television's usurpation of photojournalism's conventional
functions may account for the brutal explicitness of the pictures seen at
ICP/Midtown. As the critic Max Kozloff wrote in the catalogue to yet another
show about contemporary photojournalism, called ''Photojournalism in the 80's'':
''Still photographs cannot compete with network television in massiveness of
audience, but they can be more concentrated and dramatic in their revelations.''
But the competition, such as it is, may already be over. The current interest in
photojournalism could be a sign not of vitality but of its new status as an
artifact. Taken off the page and folded into the museum, the New Photojournalism
becomes simply another genre in the realm of art, dysfunctional but beautiful.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of David Burnett's portrait of a drought victim (CPI)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOME VIDEO: DOCUMENTARY

BYLINE: By Jack Schwartz

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 232 words



The War at Home
Produced and Directed by Glenn Silber and Barry Alexander Brown. Catalyst Media
Inc. 1979. MPI Home Video. 119 minutes. $29.95.

Vietnam: The Secret Agent
Produced by Daniel Keller and Jackie Ochs. Directed by Jackie Ochs. The Human
Arts Association. MPI Home Video. 57 minutes. $29.95

Both these theatrically released post-Vietnam War documentaries are activist
films. The first celebrates the domestic opposition to the war and the second
depicts what it asserts were the effects defoliation had on G.I.'s who fought
the war.

''The War at Home'' documents the dissident movement as it eddied around the
campus of the University of Wisconsin at Madison. Time has not been kind to the
antiwar activists. The film shows dissenters and Government equally smug and
contemptuous of one another and the democratic process.

If democracy and tolerance were among the losers of the war at home, there were
others as well. What comes across poignantly in ''The Secret Agent'' is the
sense of abandonment felt by the ailing men who fought the war and believe that
their lives have been ruined by exposure to the defoliant dropped to deprive the
enemy of cover in Vietnam. Whatever the outcome of their struggle - the
veterans' case is still mired in the courts -the G.I.'s seem more sympathetic
than the activists, and ''The Secret Agent'' is the more compelling film.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 12, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 817 words


$
     Weeks
This    ON
Week  List Fiction

1        6
            THE BOURNE SUPREMACY, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $4.95.) A
           plot to seize Hong Kong and bring China into conflict with
           the West.
2        6
            JOANNA'S HUSBAND AND DAVID'S WIFE, by Elizabeth Forsythe
           Hailey. (Dell, $4.50.) Two sides of a marriage revealed in
           diary entries.
3 *     11
            I'LL TAKE MANHATTAN, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $4.95.) A
           rich, beautiful young woman conquers the world of magazine
           publishing.
4        3
            BREAK IN, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $4.95.) Mystery,
           melodrama and bitter family rivalry in the world of British
           steeplechase racing.
5        6
            PRIVATE AFFAIRS, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $4.95.) A
           couple's marriage is seriously strained when they strike it
           rich in journalism.
6        1
            THE GREAT ALONE, by Janet Dailey. (Pocket, $4.95.) Women's
           role in seven generations of Alaskan history.
7        2
            STONE 588, by Gerald A. Browne. (Berkley, $4.50.) The
           pursuit of a stolen crystal with curative powers.
8        1
            DEEP DOMAIN, by Howard Weinstein. (Pocket, $3.50.) The 33d
           ''Star Trek'' adventure.
9       12
            THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood. (Fawcett, $4.95.)
           In the Republic of Gilead, men and women perform the
           services assigned them.
10 *    56
            THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.)
           A submarine driver brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the
           United States. 11 2 MAGIC KINGDOM FOR SALE - SOLD! by Terry
           Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $4.50.) A man copes with
           problems after buying a fantasy land.
12       1
            WEST FROM SINGAPORE, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $2.95.)
           Short stories set in the Pacific at the outbreak of World
           War II.
13      19
            LIE DOWN WITH LIONS, by Ken Follett. (Signet/ NAL, $4.95.)
           An Englishwoman in Afghanistan, caught between the C.I.A.
           and the K.G.B.
14       1
            FACES, by Johanna Kingsley. (Bantam, $4.50.) A Russian
           emigre torn between romantic passion and a desire to be a
           plastic surgeon.
15       5
            WORD OF HONOR, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $4.50.) A
           former officer is falsely held responsible for an atrocity
           committed by his men in Vietnam.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Nonfiction:General

1        4
            THE TOWER COMMISSION REPORT. (Times Books/Bantam, $5.50.)
           The full text of the President's Special Review Board.
2        7
            NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst. (Fawcett, $4.95.) Life
           is a series of losses, the author says, and we must
           confront them to grow.
3      181
            THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $9.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a
           psychiatrist.
4       14
            THE MAN WHO MISTOOK HIS WIFE FOR A HAT, by Oliver Sacks.
           (Perennial/Harper & Row, $7.95.) Strange neurological
           disabilities.
5        2
            ROCK HUDSON: His Story, by Rock Hudson and Sara Davidson.
           (Avon, $4.50.) An account of the actor's life written with
           his cooperation.
6       23
            WEST WITH THE NIGHT, by Beryl Markham. (North Point,
           $12.50.) A woman's experiences flying in Africa and across
           the Atlantic in the 30's.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction: Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

14y
45
            WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin Norwood. (Pocket,
           $4.95.) How to avoid or end addictive, unhealthy
           relationships with men.
2       11
            FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn Diamond.
           (Warner, $4.95.) A diet for weight loss and physical
           fitness.
3       45
            ADULT CHILDREN OF ALCOHOLICS, by Janet Geringer Woititz.
           (Health Communications, $6.95.) Advice about a family
           problem.
4        5
            GARFIELD: FOOD FOR THOUGHT, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine,
           $5.95.) Comic strips.
5        4
            WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE? by Richard Nelson Bolles.
           (Ten Speed, $8.95.) Job and career advice; 1987 edition.
6       22
            RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico.
           (Rand McNally, $5.95.) For 1987.
7       27
            DIANETICS, by L. Ron Hubbard. (Bridge Publications,
           $4.95.) Latest edition of a handbook by the founder of
           Scientology.
8       10
            THE ARTHUR YOUNG TAX GUIDE 1987. (Ballantine, $10.95.) Aid
           from an accounting firm.
9       10
            J. K. LASSER'S YOUR INCOME TAX. (Prentice Hall, $8.95.)
           The 1987 edition.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BESTSELERS: APRIL 12, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1384 words


$
          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

1       1     4
                 FINE THINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $18.95.)
                The vicissitudes of a son of the 60's on his way to the
                80's.
2       2    10
                 WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow,
                $18.95.) The nightmarish experiences that befall a
                woman and her family after her appointment as
                Ambassador to Rumania.
3       4     5
                 BOLT, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $17.95.) The
                jockey-hero of ''Break In'' has to contend with a
                romantic crisis, a family feud and an international
                arms-selling intrigue.
4       5     3
                 DESTINY, by Sally Beauman. (Bantam, $19.95.) The
                30-year romance of a couple with diverse backgrounds
                and ambitions.
5       3    11
                 THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King. (Viking,
                $18.95.) A fairy tale, complete with an aged king, two
                princes, an evil wizard and a mouse.
6       6    37
                 RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.) The
                West tries to stave off the Russians in World War III.
7       7    28
                 THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton Mifflin,
                $19.95.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina
                and New York City.
8             1
                 THE LADIES OF MISSALONGHI, by Colleen McCullough.
                (Harper & Row, $12.95.) Men may dominate but women rule
                in an Australian town at the turn of the century.
9       9    24
                 FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts. (Naval
                Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over Vietnam.
10     11    31
                 IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood
                horrors haunt six men and a woman who grew up in a
                small Maine town.
11            1
                 THE THANATOS SYNDROME, by Walker Percy. (Farrar,
                Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) The continuing battle between
                good and evil seen through a psychiatrist's adventures
                in 1996.
12     10     8
                 OUTBREAK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $17.95.) Tracking
                down a mysterious disease that strikes certain
                physicians and their patients.
13 *    8    13
                 NIGHT OF THE FOX, by Jack Higgins. (Simon & Schuster,
                $17.95.) A mission to keep D-Day plans from being
                discovered by the Germans.
14 *   12    12
                 THE PANIC OF '89, by Paul Erdman. (Doubleday, $17.95.)
                A financial wizard undertakes to defuse the crisis
                besetting Wall Street and the American economy.
15            1
                 TEXASVILLE, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon & Schuster,
                $18.95.) From the 50's to the 80's in Thalia, Tex. - a
                sequel to ''The Last Picture Show.''

          Weeks
This Last    On
?Wee Week  List Nonfiction
k

1       1    15
                 A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein. (Macmillan,
                $16.95.) A chronicle of one season spent with the
                Indiana University basketball team.
2       5     8
                 THE FITZGERALDS AND THE KENNEDYS, by Doris Kearns
                Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) From the Boston
                slums of Irish immigrants to the White House: three
                generations of a family.
3       2     7
                 COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber. (Beech Tree/ Morrow,
                $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the visits of
                ''intelligent nonhumans'' to his family's place in
                upstate New York.
4       8     9
                 THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf, $24.95.)
                Australia from penal colony to its gradual emergence as
                a flourishing nation.
5       7     9
                 ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph Wambaugh.
                (Perigord/Morrow, $18.95.) A case involving the murder
                of a Pennsylvania high school teacher and the
                disappearance of her two children.
6       3     4
                 BOONE, by T. Boone Pickens Jr. (Houghton Mifflin,
                $18.95.) The autobiography of an oilman and
                corporation-takeover entrepreneur.
7       4    19
                 A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins Publishers,
                $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as recorded in
                pictures by 200 photojournalists.
8       6    49
                 FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/ Doubleday,
                $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations from the television
                star and father of five.
9       9     6
                 INTIMATE PARTNERS, by Maggie Scarf. (Random House,
                $18.95.) Changing patterns in love and marriage.
10     10     4
                 BETTY: A Glad Awakening, by Betty Ford with Chris
                Chase. (Doubleday, $16.95.) A former First Lady's
                recovery from alcoholism and drug abuse.
11     11    57
                 YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House,
                $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic in
                pictures and rhyme.
12            1
                 HOLD ON, MR. PRESIDENT! by Sam Donaldson. (Random
                House, $17.95.) A White House television correspondent
                comments on his assignment and the ways of the news
                media.
13            1
                 THE JESUITS, by Malachi Martin. (Linden/Simon &
                Schuster, $19.95.) The changing relations between the
                Society of Jesus and the Roman Catholic Church.
14     13    13
                 THE SEARCH FOR SIGNS OF INTELLIGENT LIFE IN THE
                UNIVERSE, by Jane Wagner. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Acerb
                observations on life today; script of the show starring
                Lily Tomlin.
15     14    27
                 THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow, $19.95.)
                The crisis in the American automobile industry and
                Japan's role in it.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous


1       1    27
            MEN
            WHO
           HATE
          WOMEN
          & THE
          WOMEN
            WHO
           LOVE
          THEM,
             by
          Susan
          Forwa
             rd
            and
           Joan
          Torre
             s.
          (Bant
            am,
          $16.9
            5.)
            How
             to
           cope
           with
          overb
          earin
              g
           men.
2       2    24
                 THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff Smith.
                (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at moderate
                cost.
3       3     3
                 HOW TO BE YOUR OWN NUTRITIONIST, by Stuart M. Berger.
                (Morrow, $16.95.) Ways to create a diet regimen for
                health and energy.
4       4    43
                 THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn. (Norton, $15.95.)
                A regimen based on the Vanderbilt University Weight
                Management Program.
5       5    83
                 WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.
                (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard reference work in
                a 1983 revision.


 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

BERLIN DIARIES, 1940-1945, by Marie Vassiltchikov. (Knopf, $19.95.) High life in
the Third Reich, the struggles of ordinary people and stirrings of the plot
against Hitler, recorded in detail and often with shrewdness by a clever White
Russian princess.

PERSIAN NIGHTS, by Diane Johnson. (Knopf, $17.95.) The Shah of Iran is falling
in Ms. Johnson's funny, frightening seventh novel; her protagonist, an American
wife and mother, learns moral goodness by learning involvement, too late to make
a difference.

ONCE IN EUROPA, by John Berger. (Pantheon, $14.95.) These stories of
contemporary peasant life in a French Alpine village may contain the best
writing yet by their protean author, a British art critic, screenwriter,
journalist and smart, loving observer.

THE OTHER NUREMBERG: The Untold Story of the Tokyo War Crimes Trials, by Arnold
C. Brackman. (Morrow, $19.95.) A journalist's augmented eyewitness account of
these elaborate, somehow largely forgotten, revelations of revolting villainy.

THE CHILDREN AT SANTA CLARA, by Elizabeth Marek. (Elisabeth Sifton/Viking,
$16.95.) Frustrated as a Harvard student, Ms. Marek joined the staff of a center
for disturbed adolescents; her story is a notable addition to the literature of
self-healing through generosity and commitment to others.

BERNARD BERENSON: The Making of a Legend, by Ernest Samuels. (Belknap/Harvard
University, $25.) B.B. failed to write the book of art criticism he owed his
generation, but would he have lived this comfortable, elegant life if he had?

AN ARROW IN THE WALL: Selected Poetry and Prose, by Andrei Voznesensky. Edited
by William Jay Smith and F. D. Reeve. (Holt, $22.95.) This book represents the
best attempt so far to bring a contemporary Russian poet into a Western context.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEYOND THE REACH OF OUR GOOD INTENTIONS

BYLINE: By JEFFERSON MORLEY; Jefferson Morley is an associate editor of The New
Republic.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2069 words



WHERE IS NICARAGUA?
By Peter Davis. 349 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $18.95.

PETER DAVIS'S apt title is three questions in one. First, where is Nicaragua in
our Nicaragua debate? Amid all the acrimonious discussions of the rebels, the
Communists and now the Iranamok scandal, the country itself, the size of Iowa
with about as many residents as metropolitan Houston, is sometimes elusive.
Second, where is Nicaragua as a revolutionary experiment? Mr. Davis describes
the country as a ''laboratory . . . for the study of both freedom and
compulsion,'' with results uncertain. Third, and most important, where is
Nicaragua in the minds of Americans?

Mr. Davis, who made ''Hearts and Minds,'' the powerful documentary film about
the Vietnam War, doesn't have unequivocal answers for these questions any more
than the American people do. He went to Nicaragua for three weeks in late 1983
and again in 1986 and listened. Although he asked pointed questions of a wide
variety of Nicaraguans (and Americans), he allows their pointed answers to speak
for themselves. He advances his argument not by polemical thrust but by color,
juxtaposition and tactful analysis. He throws in witty asides and a hilarious
story about getting an ulcer at a Sandinista rally. His simple, shrewd point
throughout is that we cannot understand the bloody war for Nicaragua without
first understanding the war for Nicaragua going on in our heads.

Amateurs like Mr. Davis seem to be able to capture Central America in a way that
Central America professionals rarely do. In the last decade, the professionals
(meaning journalists, Washington intellectuals and professors) produced a shelf
of useful histories, short-lived journalistic accounts, unconvincing novels,
dull sectarian tracts and duller policy tomes. An ornithologist named Jonathan
Evan Maslow outdid them all with his account of searching for the brightly
plumed quetzal while Guatemala was enduring a military reign of terror in 1983.
His book, ''Bird of Life, Bird of Death,'' is one of the most affecting and
politically astute books about Central America.

''Where Is Nicaragua?'' is part of this modest tradition, the log of a curious
gringo. Perhaps the skillfully written travel book can succeed where more
ambitious efforts fail because they are faithful to our collective experience of
being interlopers in Central America. It seems no North American has lived long
enough in, or cared enough about, Central America to become a V. S. Naipaul or a
Graham Greene. Rather than try, Mr. Davis admits what he does not know.

''It is not that nothing is true in Nicaragua,'' he begins, ''but that the truth
dissolves into a collection of meanings whose common thread is their
ambiguity.'' In a film library, Mr. Davis reviews how Nicaragua has seeped into
our historical subconscious. As the Marines arrive in the 1926 newsreel, a
commentator speaks of the United States' ''dedication to peace and freedom.''
Cut to a fleeting mention in the 1930's of ''the bandit rebel Sandino.'' Cut to
1956 with Anastasio Somoza Garcia, Somoza I, lying on the floor, assassinated by
a poet. Cut to the 1970's with his son, Anastasio Somoza Debayle, a despicable
tyrant presiding with his mistress over a country where corpses burn with their
hands tied behind their backs. Cut to the triumph of the Sandinistas in 1979.
THIS is the Nicaragua in our Nicaragua debate, a montage of the rise and fall of
our idealism. But what are the lessons to be drawn? Once he reaches Managua, Mr.
Davis looks up Stanley Atha, the last Marine in Nicaragua. Lieutenant Atha
stayed on after the 1927 invasion to train Somoza's National Guardsmen. ''We
thought they'd be just the way we were,'' Mr. Atha now tells the author. This
perennial faith is voiced today by many supporters of the contra rebels in
Washington: the contras will be just like us if they take power. Opponents of
the contras can note, as Mr. Davis does, that the peace proposals of the
so-called Contadora group of four Latin American regional powers deserve support
because they resemble Sandino's peace proposals.

Where is the Nicaragua that has been governed for the last eight years by the
Sandinista National Liberation Front? Mr. Davis finds that it is convulsed by
two challenges. The first is the contra war. The second, no less important, is
the same challenge shaking the Communist world from Poland to Peking: how to
reconcile socialist government with civil society. Can a state that dominates
the means of production and claims to favor the poor majority accept an
independent world of bourgeois culture and commerce?

Mr. Davis visited the Nicaraguan-Honduran border, where the stakes in the war
seemed clearest. When he sees ''Viva Somoza'' spray-painted on a rock,
presumably by a contra supporter, and hears unprompted, credible stories of
contra atrocities, the specter of Nicaragua's past does not seem far away. Mr.
Davis recognizes that Nicaragua's government, without a relatively powerful
army, would be determined by the men in the White House and no one else.

''But the border also invited a sentimentality that produced the illusion of
clear sight,'' Mr. Davis observes. As the tour bus approaches the war zone, a
woman from New York rises to apologize to her Sandinista hosts not only for
United States support of the contras, but also for her country's baseness. As
Mr. Davis listens, with characteristic skepticism, the woman denounces most of
her fellow citizens as ''illiterate politically, spiritually, and culturally.''
The life-and-death stakes of war encourage the sentimental view that Nicaragua
and the United States are pure expressions of either good or evil.

Mr. Davis is not so fatuous as to be agnostic on Nicaragua's war. Although he
offers no explicit judgment, it seems clear that, like the vast majority of the
United States public, he opposes aid to the contras. But Mr. Davis does not want
our debate about the contras to obscure Nicaragua's debate about the role of
state and society. He listens carefully to the many Nicaraguans - few of them
contra supporters - who want to protect Continued on page 38 the civil society
of commerce and culture from the ambitions of the Sandinistas.

One cannot dismiss these people as anachronistic, minor obstacles to be overcome
in the joyous creation of a new society. The Czechoslovak novelist Milan
Kundera, cited by Mr. Davis, reminds us what happened when this mentality took
hold in postwar Czechoslovakia. Those who had dreamed of a new society
celebrated not only their victory over the past but also their victory over
evil. As Mr. Kundera puts it, ''They danced all the more frantically because
their dance was the manifestation of their innocence, the purity that shone
forth so brilliantly against black villainy.''

This is the dance of Mr. Davis's fellow traveler from New York and the other
more-Sandinista-than-thou Americans in Nicaragua. In Czechoslovakia, Mr. Kundera
reminds us, any revolutionary dancer who paused to wonder if the Communist idyll
was really so perfect was promptly ''squashed between the fingers like an
insect.'' Mr. Davis asks, ''Could Prague's fallen dancers become Managua's
ostracized dissidents?'' AFTER talking to dozens of Nicaraguans, Mr. Davis
answers that yes, they could. He acknowledges the Sandinistas' claim that any
nation at war with a powerful adversary has good reason to impose censorship.
But he insists on the elemental importance of freedom of expression and
religion. After receiving an impassioned lecture from President Daniel Ortega
Saavedra, Mr. Davis offers the relatively optimistic theory that when it comes
to such ''bourgeois liberties,'' the Sandinistas are Roman Catholic as much as
Communist. They allow a certain margin for freedom in practice but demand
doctrinal adherence to their universalistic ideology.

Thus the Sandinistas can tolerate a relatively large private sector and might
well (in peacetime) tolerate cultural and political pluralism to sustain the
morale of Nicaragua's middle class. Mr. Davis rightly stresses Nicaragua's
uniqueness; but if we were to compare it to other Marxist-Leninist states, it
would seem to resemble Cuba less than Hungary or Poland - authoritarian regimes
facing pervasive popular discontent and oscillating between experimentation and
repression.

Where is this Nicaragua in the plans and policies of the United States? Mr.
Davis implies that it isn't in our plans yet because we refuse to see it. We are
still fixed on the newsreel Nicaragua that ceased to exist in July 1979 or on
the particular Nicaragua that we want to believe in.

For the left-wing pilgrims to Managua, Mr. Davis notes, ''Nicaragua was not so
much a place or even an issue as it was an occasion,'' an occasion for their own
righteousness and no small amount of condescension toward those Nicaraguans
foolhardy enough to disagree with the enlightened gringos. For the infinitely
more powerful but no less righteous Reagan Administration, Nicaragua was the
occasion for ''Project Democracy,'' Lieut. Col. Oliver North's Orwellian title
for Mr. Reagan's undemocratic war on the Sandinistas. The common assumption of
the Reaganites and the left-wing pilgrims is that the intentions of the United
States will insure the salvation of Nicaragua.

Mr. Davis suggests instead that we take Nicaragua seriously and at face value.
''Looking at Managua through the pronouncements of the Sandinistas,'' he
concludes, ''it was possible to see not only a feisty band of patriots straining
for independence from the American imperium but also a group of leaders as
susceptible as any other to the fatal contagion of power.'' The power of the
Sandinista state, for better and worse, has put Nicaragua beyond the reach of
our good intentions. Perhaps this is why it is so hard for us to locate
Nicaragua in our minds.

A MIRROR FOR AMERICANS

To Peter Davis, the director of the acclaimed ''Hearts and Minds'' documentary
on Vietnam, returning to books was like ''returning home.''

''I've only really ever wanted to write,'' he said in a telephone interview from
St. Petersburg, Fla., where he and his children were watching the Mets warm up
for the season. ''In Nicaragua, in particular, there was much more fertile
territory for an American writer than for an American film maker.''

In Vietnam, he said, the American presence was a physical one and easier to
catch on film. In Nicaragua, the American presence is a psychological one. ''We
are very present there as a country. They think about our history almost more
than we think about our own history,'' Mr. Davis said.

In both ''Hearts and Minds'' and ''Where Is Nicaragua?'' Mr. Davis is trying to
understand what our involvement in those foreign countries says about us.

''To an American,'' he said, ''Nicaragua is a mirror of many kinds.'' ''In one
mirror it looks like Cuba, in another like Mexico, in yet another it is the
East-West struggle, and in another Christianity under siege. All of these are
mirrors of American attention and they don't show us too much about Nicaragua,
but they show us a lot about ourselves.''

Mr. Davis said that on his first visit to Nicaragua in 1983 he found the country
full of possibilities. ''Rather than seeing failures or successes, you were
seeing attempts in every area of social life, farming, education, and it was
exciting.'' On his second visit in 1986, he felt a sense of ''blighted
possibilities.'' ''Two things were institutionalized and permanent that were
only on the horizon on my first visit,'' he said. ''Those two things were war
and poverty.''

Mr. Davis, an opponent of the campaign by the Nicaraguan rebels, or contras,
warned against further United States military involvement in Nicaragua. ''If we
do invade and do air strikes, which I expect,'' he said, ''what we will do is
create enemies all over Latin America.''

''When we go to the rescue of the contras we will then have to either win or
lose,'' he added. If the United States were to win, there would be the daunting,
if not impossible, job of trying to administer the country. If the United States
were to lose, it would be an even more humiliating experience than the country's
defeat in Vietnam, he said.

Ironically, he did not meet anyone in Nicaragua who really hated Americans.
''They are under siege by someone they want to be friends with.''
  - LYDIA CHAVEZ

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a Sandinsita soldier (Magnum Photos/Susan Meiselas); photo of
food vendors in Nicaragua (Magnum Photos/Susan Meiselas) (page 36); photo of
Peter Davis (Roberta Lichtman) (page 38)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BLACKBOARD NOTES;
PECE STUDIES RISE

BYLINE: By HILARY STOUT

SECTION: Section 12; Page 12, Column 5; Survey of Education Desk

LENGTH: 463 words


AT Mount Holyoke College they debated the ''no first use'' resolution and
Pacific nuclear-free zones. At the University of California at Berkeley they
heard lectures on biological consequences of nuclear warfare. At Tufts
University they designed research projects on treaties and human rights and on
the effects of militarization on local economies.

In classrooms at hundreds of colleges and universities throughout the country
this school year, students have been grappling with problems of war and peace,
arms negotiation and social justice in the nuclear age.

Such study has been on the increase. A total of 235 American institutions of
higher learning offered majors, minors or concentrations in ''peace studies''
during the 1984-85 academic year, and 46 percent of all American colleges and
universities taught at least a course in the field, according to a study by the
World Policy Institute, in New York City. A similar survey by the institute in
1979 showed that peace studies classes were being given at only 14.6 percent of
American colleges and universities, according to Barbara Wien, a former director
at the institute.

Teachers of the new programs say that peace studies are gradually becoming
accepted as a legitimate field, and an important academic pursuit for today's
citizens. According to Robert R. Holt, director of New York University's Peace
and Global Studies Program, which began in the fall of 1985, ''The fundamental
aim is to try to train better world citizens for the future, people who will be
informed about the problems we are faced with.''

The programs vary from broad looks at social issues and sources of world
conflict, as in Berkeley's three-year-old Peace and Conflict Studies Program, to
narrower examinations of the nuclear arms race and the politics of arms control.

Despite its proliferation in this decade, the academic study of peace and war
issues is not new. Around the time the United Nations was established in the
aftermath of World War II, several colleges introduced peace studies courses and
programs. The movement against the Vietnam War prompted a number of
institutions, including Colgate, Syracuse and Kent State universities, to
incorporate the study of peace and war into their curriculums in the early
1970's.

In the 1980's, with the nuclear disarmament movement and growing concern over
the arms race, hundreds of other schools began adding peace studies to their
course catalogues. ''I think it is essential that students who expect to be
active citizens be aware of these issues,'' said Michael Klare, director of the
three-year-old Five College Peace and World Security Studies program in
Massachusetts. ''War and peace and nuclear weapons decisions are the most
critical decisions facing us today.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

60's CHAPLAINS REFLECT ON STUDENTS TODAY

BYLINE: By ARI L. GOLDMAN

SECTION: Section 12; Page 64, Column 2; Survey of Education Desk

LENGTH: 1814 words


ONE ASPECT of academic life has little to do with finals or grades, professors
or administrators. It is the province of campus chaplains and involves, as the
Rev. William Sloane Coffin describes it, ''the education of the heart.''

''The role of the chaplain is to ask where does the heart go to school,'' said
Dr. Coffin, a Presbyterian chaplain at Yale University from 1958 to 1976, ''and
to ask the question, 'Now that we've got this education, what do we do with it?'
''

The responsibility of chaplains to raise such questions has not changed since
the 1960's, when Dr. Coffin and other religious figures were active in student
demonstrations for civil rights and against the war in Vietnam. Today the causes
have changed and so has campus life. Chaplains have had a front-row seat for
observing these changes. In recent conversations, three chaplains active on Ivy
League campuses during the student activism of the 1960's reflected on students
today. From their perspective, the students are more conservative and more
openly religious. They report a fairly dramatic increase in attendance at
devotional services. While Ivy League campuses are usually known for leading
trends, this may be one instance where they are followers. Chaplains at
lesser-known schools noted that similar changes have already taken place at
their campuses.

''The main change in my time here has been in the attitude toward religion
itself,'' said Rabbi Ben-Zion Gold, a Conservative rabbi who has been at
Harvard's branch of the Hillel Foundation, a national organization of Jewish
campus groups, since 1958. ''In the 50's and early 60's the attitude toward
religion was unfriendly. People regarded it as a leftover from the Dark Ages. No
self-respecting intellectual viewed religion seriously.

''Now, it is quite the opposite,'' he continued. ''Most self-respecting people
are prepared to listen and to think; many have become very devout. Religion is
not at the center, but religious people are respected. Secularism is no longer
the preferred position.'' When Rabbi Gold first went to Harvard almost 30 years
ago, about 80 people attended the Friday night services. Now close to 300 come
for three services -Orthodox, Conservative and Reform.

At Brown University, the Rev. Howard V. O'Shea, the Roman Catholic chaplain, has
noted the same trend among Catholic students. ''All the evidence indicates that
they go to mass more than their parents,'' he said. ''I'm always having to order
more altar breads for communion.'' YET THIS increased attendance doesn't
necessarily mean that students are more devout, the chaplains said. Father
O'Shea, a Franciscan priest who characterizes himself as a liberal on church
issues, says he believes that Catholic students widely disregard the recent
statement of Pope John Paul II condemning such matters as homosexuality and
abortion.

''I'm taking the temperature here all the time about the activities of the Holy
See,'' Father O'Shea said. ''My students are respectful of the Vatican, but not
particularly interested.

''They'd yawn if I'd attempt to convey the contemporary rigid approach,'' he
said, adding that a yawn ''would be an appropriate response. They realize it is
O.K. to take what is relevant from the church and to reject the rest.''

Father O'Shea, who has been at Brown since 1963, is nostalgic for the 1960's
campus life. ''I miss it,'' he said, ''I really do. I liked it when they were
raising hell.''

Unlike Father O'Shea, Rabbi Gold looks back with caution. ''I think those were
tragic days. The country was in deep trouble. There were some beautiful moments
in it, some real altruism, real excitement about serious causes, but like all
upheavals it had its problems. It is not something you wish to institutionalize
or prolong, not something one relishes.''

Rabbi Gold found the 1960's a difficult time for him on campus. While in
sympathy with student causes, he was not always comfortable with the tactics. It
was a time, he said, ''when a religious leader had to resist being popular.''

''Yes, I was there when the students staged a sit-in at University Hall,'' Rabbi
Gold recalled. ''I came there to be with them, but I didn't lead them into it.''

Dr. Coffin, now senior minister at Riverside Church in New York City, had no
reservations about leading students into demonstrations. In one widely
publicized episode in 1967, he and several other activists, including Dr.
Benjamin Spock, led an anti-Vietnam War protest in Boston at which 944 draft
cards were collected from young men and later presented to the Justice
Department. Dr. Coffin was arrested, along with others, for counseling to evade
the draft, though the charges were later dropped, By adding the moral dimension,
Dr. Coffin says, university chaplains helped bring together students and faculty
members. ''I used to tell the economics professors to ask their freshmen to
consider this question: 'To whom does the earth belong?' ''

When professors discussed moral issues, the results represented the best in what
the academic world can offer, Dr. Coffin argued. ''In the 60's,'' he said, ''the
teach-ins were so moving. To have the expert on Shakespeare, the expert on
Southeast Asia and the scientist all talking about Vietnam. A sense of community
was built around those teach-ins.''

Chaplains, traditionally outside the academic hierarchy, also helped advise
students in choosing careers. Dr. Coffin used to tell students bound for big law
firms or big business to spend a year with migrant workers or in the Peace
Corps.

Today, he sometimes wonders what happened to the enthusiasm of that era and to
the people he influenced. Many of them, he believes, ''put their ideals in the
closet'' as they got caught up with issues of family and career, an increasing
preoccupation during the economic upheavals of the 1970's.

''I know that their kids are going to go into the closets, pull out the ideals,
dust them off and ask their fathers, 'Daddy, what are these?' '' said Dr.
Coffin.

All three ministers agreed that the renewed interest today in religion is an
outgrowth of the tumultuous 60's. Rabbi Gold said that faith in American
society, what he calls ''civic religion,'' was shattered during that decade.
''Civic religion was called very much into question because of the war itself,
the civil rights movement and the counterculture movement,'' he said. ''Elements
of society and government were laid bare because they countenanced and preserved
prejudices.''

The era also unleashed another phenomenon, he said, a new pride in diversity
that celebrated different life styles and religions. ''The idea took hold that
it is all right to be who you are. There are many ways to be an American - you
can be black or white, Protestant or Catholic, Amish or Jew. People began to say
religion has an important role to play in life and in shaping values.''

Father O'Shea said the pastoral letters of the nation's Roman Catholic bishops
on such issues as nuclear war and the effect of the economy on the poor had
encouraged many Catholic students to find religion relevant to their lives. Both
letters, particularly the 1983 letter calling for an end to the deployment of
nuclear weapons, have greatly affected Catholic students, he said. Once again,
Father O'Shea said, the students took what they deemed relevant in Catholic
teaching while respectfully rejecting Papal encyclicals they found out of date.

Another result of the openness of the 1960's, Father O'Shea said, is a student
body more able to cope with personal problems, including concerns about
sexuality. ''Students today are much less in need of counseling,'' he observed.
''Maybe high school counselors are getting better or maybe it is because of the
more open discussion in our society. Things that you once could not mention are
all over the television screens. I find it a very encouraging sign.'' RABBI GOLD
at Harvard also spends less time counseling today. He says the nature of
students' concerns has changed. Students often find the answers to their
religious questions to be far more complex than they first thought. ''I find
myself spending more time on their theological concerns than their personal
problems,'' he said. ''They are very hungry for ideas.''

All of the three ministers expressed enthusiasm for the renewed interest in
religion on the campus, viewing it as positive as long as it was not taken to
the extreme of intolerance. They associated such intolerance with groups like
the Christian fundamentalist movement, which has made inroads into the campus in
recent years. ''My understanding of faith is that it makes possible intellectual
uncertainty,'' said Dr. Coffin, ''But a religion that gives all the answers,
because it does not permit the questions, is anti-university and ultimately
anti-religious.''

Rabbi Gold said the Harvard Hillel branch that he directs was an unusual model
of religious tolerance among the major branches of Judaism. ''I am very pleased
that we contain in one small building three religious communities that do not
compromise their traditions,'' he said. EACH FRIDAY night after services, the
Harvard Hillel serves about 100 Sabbath meals in its kosher kitchen. During the
winter, when the days are short, the Orthodox students meet early in the evening
for prayer. The Conservative and Reform, who are less insistent on beginning the
prayers at sundown, have their services later.

''I find that the Orthodox students sit and wait for the other services to
finish so that they can all eat the Sabbath meal together,'' Rabbi Gold said. At
a time when the three branches of Judaism have been split over several
theological issues, such as conversion and defining Jewish heritage, the Jewish
students at Harvard demonstrate an unusual spirit of unity.

All three ministers believe that being a campus chaplain is one of the best
careers in religious life. ''To be part of the academic life and not be subject
to it is a very blissful experience,'' said Father O'Shea.

If Rabbi Gold has one reservation, it is that administrative duties take too
much of his time. He wishes he could do more teaching and reading. ''It is more
important that I be a rabbi, an interpreter of the tradition to the best of my
ability,'' he said.

''I miss the students,'' said Dr. Coffin. ''I miss the intellectual proficiency
and depth of scholarship I found among faculty friends. On the other hand I find
too many leading universities precious and arrogant, so I am happy where I am.''

The churches today are the forefront of the struggle for social change, Dr.
Coffin contended. ''The main protest against U.S. involvement in Central
America, against the arms race and for the poor is not to be found in the
academic world.''

But he is hopeful that campus passions will once again be ignited. ''People will
get bored with being bored,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Rev. Howard V. O'Shea (NYT/Jack Spratt); photo of Rabbi
Ben-Zion Gold (NYT/Seth Resnick); photo of Rev. William Sloane Coffin (NYT/Susan
Farley) (page 65)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A WORKING PAIR WHO CHANGED A WORLD

BYLINE: By RACHEL ROBINSON; Rachel Robinson is chairperson of the board of the
Jackie Robinson Foundation. She is serving as the consultant to the exhibition
''Jackie Robinson, an American Journey,'' sponsored by Coca-Cola USA. The
exhibition opens at the New York-Historical Society on Friday.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 9, Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1898 words


AMONG my reflections on this 40th anniversary of Jackie Robinson's successful
integration of organized baseball is a cherished memory of Jack and me as an
effective working pair. The working pair is a common and powerful structure for
carrying out functional and emotional tasks. Marriages, partnerships,
organizational dyads, and friendships all offer an opportunity to achieve the
above. Too often they fail to flourish or meet the public and private challenges
confronting them. I believe that the bond that Jack and I worked to create and
maintain was crucial to the triumphs we experienced, as we lived in both private
and public arenas. Later, in fact, it provided the core support when tragedy
struck our family.

As I look back on the past and ahead to the future, I feel especially fortunate
to have matured in a pairing that provided each of us with opportunities for
growth, and one of us with the strength to become a glorious example for heroes
to come. To understand the nature of our relationship, it helps to begin at its
inception.

In 1946, following a five-year, long-distance courtship, and two weeks of
marriage, we traveled to the segregated South for the first time. We were bound
for spring training with the Montreal Royals in Florida. We had little time for
adjustment in the private area of our lives, as we were plunged into the
extremely uncertain, and frequently hostile, public environment predicted by
Branch Rickey. We instinctively drew on our mutual love and trust to strengthen
the bond between us. It was clear even then that we would need to transcend the
immediate provocations of racism, and commit ourselves to higher goals.

And so, in the first leg of our trip, when we were bumped from an airplane in
Pensacola, Fla., and boarded an empty bus to our destination, we moved to the
back seat, as required by the driver, without outward protest. We contained the
angry retaliative feelings as they arose. I was particularly pained to see my
assertive man functionally reduced to the status of the South's ''boy,'' but I
said to myself, ''Not for long.''

Upon our arrival in Daytona Beach, battered as we were, we laughed over our
small and largely symbolic triumphs behind the closed door of our first tiny
room in a private home of a black family, isolated from the team's hotel. We had
survived the immediate threat to our self-esteem and were looking ahead to
Jack's first encounter with the team and press the next day.

As the spring training period unfolded, we were locked out of the ball park in
Jacksonville, Fla., and run out of Sanford, Fla. However, in Daytona Beach, our
temporary home, we quickly learned to identify and use the tactics of those in
the black community around us. They clearly gained influence and retained their
positive sense of self through their ties to religious and educational
institutions, political organizations, and extended families. We had the special
thrill and reassurance of receiving the blessings of Mary McCloud Bethune,
pioneer and mentor to many. And although we were completely isolated from the
team except on the playing field, our supportive alliances in the community
prepared Jack for re-entry into that tense public arena each day. We left the
South bruised, stimulated, and more contemplative than we arrived. A more
resilient pair.

Our totally opposite experience in Montreal later that year provided us with an
excellent springboard into the majors. At the end of the year in Canada, Jackie
Jr. was born, precious beyond belief, and a welcomed addition to the pairing
that quickly became a partnership with a division of labor dictated as much by
circumstances as by roles.

In those early days, when we lived far from family and friends and changed
locales annually - DeGaspe Street, Montreal, in 1946, Bedford-Stuyvesant in
1947, Flatbush in 1948, and St. Albans in 1949 - we were seeking a comforting
setting while fighting for economic security and social justice in full view of
the public. Montreal and then Brooklyn became special havens where we gradually
regained our sense of ourselves and our dignity. In fact, Jack's ability to play
to win, while maintaining a completely unnatural silence during the 1947 and
1948 seasons, was a tribute to his inner spirituality, as well as a lasting gift
to our people. During this period when he had agreed to accept passively all
provocation, we moved to and from the ball park to home almost as one. We shared
the work, the feelings, the stress and the irrationality of our seemingly
defenseless position.

Yes, we had doubts, but we also had Jackie Jr. and a growing host of fans who
gave us cause to believe that our mission was possible and worth the sacrifices.

In the years 1949-1952, as Jack broke free of the constraining ''agreement,''
fought back, won honors, and began to experience the presence of real teammates,
fans, and community support, we were thrilled by the births of Sharon and David.
We bought our first home, brought friends and relatives from California to New
York, solidified our relationships with our former Brooklyn neighbors, and
shared in our children's growth with pride. Our relationship had reached a
satisfying level of interdependence that promised higher ground of maturity. Our
larger world began to sparkle. Blacks were entering opening doors, and in 1955
our underdog team became the ''champs.'' No more ''Wait till next year.''

The civil rights movement was well under way, reaffirming our purpose and
mobilizing the healthy parts of our nation to challenge the malignancy of racial
prejudice. As strong believers in the role that adults play in their own
development, we reveled in the richness and meaning of the life we had elected
to lead.

In 1956 we made decisions that affected each member of our family, and created
new demands on us. We decided to move to Connecticut, seeking the advantages of
good schools and a country environment. Also, Jack had decided to retire. He had
been restless in baseball for the two previous years. He found it increasingly
difficult to prepare both physically and mentally for the coming seasons, saw
this fact as a signal, and was too proud to stay on past his prime. Through his
explorations during the winter season, he was already active in the civil rights
movement. He was also determined to become a force in business and politics.
Baseball had been a proving ground, and a crucible where his ideas and
convictions took shape. He was looking for new challenges, and new forums.

He decided to retire barely a step ahead of his team's decision to feature him
in an unbelievable trade to our most hated rivals, the Giants. He refused the
offer with considerable feelings of disappointment and betrayal. Closing the
door on this all-consuming period of life propelled him into an exciting and
surely more complex world. As his partner and his fan, I applauded his capacity
for risk-taking, and made a mental note to follow his lead and at the same time
I grieved over the loss of my favorite ballplayer.

Throughout this transitional period we had a need to remain close as a family,
hold on to the intimacy we had enjoyed, while supporting each other's need to
take on new challenges. Our activities were no longer solely centered on Jack's
career and schedule.

As a pair we discovered that all partnerships are established and maintained at
a price. For each of us to differentiate ourselves more fully was to experience
some loss. For Jack to let go, and for me to be more independent was essential,
though painful, for both of us. Fortunately, we were able to struggle with this
conflict, and achieve a satisfactory compromise.

He learned to accept my need for a career, and I learned to add on new
responsibilities and delegate to others without guilt. I became a psychiatric
nurse and practiced and taught at Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Yale
University School of Nursing.

Jack immersed himself in his work as vice president for personnel at Chock Full
o'Nuts, helped to create the Freedom National Bank, actively campaigned for his
chosen political candidates, and raised large sums of money for civil rights
organizations.

He joined protest marches, black leadership councils; he spoke before church and
school audiences, and thoroughly enjoyed contributing to the projects of local
community groups. He played a great deal of golf, his favorite pastime. He found
time to shoot baskets with boys at the Harlem Y.M.C.A., and loved to shoot the
breeze with the fellows at the Apollo Theatre. As he devoted more time to his
own children, he also wrote a newspaper column, acted in a film, wrote his
autobiography and as a final act founded his own company: a construction company
specializing in low-income housing. Throughout his last 15 years, he heroically
battled the ravages of diabetes.

During the dynamic 60's, we were both valiantly struggling with the need to
learn new skills and gain more knowledge to be applied immediately. We made
errors in judgment and from time to time needed to redirect our energies and
priorities. We established family traditions and enjoyed the rewards of having
continuity with the past. Our developing family unit had moved to center stage,
as each child sailed forth to establish his or her place outside the home.

Sharon and David went to college and, much to our sorrow, Jackie Jr. went into
the army and on to Vietnam. Jackie Jr.'s subsequent bout with drugs and
difficult recovery at Daytop was devastating. His death in an automobile
accident in 1971 was the most painful of tragedies. Jack Sr. succumbed in 1972.
Our family was dealt a series of critical blows and seemed vulnerable to
destruction. David, Sharon and I literally moved within one block of each other.

Fortunately, although we were seriously hurt, we were the survivors of a family
group that had learned early on how to grieve, how to sustain the blows of life
and mobilize. Together we embarked on the long process of recovery, and
eventually took up independent lives patterned on our earliest directions. We
made a deeper and more profound commitment to others, as well as to ourselves.

On the 40th anniversary the question is raised, ''What is the legacy of Jackie
Robinson?'' Each of us will have a personal answer. I celebrate the progress
made in our society and the impact of my partner's life on those advances.
Participating in a major movement enhances one's belief and investment in social
change. However, the most optimistic among us must acknowledge how much remains
to be done. How we must remain ever vigilant and active as new facets of
prejudice and racial stereotyping appear. Most importantly, we need to fight
back the forces of retrenchment. Forty years later, we know that opportunities
for black people in baseball and other sports are virtually limited to the
players' ranks. Just as in other industries, opportunities for mobility are
severely limited. I believe that there are unnumbered and qualified ''Jackie
Robinsons'' waiting to be discovered or lost forever.

I fervently hope that through the many channels that Jack's enlightening
experience, idealism, hope, pain and love have traveled, that his legacy will
inspire to action those who understand, as he did, that our destinies are
linked, and ''a life is not important except in the impact it has on the other
lives.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jackie and Rachel Robinson (Peter Simon); Photo of Jackie and
Rachel Robinson (Jackie Robinson Foundation)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'MAMA DRAMA,' COLLAGE ON MOTHERHOOD

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 70, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 673 words


The joys, pangs and anxieties of motherhood are treated with sympathetic
self-awareness in ''Mama Drama,'' an unassuming little collage of sketches at
the Ensemble Studio Theater. The show is the collaborative venture of seven
articulate women, five of whom also appear on stage. In spite of the diversity
of hands and the brevity of the individual pieces, ''Mama Drama'' has a
cohesiveness, which can be attributed to the director, Pamela Berlin, and to the
point of view shared by the participants.

One could imagine the play arising from a consciousness raising seminar cum
theatrical workshop. For theatergoers, especially those with children, the
evening should offer moments of recognition, although for men, at times, it may
seem a bit like eavesdropping. ''Mama Drama'' is, to say the least,
single-minded -more so, for example, than the musical ''Baby,'' which dealt with
expectant couples.

This is an all-woman show, but, within the singlemindedess, the author-actresses
have found a diversity of concerns. Surrogate motherhood and abortion are among
the serious topics under scrutiny, the latter in a very pointed sketch (by
Christine Farrell) about the passage of an anti-abortion amendment.

Adoption appears in several ways. In one of the most touching sketches (written
by Ann Sachs), Ms. Sachs tells us about a woman giving up her daughter for
adoption to an unknown couple ''in the arts in New York,'' and wondering if she
will ever encounter the girl again. Later, in a sketch written by Rita
Nachtmann, Ms. Sachs plays an expectant mother, on the verge of hysteria,
rushing to the airport (Ms. Nachtmann is her friendly cabdriver) to pick up her
adopted baby arriving from Korea.

Along with Marianna Huston - an author but not an actress on stage -and Ms.
Nachtmann, Ms. Sachs is one of the evening's more perceptive writers, and one
who is unabashed by the thought of sentiment, as expressed in ''Memorial,''
which deals with a meeting of mothers of Vietnam soldiers, one of whom died in
combat.

Other sketches are marked by their humor and, occasionally, by their irony,
especially when it comes to doctors and mothers (of mothers). Those categories
become, at some point, the opposition - doctors for their apparent apathy,
mothers for their overbearing manner. On the operating table, awaiting delivery,
Ms. Farrell wonders why those three men (husband, doctor and a stranger) are
smiling at her.

Mothers and mothers in law are always telephoning at odd hours and insisting
that the younger woman listen to her elder's advice. In matters of parental
pressure, the philosophical attitude is, ''This too shall pass,'' a line that
filters through the evening as a motif.

The actresses are each individualized. Leslie Ayvazian, padded for the occasion,
is self-mocking about her simulated advanced state of pregnancy. Ms. Farrell
wryly distances herself from incessant maternal nagging. Ms. Nachtmann is
interrogatory - as a doctor and also as a little girl trying to decipher the
mystery of birth. Anne O'Sullivan is sprite-like in several guises and Ms. Sachs
is sensitive to all changes in emotional temperature.

As connectives, there are several lively songs written and sung by the Roches -
and more music would be helpful. Some of the 30 sketches are sketchier than
others and a few have their moments of flippancy. But most of the stories in
''Mama Drama'' derive from character and, most important, from the first-hand
experience of mothers and daughters, who happen to be talented artists in the
theater.

In Loco Parentis

MAMA DRAMA, by Leslie Ayvazian, Donna Daley, Christine Farrell, marianna
Houston, Rita Nachtmann, Anne O'Sullivan and Ann Sachs; directed by Pamela;
music by The Roches; set design, Philipp Jung; costume design, Lindsay W. Davis;
lighting design, Jackie Manassee; sound design, Bruce Ellman; production stage
manager, Jane Sanders. presented by the Ensemble Studio Theater, 549 West 52d
Street.

WITH Ms. Ayvazian, Ms. Farrell, Ms. Nachtmann, Ms. O'Sullivan and Ms. Sachs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Anns Sachs and Rita Nachtmann (Swope Associates/Carol Rosegg)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Paperback Best Sellers: April 12, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 820 words

                                                                          Weeks
                                                                             On
     Fiction                                                               List
 1   THE BOURNE SUPREMACY, by Robert                                          6
     Ludlum.  (Bantam, $4.95.) A plot to seize Hong
     Kong and bring China into conflict with the West.

 2   JOANNA'S HUSBAND AND DAVID'S WIFE, by                                    6
     Elizabeth Forsythe Hailey.  (Dell, $4.50.) Two
     sides of a marriage revealed in diary entries.

 3 * I'LL TAKE MANHATTAN, by Judith Krantz.                                  11
     (Bantam, $4.95.) A rich, beautiful young woman
     conquers the world of magazine publishing.

 4   BREAK IN, by Dick Francis.  (Fawcett, $4.95.)                            3
     Mystery, melodrama and bitter family rivalry in
     the world of British steeplechase racing.

 5   PRIVATE AFFAIRS, by Judith Michael.  (Pocket,                            6
     $4.95.) A couple's marriage is seriously strained
     when they strike it rich in journalism.

 6   THE GREAT ALONE, by Janet Dailey.  (Pocket,                              1
     $4.95.) Women's role in seven generations of
     Alaskan history.

 7   STONE 588, by Gerald A. Browne.  (Berkley,                               2
     $4.50.) The pursuit of a stolen crystal with
     curative powers.

 8   DEEP DOMAIN, by Howard Weinstein.  (Pocket,                              1
     $3.50.) The 33d "Star Trek" adventure.

 9   THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood.                                12
     (Fawcett, $4.95.) In the Republic of Gilead, men
     and women perform the services assigned them.

10 * THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom                                        56
     Clancy.  (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine driver
     brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

11   MAGIC KINGDOM FOR SALE -- SOLD! by                                       2
     Terry Brooks.  (Del Rey/Ballantine, $4.50.) A man
     copes with problems after buying a fantasy land.

12   WEST FROM SINGAPORE, by Louis L'Amour.                                   1
     (Bantam, $2.95.) Short stories set in the Pacific at
     the outbreak of World War II.

13   LIE DOWN WITH LIONS, by Ken Follett.  (Signet/                          19
     NAL, $4.95.) An Englishwoman in Afghanistan,
     caught between the C.I.A. and the K.G.B.

14   FACES, by Johanna Kingsley.  (Bantam, $4.50.) A                          1
     Russian emigre torn between romantic passion
     and a desire to be a plastic surgeon.

15   WORD OF HONOR, by Nelson DeMille.  (Warner,                              5
     $4.50.) A former officer is falsely held responsible
     for an atrocity committed by his men in Vietnam.
                                                                          Weeks
                                                                             On
     Nonfiction                                                            List
     General

 1   THE TOWER COMMISSION REPORT.  (Times                                     4
     Books/Bantam, $5.50.) The full text of the
     President's Special Review Board.

 2   NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst.                                      7
     (Fawcett, $4.95.) Life is a series of losses, the
     author says, and we must confront them to grow.

 3   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.                              181
     (Touchstone/S&S, $9.95.) Psychological and
     spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 4   THE MAN WHO MISTOOK HIS WIFE FOR A                                      14
     HAT, by Oliver Sacks.  (Perennial/Harper & Row,
     $7.95.) Strange neurological disabilities.

 5   ROCK HUDSON: His Story, by Rock Hudson and                               2
     Sara Davidson.  (Avon, $4.50.) An account of the
     actor's life written with his cooperation.

 6   WEST WITH THE NIGHT, by Beryl Markham.                                  23
     (North Point, $12.50.) A woman's experiences
     flying in Africa and across the Atlantic in the 30's.

     Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1   WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin                                       45
     Norwood.  (Pocket, $4.95.) How to avoid or end
     addictive, unhealthy relationships with men.

 2   FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn                             11
     Diamond.  (Warner, $4.95.) A diet for weight loss
     and physical fitness.

 3   ADULT CHILDREN OF ALCOHOLICS, by Janet                                  45
     Geringer Woititz.  (Health Communications,
     $6.95.) Advice about a family problem.

 4   GARFIELD: FOOD FOR THOUGHT, by Jim                                       5
     Davis.  (Ballantine, $5.95.) Comic strips.

 5   WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE? by                                         4
     Richard Nelson Bolles.  (Ten Speed, $8.95.) Job and
     career advice; 1987 edition.

 6   RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States,                                 22
     Canada, Mexico.  (Rand McNally, $5.95.) For 1987.

 7   DIANETICS, by L. Ron Hubbard.  (Bridge                                  27
     Publications, $4.95.) Latest edition of a handbook
     by the founder of Scientology.

 8   THE ARTHUR YOUNG TAX GUIDE 1987.                                        10
     (Ballantine, $10.95.) Aid from an accounting firm.

 9   J. K. LASSER'S YOUR INCOME TAX.  (Prentice                              10
     Hall, $8.95.) The 1987 edition.




* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States.  The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMPAIGN SEEKS GENOCIDE TRIAL OF KHMER ROUGE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., April 12


A New York-based human rights organization has started a campaign to have the
Khmer Rouge tried for genocide before the International Court of Justice.

The Khmer Rouge rule of Cambodia from 1975 to 1979 is blamed for more than a
million deaths.

The rights group, the Cambodia Documentation Commission, said last week that it
believed it had assembled evidence to prove the Khmer Rouge actions were
genocide as defined by the 1948 Genocide Convention drafted by the United
Nations. The commission estimated that the Khmer Rouge had caused two to three
million deaths.

The commission's director said the group hoped to gain recognition for the
Cambodians' suffering and put pressure on the Cambodian guerrilla coalition
fighting the Vietnamese-backed Government to eject and punish Khmer Rouge
factions.

The case would mark the first ever considered by the World Court under the
convention, which obligates governments to punish genocide offenders.

Called 'Ongoing Violation'

''The United Nations has never recognized the Khmer Rouge human rights
violations, and the Cambodians want recognition for this terrible tragedy,''
said the director, David Hawk.

''Those who were primarily responsible for perpretrating those acts remain
active in international and Cambodian life,'' he said. ''This is an ongoing
violation of the articles of the convention that require those who commit
genocide to be punished.''

Two hundred Cambodian survivors of Khmer Rouge camps, as well as survivors of
genocide campaigns in other parts of the world, attended a news conference at
the New York Public Library on Tuesday announcing the campaign. Members of the
commission include Representative Stephan J. Solarz, Democrat of Brookyln; Max
M. Kampelman, the Reagan Administration's arms negotiator; the Nazi-hunter Simon
Wiesenthal, and Dith Pran, the New York Times photographer whose experiences in
Cambodia were portrayed in the movie ''The Killing Fields.''

Under the 1948 convention, only governments can bring a genocide complaint
before the World Court, and the commission this week sent letters to 70 heads of
state asking them to consider pressing the case.

The convention defines genocide as ''acts committed with intent to destroy in
whole, or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as such.''
It requires signers to punish those the Court or relevant United Nations bodies
find have committed genocide.

U.N. Recognizes Coalition

If the World Court decides against the Khmer Rouge, it could also rule against
the Cambodian guerrilla coalition for not punishing Khmer Rouge offenders, Mr.
Hawk said.

A Vietnamese-backed Government has ruled most of Cambodia since Vietnam's
invasion in 1979, but the United Nations recognizes a Cambodian coalition
government that includes the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge, democratic factions and
groups loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

There is no precedent for enforcing the convention, but the commission believes
the case would bring diplomatic pressure on the Cambodian coalition to ''get
those most responsible for genocide out of their current positions, and out of
the jurisdiction of democratic Kampuchea,'' Mr. Hawk said.

A letter sent to President Reagan stressed that the group did not support the
Vietnamese occupation or seek to weaken opposition to it.

While the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
as the treaty is known, was signed by the United States, the Senate refused to
approve it until October of last year for fear it was poorly drafted and might
allow other governments to intervene in United States affairs.

CONTROVERSY OVER TOLL

BANGKOK, Thailand, April 12 -Controversy still surrounds the human toll the
Khmer Rouge took during its years in power.

David P. Chandler, an American scholar of Cambodia now at Monash University in
Australia, said in an interview last week that most of his colleagues settled on
''about a million -up to a million and a half - regime-related deaths.''

Research by Ben Kiernan, a colleague of Mr. Chandler's and the author of ''How
Pol Pot Came to Power'' provides similar figures. Michael Vickery, who wrote the
first standard contemporary history of the period, ''Cambodia: 1975-1982,''
accepts a slightly lower figure.

Stephen R. Heder, a Khmer-speaking historian of Cambodia who is now on the
Amnesty International staff in London, has in the past been quoted as accepting
a figure of about 1 million to 1.5 million ''policy-related'' deaths, among them
at least 100,000 executions.

Speaking by telephone from Australia, Mr. Chandler, who is completing a history
of Cambodia since 1945, acknowledged that other figures had been given, ranging
from hundreds of thousands to three million, but he said they often reflect
political viewpoints.

He said he believed that the Vietnamese had overestimated the toll, while
Thailand, which supports the Khmer Rouge in exile, had sought to underestimate
it. Statistics on Cambodia's population in 1975 and now are considered
unreliable by most experts.

But Mr. Chandler said arguments over numbers were not the issue.

''The important thing,'' he said ''is that Pol Pot was absolutely awful.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ROBINSON'S BATTLES WENT FAR BEYOND THE DIAMOND

BYLINE: By WILLIAM C. RHODEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words


BY the end of his life, after pursuing a number of political, social and
economic paths, Jackie Robinson had come to grips with some realities about
baseball and America.

He had served as an officer in the Army, had testified against Paul Robeson, had
supported Richard Nixon and was an early advocate of the Vietnam War. ''He
believed more in the American ideal than the people who held the franchise,''
recalled the Rev. Jesse Jackson.

Before his death in October 1972, Robinson had evolved to a point near
militancy. He had been shaken by the assassinations of the Rev. Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr. and President Kennedy. He had been devastated by his oldest's
son's experience in Vietnam and subsequent drug addiction. He had felt betrayed
in business by early political allies and he had seen how many in leadership
perpetuated the social and economic disenfranchisement of black Americans, no
matter what their station.

In his autobiography, published in 1972, ''I Never Had It Made,'' Robinson,
contrasting his early optimism with the cynicism of his later life, said, ''. .
. .as I write these words now I cannot stand and sing the national anthem. I
have learned that I remain a black in a white world.''

On Oct. 15, 1972, Robinson stood before a World Series crowd at Riverfront
Stadium in Cincinnati. His body had been ravaged by the effects of diabetes. He
suffered from high blood pressure and was blind in one eye. He had survived a
heart attack four years earlier, and had suffered deeply after the death of his
oldest son, Jackie Jr., in an automobile accident the year before.

The gist of his message that afternoon was that he had come to baseball as a
second baseman, and the black athlete had not really moved beyond second base.
He said that he looked forward to the day when he could look down the third-base
line and see a black manager. Nine days later, he was dead at the age of 53.

''He was not bitter, and he didn't feel that baseball owed him anything - it was
more global than that,'' Rachel Robinson, his widow, said. ''He felt that
baseball had only gone part of the way and that it had only done the part that
benifited baseball. It hadn't made the changes that would have allowed for
change of attitude going all the way through to ownership. They were still in
control, they were still dominating and they were still excluding.''

It is tempting to say that Robinson's playing career was the most significant
part of his life. It was Robinson's activities after baseball, when he worked to
make integration a social and economic reality, that rounded out his life.

Robinson had set the tone for his life after baseball in 1949 when a
Congressional committee asked him, and other selected blacks, to refute a
statement by Paul Robeson, the black singer-actor and political activist.
Robeson had said in an interview that black Americans were so disenchanted with
America that they would not fight for their country in a war against the Soviet
Union.

Robinson agreed to testify. ''I didn't want to fall prey to the white man's game
and allow myself to be pitted against another black man,'' he wrote years later.
''I knew Robeson was striking out against racial inequality. However, in those
days I had much more faith in the ultimate justice of the American white man
than I have today. I would reject such an invitation if offered now.''

In December 1956, Robinson was traded by the Brooklyn Dodgers to the New York
Giants, and soon afterward he retired, a move he had been contemplating. ''I
think it just reinforced his decison to quit,'' Rachel Robinson recalled.

Robinson took over as vice president of personnel for Chock Full o'Nuts. By
1961, Robinson had become a director in the corporation.

In 1957, Robinson was named director of the Freedom Fund Drive for the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People.

In 1960, he raised eyebrows and angered many liberals when he supported Richard
M. Nixon in the Presidential race over John F. Kennedy. He later wrote that his
decision ''was not one of my finer ones, it was a sincere one, however, at the
time.''

His major asset was visibility, and his designated role was as a fund-raiser.
But what he wanted was a voice in national leadership.

''When he was a baseball player, everything he did was recorded and he was
called on to make judgments and he was a leader - he was made a leader,'' said
Evelyn Cunningham, a former aide to Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller and a close
friend of Robinson. ''Out of baseball, I think that Jackie missed the leadership
role, or what he perceived as the leadership role.''

By 1964, his need for expanded responsibility and a broader base of operation
led him to resign from Chock Full o'Nuts. In February 1964, he joined
Rockefeller's Presidential campaign staff as deputy director.

Robinson resigned from the N.A.A.C.P.'s national board in 1967 and joined forces
with the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. By 1968, he was supporting
Hubert H. Humphrey in his race for President against Nixon.

Robinson had adopted a more militant stance, particularly in regard to black
athletes. One of the themes of his later years was that black Americans, the
black athlete in particular, would have to wage an active fight to change a
system that would not willingly share its power.

One of Robinson's lasting contributions was helping to establish Freedom
National Bank in Harlem in 1965, an enterprise intended to help the economic
future of the community. Robinson remained chairman of the board until his
death.

Three months before his death, Robinson set up a contruction company. The firm
was designed to train contractors who had never worked on large projects, and
one of its major goals was to keep the payroll money in the community in which
building was being done.

But the company lacked the capital needed to take on massive building projects.
One of the sore points with Robinson was that, when he needed assistance from
powerful allies he had helped in the past, many, notably Rockefeller, were not
forthcoming.

                                $ ?   *  *  *

Robinson died at 7:10 in the morning on October 24, 1972, in Stamford Hospital
in Connecticut. He was preparing to attend a drug seminar when he was stricken
at his home.

Although he had become disillusioned about many things, Robinson did not die a
bitter man. He understood the contribution he had made, but regretted that he
had simply run out of time.

''He was not a person to be bitter,'' Rachel Robinson said. ''His emotions were
immediate: If he was angry he was angry at that moment. It just didn't carry
over because there were so many things to move on to and pour his energies
into.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jackie Robinson with Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller (UPI)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

OLIVER STONE EASING OUT OF VIOLENCE

BYLINE: By LESLIE BENNETTS

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1385 words


''Hell is the impossibility of reason.''       Oliver Stone in ''Platoon.''

The settings are as exotic as they are varied, but all have been nightmarish
images of hell on earth. In every film, a young man, whether through innocence,
ignorance or a fatal error of judgment, finds himself trapped in a horror he
cannot escape. Brutalized in a Turkish prison, caught in a senseless war in
which he could be blown up at any moment, stalked by Salvadoran death squads or
a Bolivian drug lord's assassins, the price of a man's miscalculation may be
death.

Sudden, random and terrifying, the violence that has often erupted in Oliver
Stone's movies has provided the lurid cinematic echo of a theme with deep roots
in his own psyche.

As a teen-ager from a privileged background, all he wanted to do was flee from
comfort to danger; in prep school he made inquiries about going to the Congo to
fight as a mercenary, and he took up skydiving. In later years he would
substitute drugs, alcohol and outrageous social conduct, acquiring a reputation
for excess notable even by Hollywood standards and institutionalizing drug use
as a recurring motif in his movies; but as a young man coming of age, the
biggest high was courting death, and Mr. Stone made one of the most fateful
decisions of his life when he dropped out of Yale to volunteer for combat duty
in Vietnam, the most fearsome arena he could find. Next Comes Wall St. In the
last year, Mr. Stone has turned 40 and earned the ultimate accolades of his
profession, winning the Academy Awards for best picture and best director for
''Platoon,'' the movie he based on his own Vietnam War experience. He also got
Oscar nominations for his screenplays for both ''Platoon'' and ''Salvador.'' Now
Mr. Stone is about to begin shooting his next film, ''Wall Street,'' a story
about the high risks and hard drives of big-money corporate raiders and traders.

On the surface, it seems a marked departure from his previous work; for once, no
character will be eviscerated or dismembered with a chainsaw or have his head
bashed to a pulp. Indeed, Mr. Stone said he saw ''Wall Street'' as a measure of
personal change. ''There's no question that 'Platoon' is the end of the blood
cycle,'' he said. ''I think I got everything I had to get out of me on that.''

Nevertheless, the themes that have long haunted his work endure. ''Wall Street
is an extension of combat,'' Mr. Stone said. ''Taking over a company is like a
military action. In these raids they stay up for weeks on end on an adrenaline
high, and a lot of their terminology is war terminology: 'We're in the kill zone
here,' 'I'm going to rip his throat out.' I'm not talking about refined Morgan
Stanley bankers; I'm talking about buccaneers.''

'Boy Seduced by Corruption'

In transmuting the wars of the battlefield into those of high-stakes capitalism,
Mr. Stone, who is co-author of ''Wall Street'' and will also direct it, has also
transposed his other obsession: the critical moral choices that define character
with irrevocable consequences.

''It's still the boy seduced by corruption theme,'' he said. ''Like the guy in
'Scarface,' the young man in 'Wall Street' wants to make big bucks fast and is
willing to take shortcuts to do it.''

As with the Oliver Stone stand-in in ''Platoon,'' who is torn between the
conflicting pulls of good and evil as personified by two starkly contrasted
sergeants, the ''Wall Street'' protagonist is confronted with life-altering
decisions. There are also obvious parallels to the young American hashish
smuggler who finds himself imprisoned in a Turkish jail in ''Midnight Express,''
which was written by Mr. Stone.

''That character is the victim of circumstances, but you could also argue that
he put himself there by breaking the law, although he did it without realizing
the consequences of it,'' Mr. Stone said. ''He's the closest to the Wall Street
boy who breaks the law without realizing it.''

Like a recurrent nightmare, the motif keeps surfacing: the character who does
not know what he is getting into until it is too late and he cannot get out.

''When I got to Vietnam, I felt exactly like Chris Taylor felt in 'Platoon,' ''
Mr. Stone said. ''I felt like: 'My God, I've made a mistake. This is much worse
than I thought it was going to be.' ''

The Enduring Consequences

For some of Mr. Stone's characters, like the cocaine dealer Tony Montana in
''Scarface,'' which Mr. Stone also wrote, the crucial choice has fatal
consequences. For others, as for Mr. Stone himself, the injuries prove not
mortal but permanent. Like the character Chris in ''Platoon,'' Mr. Stone said he
felt himself forever marked by his experiences in Vietnam.

''The good man has a responsibility to destroy evil, which is what Chris does,''
Mr. Stone said. ''But in the process he takes the evil into himself. I think
that I went in innocent and came out really soiled, damaged, soul-torn - having
seen and done things that young people don't normally do. Anyone in a combat
troop comes back an older man, a more bitter man, an alienated man.''

That he did, returning to the United States as the classic alienated loner;
fortunately for Mr. Stone, he found his way to New York University's film school
and a teacher named Martin Scorsese. Mr. Stone has compared himself to Travis
Bickle, the human time bomb in Mr. Scorsese's movie ''Taxi Driver,'' and he
talks with some fervor about the outlet that creative expression provided for
his own emotional turmoil. Certainly Vietnam served as the formative crucible of
Mr. Stone's life, enduring as the source of many of his most powerful cinematic
preoccupations.

'It Doesn't Go Away'

''Part of my perception of reality was certainly dictated by my experience in
Vietnam,'' he said. ''What combat burned into our heads was the very real fact
that we could be dead any moment. Once you've been at that demarcation of life
and death, it doesn't go away after the war. I had had very romantic ideas about
war; I was bored with peace and domesticity and the conformist values of that
era, and I wanted to live more intensely.

''The war formed me; it was the major shaping event of my life, but it never
turns out the way you expect it to be. I realized the first day in the bush that
war had nothing to do with the illusions I had about it. It has nothing to do
with heroism. Incoming fire is very random and can kill you as easily as the guy
standing two feet away from you. And modern firepower is so devastating that the
modern small battlefield is really a slaughter pit. There was this sickening
realization that I had a year to go and the odds were pretty bad.''

Although that feeling of being trapped in hell has informed most of his work
since then, Mr. Stone says he sees such experiences as the most significant of
his life.

''It's wrong always to be in control,'' he said. ''You'd never learn anything,
and learning is more important than being in control. Most of the stuff I've
learned in my life has come from humiliation, defeat or stretching myself and
making a fool of myself. 'Excess leads to wisdom,' that's what Blake said. By
really knowing the limits of life as much as you can, you find out about life.
All the great moral choices are based on really being out there.''

Last week, only a few days after receiving his Academy Awards, Mr. Stone flew
from New York to Washington to deliver a speech at the National Press Club, a
stinging denunciation of Reagan Administration policy in Central America, in
which he sees parallels to Vietnam. Afterward, he made a stop at the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial, which he had never before seen. The visit left him moved.

''Did I survive Vietnam for a reason, to make a movie or write a book, or was it
just random chance?'' he said. ''I can't answer that question. I wanted to
believe that.''

Then it was time to leave the interviewers and autograph-seekers and head home
to Los Angeles and his wife and child for a brief vacation. ''I've come to
appreciate domesticity,'' said the man who once fled halfway around the world to
escape it. ''Love is the greatest thing of all. I haven't dwelt on that, but I'm
getting there. I'm growing; I'm trying to learn. Each film is a new experience.
I'm going to do a great love story some day, you'll see.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Oliver Stone (NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TALE OF 2 EMBASSIES: IRONIES ABOUND

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words


Shortly after the first American ambassador arrived in Moscow in 1933, Stalin
asked him over dinner whether there was anything he could do for him. Yes, the
envoy, William C. Bullitt, replied, he would like ''that lovely bluff
overlooking the Moscow River'' for an embassy site.

Stalin agreed, and so began what today may be the oldest unfinished business in
Soviet-American relations.

An embassy was eventually built, though far from the site Mr. Bullitt had
requested. But critics now say that the building is too infested with electronic
bugs to be usable. And in Washington, the Russians are barred by agreement from
moving into their new embassy until the Americans move into theirs.

Mr. Bullitt evidently sought the property on Lenin Hills - today the site of
Moscow University and government guest lodges - for the panorama of Moscow. He
hoped to build a residence patterned on Monticello, Thomas Jefferson's estate in
Virginia. A History of Embassy Project The Ambassador is unlikely to have
anticipated the technological advances in electronic espionage that would have
made such a high site lucrative. This vignette is among several that emerge from
a history of the embassy project prepared several years ago by Culver Gleysteen,
a Foreign Service officer, now retired.

One of the charges being aired in Washington is that the new Soviet Embassy
there occupies high ground, while the American structure in Moscow is low. Mr.
Gleysteen recalls not only that the Americans could have had the high site, but
also that it was the State Department that pressed the reluctant Russians to
take the high site in Washington.

Mr. Gleysteen, who served three tours of duty in the Soviet Union between 1950
and 1974, prepared his study in 1978 out of concern that the roots of the
embassy project were fading into obscurity. His conclusion at the time was that
''a mid-1982 completion date would seem optimistic.''

New Housing Already Occupied

It proved optimistic, indeed. American diplomats began moving into new housing
in the compound only last year. But the chancery is not ready for occupancy, and
52 years after Mr. Bullitt first cabled Washington that a new embassy was in the
national interest and won appropriations for it, American diplomats still work
out of their present cramped chancery in a leased building.

In broad outline, the history of the project parallels the ups and downs of
Soviet-American relations. The negotiations initiated by Ambassador Bullitt
stalled and were revived only in the 1950's.

In the meantime, the American Embassy first occupied a building next to the
National Hotel looking toward Red Square. And in 1952, the United States
accepted a Soviet offer of the present premises, a nine-story building on
Tchaikovsky Street, which is a section of the Ring Road around central Moscow.
The ambassador at the time, George F. Kennan, accepted the offer, Mr. Gleysteen
writes, because the site was reasonably central and close to the ambassador's
residence, Spaso House. Embassy Choice Is Called Poor The choice was probably a
mistake, Mr. Gleysteen writes. The embassy quickly outgrew the building, and by
the 1960's, he said, it ''had probably become the worst Foreign Service office
building anywhere, certainly for any major post.''

In Washington, meanwhile, the Russians were also in the market for a new
embassy. They had outgrown the building they inherited from the czarist period
on 16th Street N.W. and were shopping for a bigger property.

Their search met resistance from property owners who feared the effect of
Communist neighbors on real estate values.

A Soviet attempt to buy a property called Bonnie Brae in the Chevy Chase area
ran into opposition from residents. A subsequent bid to buy an estate called
Treganon in Cleveland Park, Mr. Gleysteen wrote, was opposed by J. Edgar Hoover,
the F.B.I. director, who lived nearby.

Finally, the State Department pressed the Russians to accept a Government-owned
property on Wisconsin Avenue that had been vacated by the Veterans
Administration. Mr. Gleysteen said intelligence agencies had no objection to
locating the Soviet Embassy on the site, an elevation known as Mount Alto.
Soviet Long Resisted Site Yet as late as 1971, the Soviet Embassy resisted the
site, on the ground that it was distant from the center and hard to secure
against harassment, like that of the Jewish Defense League.

In Moscow, the Soviet Government offered the Americans a site behind the
existing embassy that was slated for urban renewal. Though it has been described
as a low-lying ''swamp,'' it is in fact no swampier than any other part of
Moscow.

The discussion of sites got under way in 1959 when Nikita S. Khrushchev came to
the United States.

But with the shooting down of the American U-2 spy plane, the Soviet invasion of
Czechoslovakia, the war in Vietnam, bureaucratic wrangling and disputes over the
shape and value of lots, agreement was not reached until 10 years later.

It called for matching 85-year leases, the Soviet Embassy for the 12.5-acre
Mount Alto site, and the Americans for the 10-acre embassy site and the 1.8-acre
plot of Spaso House.

Then began even more involved negotiations over construction, ranging from
importing construction materials to the duration of the lease, the height of the
respective chanceries and control over the site during construction.

Russians Hired U.S. Architect

The Russians had a lesser problem, since they hired an American architect and an
American construction concern. In the Soviet Union, the sole building contractor
is the Soviet Government.

In the end, Mr. Gleysteen said, the agreement gave the Russians control over
basic construction, and the Americans control over plumbing, electrical and
other finishing work - a noteworthy fact in light of recent complaints that the
Russians imbedded their bugs into prefabricated concrete sections cast off-site.

The agreement was finally signed in December 1974, Mr. Gleysteen wrote, ''39
years after Ambassador Bullitt took up the issue with Stalin and 13 years after
the Soviet accepted our initiative to revive it.'' That was 12 years ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AMY CARTER TELLS COURT SHE SAT IN ROAD TO ALTER C.I.A. POLICY

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 917 words

DATELINE: NORTHAMPTON, Mass., April 13


Amy Carter testified today that she climbed up a fire escape and through a
window into a college administration building, and later sat down to block a bus
carrying arrested protesters, because she thought it would help end illegal
activities in Central America by the Central Intelligence Agency.

''Every time a person sacrifices themself for a larger injustice, it aids in the
cycle of change,'' said the daughter of former President Jimmy Carter. Now 19
years old and a sophomore at Brown University, Miss Carter is charged with
disorderly conduct at a protest rally Nov. 24 at the University of Massachusetts
at Amherst.

She echoed the testimony of others among the 15 defendants, who admit to the
acts they are charged with but argue that their disorderly conduct and
trespassing were justified to prevent greater evils.

Judge Richard Connon is, for now, allowing testimony on the C.I.A.'s activities
in Central America; that, along with the presence of Miss Carter and the 1960's
radical Abbie Hoffman among the defendants, has focused unusual attention on the
trial in State District Court here, which the defendants characterize as ''the
C.I.A. on trial.''

Defense Rests Its Case

The courtroom was filled with spectators and reporters as Miss Carter testified
today; at one point Judge Connon told a photographer with a noisy camera to stop
shooting.

Asked by the prosecutor, Diane Fernald, why she had left the building before the
arrests began there, Miss Carter talked about the power of her family name to
overshadow weeks of hard work by fellow protesters.

''Because of the publicity and things like that, I didn't feel it was fair for
me to join in an action before I met everyone and had seen what their feelings
are,'' she said. But she said she decided to be arrested when she saw the
actions of police officers in riot gear.

After the judge and jury left for lunch, the audience gave Miss Carter a
standing ovation and she embraced a fellow defendant.

The defense rested its case this afternoon after calling Miss Carter and other
defendants to the stand and presenting a series of experts, including a former
C.I.A. agent, former Government officials and specialists in intelligence
matters, to testify about their belief that the agency was involved in
assassinations, torture, and other illegal activities.

Value of Individual Protest

Edgar Chamorro, a former leader of the contras fighting the Marxist-led
Government of Nicaragua, testified on Friday about C.I.A. involvement with those
opposition forces. Ralph McGehee, who as a C.I.A. agent was the chief adviser to
the South Vietnamese secret police during the war there, said that he had been
part of an assassination project in that country.

Also last week, Daniel Ellsberg, a former National Security Council aide,
testified that he had been motivated to release the Pentagon Papers to The New
York Times and other newspapers by the acts of individual war resisters during
the Vietnam War.

Ramsey Clark, who was Attorney General in the Johnson Administration, testified
along similar lines this afternoon. ''I believe that if Rosa Parks had not
refused to move to the back of the bus,'' he said, referring to the event that
led to a boycott of segregated buses in Montgomery, Ala., ''you and I might
never have heard of Dr. Martin Luther King.''

Mr. Clark also testified that he had been lied to by the director and general
counsel of the C.I.A. while he was Attorney General, and that the agency ''seems
uninhibited by law.''

Judge May Not Allow Approach

The lawyers for the protesters are led by Leonard I. Weinglass, who defended Mr.
Hoffman and other members of the ''Chicago Seven'' in the famous trial after the
1968 Democratic National Convention. The defense is seeking to show that the
protesters felt their action was necessary to prevent the C.I.A. from breaking
the law. While Judge Connon has allowed testimony on the agency's activity, he
may later tell the jury to disregard it or he may omit mention of this
''necessity defense'' in instructing the jurors.

All the charges are misdemeanors. Of the 60 who were arrested, about half have
already been sentenced to fines or suspended fines; none have been jailed.

The prosecution has sought to focus the jury's attention on whether the
defendants felt themselves at risk because of the C.I.A., and whether they could
have expected to change national policy.

Prosecutor Cites Other Goals

Ms. Fernald has also pointed out that the goals of the demonstrators included
two issues not directly related to the agency: non-prosecution of students
apprehended in an earlier demonstration, and changes in the enforcement of the
university's ''picketing code.'' She has also sought to show that the university
was considering these issues before the students took over the building, Munson
Hall.

The case has been something of a personal trial for Miss Carter. The National
Enquirer has been asking questions about her academic record; The Star, another
supermarket tabloid, sent a reporter to find out if she had a boyfriend. And she
has been peppered with questions about her parents.

In response to a reporter's question today, she said that her parents had read a
newspaper article about Mr. Ellsberg's testimony, and that she had spoken to
them by telephone over the weekend.

''My parents told me they were proud of me,'' she said. ''They said they were
surprised we had accomplished this much and gotten this far.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOLLOWING HIS WHIMSY, SHANDLING FINDS SUCCESS

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 552 words


AMBLING along on Showtime for the past couple of seasons, ''It's Garry
Shandling's Show'' has become the pay cable crowd's ''Late Night With David
Letterman.'' Like NBC's Mr. Letterman, Mr. Shandling is low-keyed and kind of
goofy, given to noticing the smaller absurdities of life. He is a well-meaning,
rational soul buffeted by a world overdosing on silliness. Frustrated in love,
stymied by business opportunities and hounded by well-meaning friends, Mr.
Shandling muddles through life engagingly, his bite a good deal sharper than his
wimpy bark.

His show, complete with a dopey theme song, is a loose affair, allowing the
comedian to slip in and out of his sitcom character, who also happens to be
named Garry. He can talk directly to the camera, commenting on the supposed
action, and he can even walk into the studio audience, gathering reactions and
shaking hands. Yes, I know, George Burns did something similar on his old show
with Gracie Allen, but this is far more sophisticated, almost post-modern, if
you're partial to buzz-words.

Tonight's episode at 10:30 - directed by Alan Rafkin, written by Jeff Franklin
and Ed Solomon - provides an almost clinical study of the Shandling method.
Entering the small set, he tells the audience that this will be the season's
last show and that he is grateful for what has been ''a pretty full career for
me.'' It seems he has been given the lead in a new dramatic series called
''Force Boxman'' and will get to play ''a kind of cop.'' A promo tape shows
Force, an former veteran from the jungles of Vietnam, pointing a gun at a
villain and warning, ''Go ahead, I dare you.'' His partner in action-adventure
is a gorgeous former hooker named Amaretta Jones.

Saying goodbye to his regular cast and Bruce the unmoved cameraman, Mr.
Shandling announces that his replacement will be Red Buttons, who won an Oscar
in 1957 for ''Sayonara.'' Arriving soon after at a roadside diner, Mr. Shandling
looks up at the television set and, sure enough, there is Red Buttons taking
over his old show (''I'm more than delighted, I'm actually thrilled''). Mr.
Buttons quickly launches into his old television routines, including a tour
through history (Lot leaving Sodom: ''Salt I've got, popcorn I need''). He even
has his own guest star - the comedian Marty Allen. ''Boy,'' murmurs Mr.
Shandling enviously, ''how does Marty Allen get his hair to look so good.''

And so the show unfolds, going wherever the whimsy of the moment may take it.
When Mr. Shandling decides to return, after all, to his old pals and crew, they
are less than enthusiastic. ''We're finally on a hit show - we're going to be
famous,'' one of the performers says. Mr. Buttons is more diplomatic. ''You
started it all,'' he assures Mr. Shandling, ''all I did was come in and make it
funny.'' He even gives Mr. Shandling the secret to a successful act: ''You make
nice and you always end with heart.''

The result is simultaneously a spoof and celebration of television past and
present, a Pirandellian romp through the surreal terrain of comedy shtick. Mr.
Shandling, once a television writer (''Welcome Back, Kotter''), occasionally
does stints as guest host on The ''Tonight'' show. They have helped his career
considerably. But he seems to have found his ideal niche in this Showtime
series.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Garry Shandling with Shawn Southwick

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

'FRONTLINE' EXAMINES 'SECURITY RISK' OF 1946

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 585 words


PENN TOWNSEND KIMBALL, journalist, professor and sometime political aide, was
labeled a security risk by the State Department in 1946. The label, based on
flimsy evidence, has apparently never been removed. ''The Secret File,'' a
''Frontline'' documentary on Channel 13 at 10 tonight, examines Mr. Kimball's
case. Someone, it is clear, owes him an apology.

The Government file on Mr. Kimball began when he applied to the Foreign Service
and was offered a post in Saigon. He changed his mind then, and took a job at
Time magazine. Later, he would work for The New York Times and teach journalism
at Columbia University. Meanwhile, his security file stayed on like an undying
monster, occasionally regurgitating its old conclusion: Mr. Kimball was a
security risk.

How did this harm him? That's unclear; Mr. Kimball has had a successful career
in journalism and politics. Among other things, he worked for prominent
Democrats such as William Benton, W. Averell Harriman and Chester Bowles. It's
hard to say - and Mr. Kimball doesn't - that he was ever persecuted.
Nonetheless, suggestive incidents happened.

Thus, in 1962, the Kennedy Administration seemed ready to appoint him to the
Federal Communications Commission; then it backed off. At various times, his
passport applications were delayed. There are also hints that the security
labeling prevented him from getting fellowships and grants.

The worst thing, though, was that his wife, Janet, now dead, was falsely
implicated. Thin and misleading evidence linked her to two Communist spies. The
''Frontline'' documentary has been done on the cheap - film of Mr. Kimball
driving his car, walking on a beach, dialing a phone, while a narrator talks
blandly. It comes alive when Mr. Kimball, his voice choking, mentions his wife.
''I don't think I'll ever rest,'' he says, ''as far as Janet is concerned.''

Mr. Kimball wants an apology; he also wants disclosure of his security file
under the Freedom of Information Act. He is neither a radical nor a nut. In
1983, he wrote ''The File,'' a book about his experiences. In 1984, he sued the
State Department, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Central Intelligence Agency
and Federal Government as a whole for damages. In response, the State Department
and F.B.I. offered to destroy their files on Mr. Kimball. The C.I.A. apparently
said only that it might destroy its file in the future. The case is still
pending.

''Frontline'' is dealing with a serious topic. Security files, no matter how
erroneous or muddle-headed, have a life of their own. How many people like Mr.
Kimball have been investigated? Presumably, there have been tens of thousands;
many Government positions demand security clearances. At the same time, there
are investigations of suspected terrorists or spies. Dossiers pile up.

What should be done? ''Frontline'' gets a little foggy here; many serious
students of the problem get foggy, too. There is no simple answer. The
documentary says that security investigations can be frivolous. That's certainly
true. On the other hand, what about the Walkers or Jonathan Pollard? Spying is a
fact.

Meanwhile, the documentary - Michael Barnes is producer - uses the words
''informant'' and ''accuser'' interchangably. This is misleading; an informant
isn't necessarily accusing anyone. Nonetheless, citizens may not know they've
been accused unless the Government complies fully with the Freedom of
Information Act. Mr. Kimball, still awaiting an apology, persuades us it should
comply.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WINNERS OF PULITZER PRIZES IN JOURNALISM, LETTERS AND THE ARTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2636 words



PUBLIC SERVICE
Andrew Schneider and Matthew Brelis
The Pittsburgh Press

Mr. Schneider and Mr. Brelis were honored for 14 articles in which they
documented dangerous medical problems and drug addiction among airline pilots
and flight crews. Mr. Schneider, who was born in New York City and is 44 years
old, joined The Press in 1984 after working as a freelance writer and as an
Associated Press reporter in Concord, N.H. He won a 1985 Pulitzer Prize for
specializing reporting for articles on the nation's organ-transplant system. Mr.
Brelis, a 29-year-old native of Boston, graduated from Vassar College in 1980
and joined The Press the following year. The articles by Mr. Schneider and Mr.
Brelis helped lead to new procedures to test flight crews for drug and alcohol
use.

GENERAL NEWS REPORTING
The Akron Beacon Journal

The Beacon Journal's staff of reporters, artists, photographers and editors won
for coverage of a hostile attempt to take over the Goodyear Tire and Rubber
Company. Articles on the takeover attempt culminated in an eight-page piece on
Nov. 30, ''The Goodyear War,'' on the battle between the tire company and the
British financier, Sir James Goldsmith. The breakup of Goodyear would have
threatened Akron's financial and social fabric.

INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING
Daniel R. Biddle, H. G. Bissinger and Fredric N. Tulsky
The Philadelphia Inquirer

The three reporters won for a series titled ''Disorder in the Court'' that
documented conflict of interest, incompetence and politicking in the
Philadelphia courts. Mr. Biddle, 33 years old, graduated from the University of
Michigan and worked for The Cleveland Plain Dealer from 1976 until 1979, when he
joined The Inquirer as a City Hall reporter. He has covered the Pennsylvania
Supreme Court since December 1980. Mr. Bissinger was born in New York City in
1954, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and has worked for The
Inquirer since 1981. Mr. Tulsky, born in Chicago in 1950, has been with the
Inquirer since 1979 and has won a series of journalistic and legal awards. Mr.
Biddle and Mr. Bissinger spent more than two years investigating and writing
stories that uncovered secret meetings between judges and defense lawyers in
criminal cases, judges who raised campaign contributions from lawyers and later
heard their cases in court, and a regular system of picking judges for
political, not professional, reasons. Mr. Tulsky contributed an expose of an
unusual legal tactic: Philadelphia lawyers who won new cases for their clients
by arguing that they themselves had been incompetent in the original trial. The
series led to a series of investigations and reforms.

John Woestendiek
The Philadelphia Inquirer

Mr. Woestendiek won for a two-part series on a man wrongly convicted of
murdering a 71-year-old man in a Philadelphia delicatessen. Mr. Woestendiek, who
is 33 and was born in Winston-Salem, N.C., graduated from the University of
North Carolina and worked at The Arizona Daily Star in Tucson and The Lexington
(Ky.) Leader before he joined The Inquirer in 1981. Mr. Woestendiek's series
started with a call from a former motorcycle gang member whose son, Terence
McCracken Jr., had been imprisoned for life in the slaying. Mr. Woestendiek,
interviewing jurors and expert witnesses, got another man to admit to the
killing and won a new trial for Mr. McCracken, who was released from prison on
Jan. 27.

EXPLANATORY JOURNALISM
Jeffrey R. Lyon and Peter Gorner
The Chicago Tribune

Mr. Lyon and Mr. Gorner won for their seven-part series titled ''Altered Fates:
The Promise of Gene Therapy.'' Born in Chicago in 1943 and educated at
Northwestern University, Mr. Lyon joined The Tribune in 1974 after working for
The Chicago American, the Chicago City News Bureau and The Miami Herald. Mr.
Gorner, also a Chicago native, has spent 20 of his 44 years as a critic, editor
and feature writer for The Tribune. He is also a graduate of Northwestern
University and studied music criticism at the University of Southern California.
Their articles explored the lives of victims of some of the more than 4,000
known genetic disorders and the work of scientists who are developing cures.

SPECIALIZED REPORTING
Alex S. Jones
The New York Times

Mr. Jones won for his profile of the divided Bingham newspaper family of
Kentucky. The 40-year-old Mr. Jones, who was born in Greenville, Tenn., and
graduated from Washington and Lee University, has covered the press for The
Times for the last two years. He joined The Times in 1983 as a business reporter
after five years as editor of The Greenville (Tenn.) Sun. In his article on the
Binghams, he chronicled the family dispute that pitted brother against sister
and father against son. As a result, the family's papers, The Courier-Journal
and The Louisville Times, were put up for sale.

NATIONAL REPORTING
The Miami Herald

The Miami Herald staff won for more than 170 articles on the American arms deals
with Iran and the diversion of money from sales to the Nicaraguan rebels. In one
of its articles, 10 months before Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d acknowledged
that Lieut. Col. Oliver North had secretly transferred money to the rebels, The
Herald detailed how the lieutenant had directed the secret operation. The Herald
published many other exclusive articles detailing government deception.

The New York Times

The New York Times staff won for coverage of the aftermath of the Challenger
explosion, which included stories that identified serious flaws in the space
shuttle's design and in the administration of the space program. One of the most
important revelations was that the possibly disastrous defects in the shuttle's
booster rockets had been known several months before the launching and that
engineers had warned that cold weather could aggravate the problem.

INTERNATIONAL REPORTING
Michael Parks
The Los Angeles Times

Mr. Parks was honored for ''balanced and comprehensive'' coverage of widespread
unrest in South Africa. The 43-year-old Mr. Parks was born in Detroit, graduated
from the University of Windsor and began his reporting career at The Detroit
News in 1965. For The Baltimore Sun, he covered the Vietnam War and reported
from Moscow, Cairo, Hong Kong and Beijing, where he also served as bureau chief
for The Los Angeles Times. In December, the South African Government, moving to
restrict news coverage of the unrest, ordered him, without explanation, to
leave. The order was rescinded after an appeal by Mr. Parks's editors, who
pointed out that Government officials had been unable to cite a single
''inaccurate or unfair'' story among the 265 he filed in 1986.

FEATURE WRITING
Steve Twomey
The Philadelphia Inquirer

Mr. Twomey won for his magazine profile of life aboard the giant American
aircraft carrier America. Mr. Twomey, who is 35 years old, was born in Niles,
Mich., and joined The Inquirer in 1973 after graduating from Northwestern
University. He has covered suburban politics, education and labor for The
Inquirer and until recently was the paper's correspondent in Paris. In his
article on the America, he captured the daily routines of the ship's personnel
and raised questions about the half-million dollars a day it costs to operate.

COMMENTARY
Charles Krauthammer
The Washington Post Writers Group

Mr. Krauthammer, 36 years old, won for his witty, insightful columns on national
issues. Before turning to writing, the native of New York City and graduate of
Harvard Medical School practiced medicine for three years and worked on
psychiatric research policy in the Carter Administration. He joined the New
Republic as a writer and editor in 1980 and began writing a column for The
Washington Post in 1985. Mr. Krauthammer wrote some of the first columns about
the Iran-contra scandal, and his columns discussed such diverse subjects as the
Reagan-Gorbachev meeting in Iceland, affirmative action and AIDS in the work
place.

CRITICISM
Richard Eder
The Los Angeles Times

Mr. Eder won for his book reviews that appear biweekly in The Los Angeles Times.
Mr. Eder, 54 years old, was born in Washington and graduated from Harvard
University. For 28 years he wrote for The New York Times, covering varied topics
from wars to education to the Broadway theater. He held posts as a correspondent
in London, Madrid, Belgrade, Washington, South America and the Caribbean, as a
theater and film critic and as Paris bureau chief. Mr. Eder joined The Los
Angeles Times in 1982 as its New York-based arts critic. He now lives in Boston,
where he primarily reviews fiction.

EDITORIAL WRITING
Jonathan Freedman
The San Diego Tribune

Mr. Freedman, who turned 37 last Saturday, won for his editorials urging passage
of the Immigration Reform and Control Act, the first major immigration
legislation in 34 years. Born in Rochester, Minn., he graduated from Columbia
University in 1972. A novelist and illustrator, Mr. Freedman began as a
journalist in Brazil in 1973, after someone told him The Associated Press needed
an English-speaking reporter there. Mr. Freedman, who joined The Tribune in
1981, credits much of his success to his editor, Ralph Bennett, who encouraged
him to study immigration first hand before undertaking any editorials. ''I had
submitted a piece that described how the Mexican border was the place where
water goes south and the human river heads north,'' Mr. Freedman recalled. His
editor dismissed it with an expletive and said, ''Tomorrow, you're going to the
border.''

EDITORIAL CARTOONING
Berke Breathed
The Washington Post Writers Group

Mr. Breathed won for his ''Bloom County'' cartoon strip, which contains social
commentary in a setting of precocious children, peculiar adults and talking
animals. Mr. Breathed, 30 years old, was born in Los Angeles and graduated from
the University of Texas, where he developed the cartoon strip, which today
appears in 1,100 newspapers. Mr. Breathed, who lives in Evergreen, Colo., has
published four books of his comics. One of his winning cartoons depicts Dr. Opus
Spock, a penguin, testifying before Congress in support of the ''Star Trek
Strategic Defense Project.'' Like Pinnochio's nose, the penguin's beak grows
longer with each response.

SPOT NEWS PHOTOGRAPHY
Kim Komenich
The San Francisco Examiner

Mr. Komenich won for a series of photographs of the fall from power of President
Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines. Mr. Komenich, who is 30 years old, was
born in Laramie, Wyo. He joined The Examiner in 1982 after earning a bachelor's
degree in journalism from San Jose State University in 1979 and working for
three years for The Contra Costa Times in Walnut Creek, Calif.

FEATURE PHOTOGRAPHY
David Peterson
The Des Moines Register

Mr. Peterson won for photographs of people in Iowa hard-hit by the farm crisis.
Born 38 years ago in Kansas City, Mo., Mr. Peterson received a bachelor's degree
in art education from Kansas State University and one in journalism from the
University of Kansas. He worked at The Topeka Capital-Journal for two years and
has worked at The Register for the past 10 years. Mr. Peterson's winning
photographs included portraits of a family forced to sell their farm, a
once-bustling town now nearly deserted and a farmer's wife at the grave of her
husband, who had committed suicide.

FICTION
Peter Taylor
''A Summons to Memphis''

Mr. Taylor won for his novel of a New Yorker's return to his hometown of
Memphis. Mr. Taylor, who was born in Trenton, Tenn., and graduated from Kenyon
College, has taught English literature and creative writing at seven colleges,
including Harvard University and the University of Virginia. Mr. Taylor has long
been celebrated for his short stories of the South. In ''A Summons to Memphis,''
a psychological tale of a Southern gentry whose life is fox hunts and debutante
balls, Mr. Taylor's hero re-establishes his ties with a past he thought he had
rejected.

DRAMA
August Wilson
''Fences''

Mr. Wilson won for his play about a black man's quest for identity in
contemporary America. Mr. Wilson, who is 42 years old and lives in St. Paul,
dropped out of school in the ninth grade in his native Pittsburgh and is largely
self-educated. He is the author of ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom,'' which won the
New York Drama Critics Circle Award as the best play of 1984-85, and ''Joe
Turner's Come and Gone,'' which was performed last year by the Yale Repertory
Company. ''Fences,'' now playing on Broadway in a production starring James Earl
Jones, depicts a middle-aged sanitation worker and his tormented relationships
with his wife and son.

HISTORY
Bernard Bailyn
''Voyagers to the West: A Passage in the Peopling of America on the Eve of the
Revolution''

Mr. Bailyn, a professor of history at Harvard University and one of the nation's
foremost historians, won his second Pulitzer Prize for his detailed and
personalized portrait of British emigration to the American colonies. The
64-year-old Mr. Bailyn was born in Hartford, graduated from Williams College in
1945 and earned a master's degree at Harvard in 1947 and a Ph.D. there in 1953.
He won the prize for history in 1968 for his book ''The Ideological Origins of
the American Revolution.'' He won this year for the first volume in a
multivolume work entitled ''The Peopling of British North America.''

BIOGRAPHY
David J. Garrow
''Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King Jr. and the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference''

Mr. Garrow, a 33-year-old associate professor of political science at City
College and the Graduate Center of the City University of New York, won for his
biography of the slain civil-rights leader. Mr. Garrow was born in New Bedford,
Mass., graduated from Wesleyan University in 1975 and earned master's and
doctoral degrees from Duke University. His biography of the Rev. Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr. detailed his inner torment over his sexual adventuring and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation's attempts to use this weakness to destroy him.

POETRY
Rita Dove
''Thomas and Beulah''

Ms. Dove won for poetry that combines elements of autobiography and history. The
poet, who teaches creative writing at Arizona State University, was born in
Akron, Ohio, in 1952 and educated at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio,
Universitat Tubingen in West Germany and the University of Iowa. In The New York
Review of Books, Helen Vendler wrote that in ''Thomas and Beulah,'' Ms. Dove
''has planed away unnecessary matter: pure shapes, her poems exhibit the thrift
that Yeats called the sign of a perfected manner.''

GENERAL NONFICTION
David K. Shipler
''Arab and Jew: Wounded Spirits in a Promised Land''

Mr. Shipler, a 44-year-old foreign-affairs correspondent in the Washington
bureau of The New York Times, won for his exploration of Arab and Jewish
relations in the Middle East. Mr. Shipler was born in Chatham, N.J., graduated
from Dartmouth College and joined The Times as a news clerk in 1966. He was a
reporter on the metropolitan staff and later reported from Southeast Asia,
Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union and the Middle East. In narratives, anecdotes
and conversations, Mr. Shipler's book ranges over such topics as war and
friendship, social and sexual attraction and repulsion, nationalism and the role
of the Holocaust.

MUSIC
John Harbison
''The Flight Into Egypt''

Mr. Harbison won for his 13-minute cantata set to Matthew 3:13-23. The
48-year-old composer and conductor, a professor of music at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, was born in Orange, N.J., graduated from Harvard in
1960 and studied with Roger Sessions, Boris Blacher, Eleazar Carvalho and Dean
Dixon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SOME OFFBEAT OUTINGS ON A HOLIDAY WEEKEND

BYLINE: By ELEANOR BLAU

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 934 words


AMID the plentiful ways to celebrate Easter traditionally, here are some weekend
possibilities that have nothing to do with eggs or rabbits. They involve, among
other things, ghosts, workhorses, Svengali and medieval African music.

The ghosts can be found tonight at the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th
Street, in ''The Spooky Bunch,'' a 1980 comedy by Ann Hui, a Hong Kong film
maker.

It's the first of four Hui films to be shown there on consecutive Fridays, and
centers on a female spirit and her army of ghosts who inhabit some members of a
Cantonese opera troupe, causing havoc.

For instance, an uninhabited actor has to flee the stage when a sword fight
turns into the real thing. Eventually a Buddhist monk is called to trap the
ghosts in a jar.

Scheduled next Friday is ''The Story of Woo Viet'' (1981), about a Vietnamese
refugee who comes to realize he has cut off his roots, followed on May 1 by its
sequel, ''Boat People'' (1982), for which Ms. Hui is best known in the West -
about a Japanese photojournalist who becomes disillusioned with postwar Vietnam.
The movie on May 8 is ''Love in a Fallen City'' (1984), a romance set in 1940's
Shanghai.

All the films have English subtitles and start at 7 P.M. Single tickets are $5
($4 for students and the elderly); series tickets, $18 ($14 for students and the
elderly). The number for information is 517-8508.

Live horses including, maybe, the Lone Ranger's Silver, will appear in a
''Festival of the Horse'' at the South Street Seaport tomorrow and Sunday, noon
to 5 P.M. So will horse-drawn vehicles with a theatrical past, among them the
glass hearse from the film ''The Godfather'' and the original ''Surrey With the
Fringe on Top'' from Broadway's ''Oklahoma!'' Two Belgian draft horses pulling
wagons will tour the area ($5; $3 for children). Everything else is free, unless
you buy a memento for a dollar or two from a farrier operating a forge and fire.

The early, silent feature films that followed the era of nickelodeons were often
adaptations of Broadway hits, and those that survive are rare relics of the
early American stage.

Some of these - from the World Film Corporation in Fort Lee, N.J., run by the
theatrical magnates Lee and J. J. Shubert - will be shown by the American Museum
of the Moving Image in Astoria, Queens, in a two-weekend series, ''The Shubert
Touch.''

'Trilby' and Train Wreck

It starts tonight with ''The Wishing Ring'' (1914), a romance, and ''The Beloved
Blackmailer'' (1918), a parody of early melodrama.

Tomorrow's doubleheader will be ''Trilby'' (1915), in which Wilton Lackaye
re-creates his original stage Svengali, and ''The Whip'' (1917), a melodrama
that includes a train wreck - reflecting the stage fad then for special effects.

Programs start at 7:30 P.M., Fridays and Saturdays, but experimental video work
is on view starting at 6:30 P.M. Admission is $4. To make reservations, which
are advised, call (718) 784-4520. The museum is at 34-31 35th Street, five
blocks from the Broadway stop on the R line.

Senegalese Music

Performers from Senegal, three men and a woman, will play 11th-century court
music tomorrow night at 8 at the Lehman Center for the Performing Arts in the
Bronx.

They are Fulani - an ethnic group of cattle herders that once roamed all over
West Africa - and their music, intended for royal families, emphasizes
virtuosity. It is described as more subtle than the African social music
generally performed here by visiting troupes.

One sings, and the others each specializes in a different instrument: the
lutelike galam; the ritti, whose one string is played with a bow, and the xoddu,
an hourglass-shaped drum.

Tickets are $10. The center is on Bedford Park Boulevard West and Goulden Avenue
in the northwest Bronx. Information: 960-8833.

'Salome' Spoof

The Bill Cratty Dance Theater will perform at the 92d Street Y at Lexington
Avenue tomorrow night at 8 and Sunday at 3 P.M. with ''Salome'' - Mr. Cratty's
takeoff on the biblical tale, with music by Galt MacDermot of ''Hair'' fame -
and three premieres.

One is ''Muggsy,'' a spoof on vaudeville acts, and another is ''Going Bananas,''
which may sound like a spoof but isn't - people wrapped in elastic material are
manipulated by a nurse. They're ''struggling in a reality where there is no
escape,'' Mr. Cratty reported. The other premiere is a solo he will do to
Beethoven's Andante Favori (originally the slow movement of the Piano Sonata
Opus 53).

Tickets are $8.50 to $12.50. To charge, the number is 996-1100.

Disney Paraphernalia

It's hard to think of Snow White as middle-aged, but the Walt Disney animated
film of that name is 50 years old, reason enough to celebrate with a display and
sale of 150 cels (artworks) for various Disney films at the T. R. Gallery at 780
Seventh Avenue, near 51st Street.

The items range in cost from $150 for a serigraph (silk-screened image) of a
loving Minnie and Mickey Mouse (he has lipstick marks all over his face) from
''Mickey's Surprise Party,'' a film made for the 1939 World's Fair, to $3,350
for a limited-edition series of four hand-painted images from ''Lady and the
Tramp'' (1955).

A pair of limited edition, hand-painted cels from ''Snow White'' -one showing
the Wicked Queen, the other showing a happy Snow White being carried by a happy
Prince, with seven happy Dwarfs - is priced at $2,200. But you don't have to buy
anything, and admission is free. The show is on through May 11. The gallery is
open daily from 10 A.M. to 11 P.M. except Sunday, when the hours are noon to 6.
Information: 765-6975.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 18, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PRIZE WINNERS FIND GLORY BITTERSWEET

BYLINE: By JOSEPH BERGER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1461 words


Winning a major prize like a Nobel, a Pulitzer or an Oscar is generally regarded
as an undiluted moment of glory, but winners of such awards report that there
are sometimes bittersweet dividends as well.

Prize winners tell of a puzzling emptiness and disappointment as well as
affirmation and financial reward, anxiety as well as eminence and entree. Some
winners worry whether their next work will be up to the standard of a prize
winner. Others may feel that their prize was not really deserved. Still others
may experience the malaise that comes with wondering what worlds are left for
them to conquer.

The playwright Lanford Wilson, who won a 1980 Pulitzer for ''Talley's Folly,''
told of several young writers who said they felt blocked after winning
prestigious prizes, and he said he could understand why. ''Type 'This is the
next play by last year's Pulitzer Prize winner' at the top of a page and try to
write something underneath it,'' he said.

Internal Pressures Amplified

Dr. Steven Berglas, a clinical psychologist at the Harvard Medical School and
author of ''The Success Syndrome, explains ''that any success experience,
particularly a success marked by a prize, heightens performance expectations.''

Internal pressures are amplified from outside.

''Each time you achieve something significant, people look for the encore,'' he
said.

Winners also worry that their prize was not really merited and that they will be
detected as frauds.

''People inside tend to feel a little fraudulent, and winning the Nobel Prize
highlights that feeling,'' said Arno Penzias, winner of the 1978 prize for
physics. ''You see your own shortcomings, not those of others.''

Some winners of scientific Nobels are said to feel that they were rewarded for
work that was not their finest or that was the result of a serendipitous
discovery that could just as well have been made by someone else. Often, the
envy of some colleagues, who try to undercut the work that led to the prize,
serves to confirm such doubts.

In the aftermath of a prize, some winners report a loss of energy, a feeling
that they are coasting and have lost the hunger that drove them to achieve the
success.

''Unless you are very competitive, you aren't likely to function with the same
vigor afterward,'' said I. I. Rabi, who won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1944.
''You know, it's like the lady from Boston who said, 'Why should I travel when
I'm already there.' ''

Harriet Zuckerman, a sociologist at Columbia University who wrote the 1977 book,
''Scientific Elite: Nobel Laureates in the United States,'' found that the
productivity of Nobel winners declined to an average of 4 scientific papers a
year in the five years after their prize compared with 5.9 a year in the five
years before.

While some of this loss of productivity was due to age, she found the loss was
also the result of the distractions of increased celebrity and ''the inevitable
regression toward the mean that operates in many spheres of human performance.''


A Resentment of Admiration

Dr. Berglas said some people withdraw energy from their work because they resent
admiration given for an achievement, rather than for who they are as a person.
''You become subordinate to what you've done and you'd like to be known as a
person not a product,'' he said.

Another feeling that accompanies a major prize or unexpected success is one that
was captured in a jest by Earl W. Wallace when he won the Academy Award last
year for his screenplay for ''Witness.''

''I have an uneasy feeling my career just peaked,'' he told a nationwide
television audience.

J. Anthony Lukas said that his feelings after winning the 1968 Pulitzer for
special reporting were largely sheer delight, but that there was an underside.
''Of course I wanted to win one very badly, and once I had it there was this
letdown,'' he said. ''I worked 20 years in journalism, now is there anything
else to go after?''

Mr. Lukas won a second Pulitzer last year for ''Common Ground,'' his book about
the impact of Boston's desegregation plan on three families. The book took seven
and a half years to complete and, despite the prizes it won, he remembers
worrying: ''What am I going to do with the rest of my life?''

A Need for an Obsession

''Can I find something that I'm obsessed about?'' he remembers feeling. ''And
there was a kind of panic that I would never find something that I would care so
much about.''

He has apparently found such a project, because he has signed a two-book
contract with Alfred A. Knopf Inc.

While popular opinion suggests that prize winners can relax, many prize winners
report a subtle increase, rather than a diminution, in pressure to perform.

David Halberstam, who won a 1964 Pulitzer for his reporting from Vietnam and
emphasizes that his prize was overwhelmingly a joy, recalls nonetheless that
''for a while immediately afterward, you hated to put your name on any story
that was ordinary.''

''I really became inordinately, unusually sensitive that, if somehow a story was
mine, it ought to be a little better,'' he said. ''If you walked into a story
with other reporters, a little more was expected of you. There was an instinct
to write fewer pieces rather than more and try to make the fewer better. If you
were going to sign your name to something, you wanted it to have your own
signature.''

A New Set of Anxieties

In the case of F. Murray Abraham, who as a relatively unknown actor won an
Academy Award for ''Amadeus,'' the concern was over the dramatic intensity that
led to the award-winning performance. ''Will I lose some of my intensity because
things will get easier?'' he recalled asking himself.

''The fact is that the anxieties I had were replaced by new anxieties,'' he
said.

Several writers said that, after the glow of their prize wore off, they had to
return to the struggle with their work, which was daunting at first but
ultimately healthy. ''I know that very soon the phone is going to stop ringing
and I'll be back to sitting alone in my room at my word processor trying to make
another book work,'' Mr. Lukas said. ''There's no question that getting awards
is a lot easier than writing.''

Dr. David W. Kreuger, a psychoanalyst who has studied hundreds of successful
people, said that prize winners who experience the greatest disappointment are
those whose sense of self-worth depends on external affirmation and who have
expectations that the prize will provide love and fill other internal needs.
''If it had been sought to make one feel happy, complete or fulfilled, it
becomes apparent quickly enough that it doesn't do that,'' he said.

''You still may get bumped in the subway by a guy who doesn't know you won a
prize,'' he added. ''You're reminded daily of your humanness.''

Indeed, not winning a prize can be healthier, he suggested, because it ''often
provides a kind of perpetual series of occasions for hope.''

Twinges of Jealousy

Mr. Lukas said that, while most of his friends were very generous, some had
difficulty with his having a best seller and winning a Pulitzer, though, he
added, such responses were understandable.

''All of us who are writers, actors, ballplayers or other kinds of performers,''
he said, ''if we're honest with ourselves, we have to recognize that we do not
take undiluted joy in the successes of our friends, particularly if those
friends are competitors. We call the friend and say, 'We feel so happy for you,'
and when you search your own reaction you know your joy is somewhat mixed.''

Those who avoid the ''post-prize blues,'' as one winner described them, seem to
be those for whom their work, and not the prize, was the chief goal.

''The Pulitzer didn't tell me I was a great photographer,'' said Robin Hood, who
won the 1977 Pulitzer for feature photography as a staff member of The
Chattanooga (Tenn.) News-Free Press. ''I was excited to win, but I feel a lot
more about my photographs than anybody can tell me with an award.''

A Personal Measure of Success

Mr. Hood said he also kept a healthy perspective about the significance of his
award. ''It was the right image for that particular panel that year,'' he said.

''I rue the day that I feel I made the best photograph of my career,'' he added.

Mr. Wilson, the playwright, believes that ''success is something you have to
judge for yourself.'' One of his first plays, ''Lemon Sky,'' was a commercial
failure, but he regarded it as a success because he accomplished everything he
wanted with it.

''You can't take yourself all that seriously,'' he said. ''You do in your own
soul, in your own self-worth, but not out in the marketplace. It's just a
marketplace and you can't take what people think of you that week very
seriously.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lanford Wilson, the playwright who won a Pulitzer prize in
1980

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OF FIG LEAVES, ART AND OTHER DISPUTES;
Hong Kong: Uproar Over Film Censorship

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 2; Page 36, Column 6; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 490 words


FROM REMOVING FIG LEAVES on Italian masterpieces to censoring films in Hong Kong
to protecting antiquities in Israel, culture the world over provokes heated
debate.

Following is a roundup of reports from 12 Times foreign correspondents about
cultural issues that have sparked controversy and discussion in their countries.
In addition to reflecting the inextricable connections among art, money and
politics, their reports show that countries throughout the world are struggling
to maintain their cultural heritage and that television - its control,
programming and funding - is an increasingly important concern.


The Government here is facing sharp criticism after its admission that it has
been censoring films for the last 34 years without legal authority to do so. The
Government, which is headed by British officials appointed by London, apparently
censored films that it believed would offend China, Hong Kong's vast northern
neighbor.

The admission, which came only after a report in The Asian Wall Street Journal,
has provoked bitter accusations that Britain is more interested in placating
China than in protecting the interests of the 5.5 million residents of this
territory, which reverts to China in 1997. Supporters of direct elections here
are concerned that if Britain is unwilling to stand up to China on artistic
matters, it is unlikely to introduce democracy in the territory in the face of
apparent opposition from Beijing.

The fact that censorship took place was not new, although many residents
apparently were unaware of it until the recent publicity storm. What was new was
the realization that the Government knowingly censored films without any legal
right to do so.

''Such an abuse of power for so long is a shocking state of affairs, and is
contradictory to the spirit of rule by law,'' said the Chinese-language Hong
Kong Daily News. The English-language South China Morning Post lamented that the
incident undermined ''the confidence-building process so vital to Hong Kong.''

At least 21 films were banned outright by the Government, but certain scenes
were apparently cut from many others. Some films reportedly were even sent to
the Xinhua News Agency office in Hong Kong, China's unofficial representative in
the territory, for editing. The banned films included an array of little-known
titles, mostly from Taiwan and Vietnam, both of which are strongly critical of
the Beijing Government. One 1974 Hong Kong film that was banned portrayed a
group of young people who escape from China to the territory.

Hong Kong, clearly embarrassed by the reports, issued a statement confirming
that films had been censored ''on the grounds that they might damage good
relations with other territories.'' It also noted that the censorship had never
been challenged in court. In any case, the row seems likely to be settled
through new legislation that will grant the Government clear authority to ban
films.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: APRIL 19, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1505 words




$
          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   5    FINE THINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
                 $18.95.) The vicissitudes of a son of the 60's on his
                 way to the 80's.

 2      2   11   WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
                 (Morrow, $18.95.) The nightmarish experiences
                 that befall a woman and her family after her
                 appointment as Ambassador to Rumania.

 3      3   6    BOLT, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $17.95.) The
                 jockey-hero of ''Break In'' has to contend with a
                 romantic crisis, a family feud and an international
                 arms-selling intrigue.

 4      4   4    DESTINY, by Sally Beauman. (Bantam, $19.95.)
                 The 30-year romance of a couple with diverse
                 backgrounds and ambitions.

 5      5   12   THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
                 (Viking, $18.95.) A fairy tale, complete with an aged
                 king, two princes, an evil wizard and a mouse.

 6      6   38   RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam,
                 $19.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians in
                 World War III.

 7     15   2    TEXASVILLE, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon &
                 Schuster, $18.95.) From the 50's to the 80's in
                 Thalia, Tex. - a sequel to ''The Last Picture Show.''

 8      8   2    THE LADIES OF MISSALONGHI, by Colleen
                 McCullough. (Harper & Row, $12.95.) Men may
                 dominate but women rule in an Australian town at
                 the turn of the century.

 9     11   2    THE THANATOS SYNDROME, by Walker Percy.
                 (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) The continuing
                 battle between good and evil seen through a
                 psychiatrist's adventures in 1996.

10 *    7   29   THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy.
                 (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family
                 relationships in South Carolina's low country and
                 New York City.

11     13   14   NIGHT OF THE FOX, by Jack Higgins. (Simon &
                 Schuster, $17.95.) A mission to keep D-Day plans
                 from being discovered by the Germans.

12 *    9   25   FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts.
                 (Naval Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over
                 Vietnam.

13     12   9    OUTBREAK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $17.95.)
                 Tracking down a mysterious disease that strikes
                 certain physicians and their patients.

14 *   14   13   THE PANIC OF '89, by Paul Erdman. (Doubleday,
                 $17.95.) A financial wizard undertakes to defuse the
                 crisis besetting the American economy.

15 *   10   32   IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood
                 horrors haunt six men and a woman who grew up in
                 a small Maine town.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   16   A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein.
                 (Macmillan, $16.95.) A chronicle of one season
                 spent with the Indiana University basketball team.

 2      3   8    COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber. (Beech Tree/
                 Morrow, $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the
                 visits of ''intelligent nonhumans'' to his family's
                 place in upstate New York.

 3      4   10   THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf,
                 $24.95.) Australia from penal colony to its gradual
                 emergence as a flourishing nation.

 4      2   9    THE FITZGERALDS AND THE KENNEDYS, by
                 Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.)
                 From the Boston slums of Irish immigrants to the
                 White House: three generations of a family.

 5      6   5    BOONE, by T. Boone Pickens Jr. (Houghton
                 Mifflin, $18.95.) The autobiography of an oilman
                 and corporation-takeover entrepreneur.

 6      7   20   A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                 Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                 recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.

 7 *    8   50   FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/
                 Doubleday, $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations
                 from the television star and father of five.

 8            1  THIS 'N THAT, by Bette Davis with Michael
                 Herskowitz. (Putnam, $17.95.) The actress's
                 memories and opinions.

 9      5   10   ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph
                 Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $18.95.) A case
                 involving the murder of a Pennsylvania high school
                 teacher and the disappearance of her two children.

10      9   7    INTIMATE PARTNERS, by Maggie Scarf.
                 (Random House, $18.95.) Changing patterns in love
                 and marriage.

11     12   2    HOLD ON, MR. PRESIDENT! by Sam Donaldson.
                 (Random House, $17.95.) A White House television
                 correspondent comments on his assignment and
                 the ways of the news media.

12     10   5    BETTY: A Glad Awakening, by Betty Ford with
                 Chris Chase. (Doubleday, $16.95.) A former First
                 Lady's recovery from alcoholism and drug abuse.

13     11   58   YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss.
                 (Random House, $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden
                 Years Clinic in pictures and rhyme.

14            2  LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S.
                 Siegel. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) A surgeon stresses
                 the importance of the patient's mind and emotions
                 in treating serious illness.

15     14   14   THE SEARCH FOR SIGNS OF INTELLIGENT
                 LIFE IN THE UNIVERSE, by Jane Wagner.
                 (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Acerb observations on life
                 today; script of the show starring Lily Tomlin.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   28   MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO
                 LOVE THEM, by Susan Forward and Joan Torres.
                 (Bantam, $16.95.) How to cope with overbearing
                 men.

 2      3   4    HOW TO BE YOUR OWN NUTRITIONIST, by
                 Stuart M. Berger. (Morrow, $16.95.) Ways to create
                 a diet regimen for health and energy.

 3      2   25   THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE,
                 by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be
                 prepared at moderate cost.

 4      5   84   WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                 DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
                 standard reference work in a 1983 revision.

 5      4   44   THE ROTATION DIET, by Martin Katahn.
                 (Norton, $15.95.) A regimen based on the
                 Vanderbilt University Weight Management
                 Program.


 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

 AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

WHERE IS NICARAGUA? by Peter Davis. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The documentary
film maker (''Hearts and Minds'') visits Nicaragua as an intelligent amateur, a
curious gringo offering penetrating questions rather than answers about the
country as a revolutionary experiment and as an icon in the American mind.

STARING AT THE SUN, by Julian Barnes. (Knopf, $15.95.) Precision of language,
ironic detachment, a talent for incarnating ideas: these are the author's tools
in a brilliant novel about a woman living between enchantment and
disenchantment, between God and technology in the 21st century.

BEYOND OUR MEANS, by Alfred L. Malabre Jr. (Random House, $17.95.) America can't
live forever on borrowed money, says the economics editor of The Wall Street
Journal, and describes various possible consequences of trying, most of them
dreadful.

BEING INVISIBLE, by Thomas Berger. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) Enraged, cranky and
bold as usual, Mr. Berger delivers us a comic hero whose invisibility is a
weapon in his war on society.

BERLIN DIARIES, 1940-1945, by Marie Vassiltchikov. (Knopf, $19.95.) High life in
the Third Reich, the struggles of ordinary people and stirrings of the plot
against Hitler, recorded in detail and often with shrewdness by a clever White
Russian princess.

PERSIAN NIGHTS, by Diane Johnson. (Knopf, $17.95.) The Shah of Iran is falling
in Ms. Johnson's funny, frightening seventh novel; her protagonist, an American
wife and mother, learns moral goodness by learning involvement, too late to make
a difference.

ONCE IN EUROPA, by John Berger. (Pantheon, $14.95.) These stories of
contemporary peasant life in a French Alpine village may contain the best
writing yet by their protean author, a British art critic, screenwriter,
journalist and smart, loving observer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By PATRICIA LEIGH BROWN

SECTION: Section 7; Page 17, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 241 words


To non-weavers, the term interlacing sounds a bit cryptic. The noted textile
designer Jack Lenor Larsen and the writer Betty Freudenheim unravel it in
INTERLACING: The Elemental Fabric (Kodansha International, $60), a richly
illustrated volume that, in contrast to so many books on design, has a
distinctly anthropological bent. Interlacing refers to the kind of fabric
construction common to weaving, plaiting and braiding, in which each element
passes over and under elements that cross its path. ''Almost as elemental as
fire,'' write the authors, it is an extremely ancient technique that has spanned
a panoply of objects and cultures. The book, which is an appreciation of
interlacing as well as a description of it, covers everything from little girls
braiding pigtails as a fledgling act of childhood adornment, to the hundreds of
exquisite and practical variations - Czechoslovak bobbin lace, Guatemalan corn
dollies, East African beer stirrers, wedding baskets from Burkina Faso and the
legendary Panama hat. Though the book is at times a bit technical for a general
audience, the photographs, in particular, many in color, are an accessible and
enticing introduction to the subject, as is the excellent bibliography. Only Mr.
Larsen's voluminous personal experiences, fleetingly alluded to in the text, are
missing. What was the dean of New York textile designers doing in Vietnam, for
example, designing interlaced sea-grass mats?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of toy piper braided from plant fiber

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnamese, in Election Today, Have a Choice for First Time

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 406 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 18


The people of Vietnam will vote Sunday in the first national elections to offer
a genuine choice of candidates, according to official newspaper and television
reports.

Voters will choose 496 deputies to the National Assembly, the third to be
elected since the country was unified under Communist rule in 1975. They will
also vote for local councils.

Under new election procedures similar to those being introduced in the Soviet
Union under Mikhail S. Gorbachev, each constituency must have more candidates on
the ballot than the seats to be filled.

Vietnam is a single-party state - the Communist Party newspaper Nhan Dan called
it ''a tool of the socialist collective mastery system'' and a ''proletarian
dictatorship'' - and all candidates are required to accept the Communist
ideology.

''The election must be carried out in a truly democratic manner,'' the newspaper
said. ''Voters should not be driven into a situation where they merely have to
cast their votes for a preselected name list.''

Correction of Abuses Ordered

Local party organizations have been bombarded with directives about conducting
self-criticism, correcting political abuses, eliminating high-handed attitudes
and listening to the sentiments of local people.

Exemplary provinces have been praised in the official press - at least one was
reported to have introduced secret balloting in candidate selection - while
those with poor performance have been castigated.

On March 23, according to a domestic radio broadcast monitored and translated by
the BBC, a team of Hanoi assemblymen ''in a serious mood'' reviewed their
performance and found flaws. The team ''was slow in solving complaints and
denunciations from constituents'' and contributed little ''to the building of
various social-economic projects in the capital,'' the radio said.

In the election Sunday, the Hanoi candidate list will be led by Nguyen Van Linh,
who became General Secretary of the Communist Party in December.

Assembly Will Meet in June

Constituencies throughout the country have been directed to send into retirement
members who are too old or ill to function effectively and to look for
replacements who ''set good examples in their life style.''

The new assembly will not meet until June. Its first session is expected to
coincide with the completion of changes at the top levels of the Government,
according to Vietnamese officials and Hanoi-based diplomats.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New Book on Marcos Says U.S. Knew of His '72 Martial-Law Plans

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 778 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


Contrary to official assertions, the United States Embassy in Manila knew that
President Ferdinand E. Marcos was about to declare martial law in 1972 and did
not act to stop him, according to a new book by Raymond Bonner.

Drawing heavily on previously classified State Department and Central
Intelligence Agency documents, Mr. Bonner contends that the C.I.A. got a copy of
the martial law declaration several days before Mr. Marcos announced it. The
document was provided by a Filipino informer whom the C.I.A. had recruited from
among the small group of confidants who helped Mr. Marcos plan martial law.

The book also contends that President Marcos was not concerned about possible
adverse American reaction because he had telephoned President Nixon, who said he
had no objection to Mr. Marcos assuming absolute power.

The book, ''Waltzing With a Dictator: The Marcoses and the Making of American
Policy,'' will be published next week by Times Books, which is a division of
Random House. Mr. Bonner is a former correspondent for The New York Times who
has also written a book about El Salvador.

Look at Long U.S. Role

In his new book, Mr. Bonner asserts that American acquiescence to the
martial-law declaration was part of a long-term pattern of the American role in
Philippine politics. The book says that role was to bolster leaders who were
seen as friendly to Washington regardless of how corrupt or oppressive they
were.

The close ties between American Presidents and Mr. Marcos were cemented by the
lavish hospitality of Mr. Marcos and his wife, Imelda, as when Ronald Reagan,
then Governor of California, stayed at Malacanang Palace in 1969, Mr. Bonner
writes.

Also helpful, according to a C.I.A. memorandum Mr. Bonner obtained, was the
$250,000 the Marcoses gave President Nixon for his 1972 Presidential campaign.
The memorandum was considered so sensitive that instead of being sent as a cable
it was hand-delivered to the agency's headquarters in Langley, Va. During one of
the Watergate trials, Federal prosecutors found evidence of a smaller
Marcos-connected contribution, but the new book refers to different evidence.
Mr. Bonner said Mr. Nixon declined to be interviewed for the book. Telephone
calls to Mr. Nixon's offices on Friday and Saturday went unanswered.

Other Disclosure in Book

These are among the other disclosures in the book:

* As early as 1953, the Central Intelligence Agency under Edward G. Lansdale
provided more than $1 million to help elect Ramon Magsaysay President, with a
C.I.A. agent masquerading as a journalist for The Christian Science Monitor
writing Mr. Magsaysay's speeches, the book says. Once, when Mr. Magsaysay
delivered a speech written by a Filipino, Mr. Lansdale was so enraged he knocked
Mr. Magsaysay out. The C.I.A. went so far as to drug the drinks of Mr.
Magsaysay's incumbent opponent, President Elpidio Quirino, and discussed
assassinating an outspoken opposition senator.

* To help persuade Mr. Marcos to dispatch a small civic action team to Vietnam,
President Johnson agreed to pay him $39 million secretly, with State Department
officers delivering the money in quarterly checks.

* The C.I.A. early on was aware that Mr. Marcos and his wife were amassing huge
personal fortunes. In 1969, four years after Mr. Marcos was first elected
president, an agency profile concluded that he had already stolen several
hundred million dollars, Mr. Bonner writes. A C.I.A. study of Mrs. Marcos in
1976 determined that she had taken over a portfolio of four dozen companies,
including several banks, worth at least $150 million. The C.I.A. was also aware
that President Marcos and one of his associates, Herminio Disini, received
bribes of $25 million to $40 million from the Westinghouse Corporation for
helping it win the contract to build the Philippines first nuclear power plant.

The most striking new material in the book is Mr. Bonner's disclosure that the
C.I.A. warned the embassy that Mr. Marcos would declare martial law in 1972. The
information was passed on to Ambassador Henry Byroade, who returned to
Washington to confer with President Nixon and Henry A. Kissinger, then the
national security adviser.

Mr. Nixon ''seemed bored'' by the news, a former member of the National Security
Council staff who was present told Mr. Bonner. Ambassador Byroade later told Mr.
Marcos that Washington would back him if martial law was needed to put down the
then-tiny Communist insurgency. This was the pretext Mr. Marcos cited in
declaring martial law.

The White House and State Department have said repeatedly they did not know in
advance that Mr. Marcos would impose martial law.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Army Ratings Aim to Restore Sergeants' Authority

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 611 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


The Army is testing a new system for rating the performance of sergeants in an
effort to enhance their authority and prestige, according to Army officials.

The system is part of a wide effort to improve the training of the corps of
sergeants who are responsible in peacetime for the instruction and care of
soldiers and in war for the success or failure of small units on the battlefield
- and whether soldiers live or die.

Once in place, the system will apply to 277,000 sergeants in the top five grades
of the Army's 1.8 million enlisted soldiers. They are the leaders of infantry
fire teams and squads, commanders of tanks and section chiefs of artillery guns,
and the Army's middle managers.

Primary Aim of System

On the surface, the new ratings are intended to identify the best young
sergeants for promotion. Equally important, the ratings are intended to make
senior sergeants sharpen their leadership skills by insisting that they not only
rate their subordinates but also counsel them.

The underlying purpose, however, is to reinforce the authority of the sergeants.
John D. Miller, the personnel specialist in charge of designing the ratings,
said the system was intended to ''make clear who works for whom, and who writes
the report card.''

The new system, which emphasizes values such as selfless service, competence and
candor, is being tested this month. Mr. Miller said Army leaders were
particularly interested in making sure the two-page form for the ratings was
clear and easy to handle. Otherwise, it would be seen as just another piece of
paperwork and bureaucracy.

After the results of the testing period have been studied, Mr. Miller said, a
recommendation will be submitted to the Army Chief of Staff, Gen. John A.
Wickham Jr. If he approves, the system is to take effect late this year.

In the final years of the Vietnam War the authority and prestige of sergeants
plummeted as a lack of discipline spread through the Army in that unpopular
conflict. After the war the authority of sergeants was further undermined when a
volunteer Army replaced the draft and the service filled its ranks with high
school dropouts and other recruits who had low scores on intelligence tests for
those entering the Army.

New Incentives Bring Change

Consequently, many good sergeants left the Army, with their responsibilities for
training and caring for soldiers being taken over by junior officers. The other
services had somewhat the same experience, but not to the degree the Army did.

A reversal in the fortunes of sergeants began in the early 1980's as pay
increases attracted more qualified recruits. Less able sergeants were either
removed to make way for fast rising younger sergeants or were sent to
noncommissioned officers' schools for retraining.

Now the Army is seeking to solidify a revival of competence among the sergeants.
General Wickham, when he approved the concept of a new rating system last year,
said it was intended to foster a ''better approach to noncommissioned officer
professionalism.''

Basically, a senior sergeant who is rating subordinates will no longer merely
run a pencil through a check list, as in earlier systems. Instead, Mr. Miller
said, the sergeant doing the rating must write a short evaluation of the
subordinate's strengths and weaknesses.

''This is going to cause the raters to spend time thinking about values and
criteria,'' Mr. Miller said. The rating sergeant must assess a subordinate's
proficiency on the job, competence in a military specialty, physical fitness,
education, leadership, ability to train others, commitment to professional
values and sense of responsibility.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, APRIL 20, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1043 words




International    A3-9



An Argentine mutiny ended when the President met with army rebels and persuaded
them to surrrender. Later, he told cheering crowds that the officers would be
detained and would face justice.    Page A1



An Israeli shootout with Palestinians killed two Israel soldiers and three
guerrillas who had crossed into Northern Israel, the Israelis reported.    A1



News coverage for Nicaraguans remains poor, with the Sandinista Government
maintaining strict control over what can be published or broadcast. ''People no
longer believe what we read,'' one Nicaraguan said.    A1



Peace in Sri Lanka seems remote after a brutal massacre of Sinhalese by Tamil
guerrillas on Friday. ''I fear that we have reached the point of no return,'' a
Sri Lankan said.    A1



Efforts by the U.S. to counter spying have been hampered by problems known to
the Government for years, officials said. Some said recommendations for change
requested by the President would add little new information.    A6

Seoul police broke up a rally almost before it began, arresting scores of
anti-Government students. The swift and decisive move showed that President Chun
Doo Hwan will deal forcefully with protests.    A3



The Soviet nuclear power program has continued despite the Chernobyl explosion.
While the accident shook Western popular support for nuclear power, the Soviet
Union still plans to double capacity by 1990.    A4



A panel reviewing covert activities of the United States Government will
recommend consolidating some of the overseas operations and ending others that
are considered outdated, a White House official said.    A3



World population may grow faster than available resources unless a global
strategy of family planning is adopted, a new study says. It asserts population
could stabilize if control measures are quickly initiated.    A9



Vietnam vote is reported heavy

    A3



Easter in Seville . . .

    B7



. . . and in Rome

    B7


National    A12-17



Morton Thiokol will be paid more by NASA than it received before the Challenger
disaster to build the space shuttle's booster rockets. Some question whether
Thiokol will profit from redesigning the rockets' flaws.    A1

Scientists have photographed atoms for the first time in a newly discovered
superconducting material, revealing a surprising host of tiny flaws that may be
a key to its extraordinary electrical properties.    A1



Chlordane could cause cancer even when properly used, a new study by the
Environmental Protection Agency has found. The pesticide, used to control
termites, has caused cancer in test animals.     A12



Dallas elected a woman as Mayor for the first time in the city's history. The
election of Annette Strauss, a City Council member, capped a year of
extraordinary political ferment in the city.    A12



More Cubans have fled to Florida by makeshift rafts in recent weeks than usual,
the Coast Guard reported. Some speculate this may signal building pressure on
the Communist island for another mass exodus.    A12



Portland's Mayor will run again. Bud Clark made his announcement at his annual
charity ball after emerging unfazed from a dispute with his own police chief.
    A12

Michael Deaver will seek to overturn his perjury indictment today by resuming a
constitutional challenge to the special-prosecutor law, according to a lawyer
for the former White House aide.    A13



John Landis's manslaughter trial is creating mixed emotions in Hollywood. The
film director, charged with recklessly causing three deaths, had the support of
industry colleagues at first. ''Now they seem to be abandoning ship,'' one said.

    A15



Exotic fauna on Pacific's floor

    A14



1.2 million robberies a year

    A15



Washington Talk    A16



They're in good spirits at the Western White House

Measuring Congress

Regional    B1-4



New antismoking rules at work that are to be enforced in less than three weeks
have left many businesses grappling with a change that could have a profound
effect on the nature of the workplace.    A1



A gunman at an amusement park opened fire in a crowded plaza, wounding a
23-year-old man and sending dozens of other people running for safety, officials
said. It was the third violent incident at the park that day.    B1



Decaying bridges are a fiscal burden as heavy trucks, harsh weather and time
damage a transportation network once worthy of envy. ''The whole system needs to
be rehabilitated,'' a Connecticut official said.    B2



A legal dispute about zoning rules could affect community facilities, including
schools, churches and doctors' offices. The dispute turns on whether such
buildings are exempt from certain rules applying to residential areas.    B3



Senator Moynihan traveled upstate in New York campaigning during Congress'
Easter recess. Although Mr. Moynihan has not announced he will run for a third
term, he said, ''I think I probably will.''    B1

A 'workfare' proposal in New Jersey proposed by Governor Kean has received
praise from both sides of the aisle in the Legislature. ''The amount of support
that greeted the proposal was beyond my expectations,'' he said.    B4



Columbia is embroiled in a dispute about the school's housing policy that is one
aspect of a deeper, continuing mistrust of the university among many people in
the surrounding neighborhoods.    B1



Columbia sues in eviction

    B12



A two-week chess tournament ended.Yasser Seirawan from the United States and
Andras Adorjan from Hungary shared top honors in the New York Open, the nation's
richest and most prestigious chess competition.    B3



Trucks and Mercedes do not mix for the gentry of Greenwich, Conn., who are
troubled that their town of stately mansions might soon become home to a
truck-weigh station. ''The esthetics!'' one resident said.    B2



Secular, sacred and political: It's Easter

    B1


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VOTING IN VIETNAM IS REPORTED HEAVY

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 300 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 19


Vietnam reported a heavy turnout today in general elections intended to ease out
the Communist Party's old guard and bring in a new and more efficient
government.

The Hanoi radio said more than half the voters cast their ballots before noon.

It was the third election held since reunification in 1975 and the country's
most open to date.

Pham Van Dong, who has been chairman of the Council of Ministers since 1955,
confirmed he would be stepping down when the new Assembly meets in June,
according to a broadcast monitored here.

''I've been in this post too long,'' Mr. Dong, 81 years old, told journalists
after casting his vote in Hanoi. ''The National Assembly will find a worthy
person to hold this post.''

Voters were offered 829 candidates for 496 seats and were urged to pick a more
dynamic legislature to carry out the new policies set out by the ruling
Communist Party.

Truong Chinh, 80, the State Council chairman and the only other living link to
the group around Ho Chi Minh that founded the party in 1930, was also expected
to be replaced by the Assembly in June.

Nguyen Van Linh, who replaced Mr. Chinh as party chief in December, stressed
that his policy of economic ''renovation'' meant that deputies must be more
accountable to the electorate.

''Deputies must listen to the opinions of the people,'' Mr. Linh, 72, said after
opening a polling station in the capital.

Twelve years after defeating the United States-backed Saigon Government, Vietnam
still suffers shortages of food and consumer goods; inflation has been as high
as 700 percent, and there has been widespread corruption and failure to meet
production targets.

Under Mr. Linh's leadership, the party announced major changes last week, using
Western-style support for private business to revive the economy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Pentagon's Cartoon Offensive

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 406 words


Each spring, just as the crocuses wilt, the Pentagon's printing presses churn
out a tulip-red broadsheet entitled ''Soviet Military Power.'' This hardy
perennial, grown with finest intelligence fertilizer, features Soviet military
equipment just the way the Kremlin would like the world to see it - a teeming
profusion of menacing missiles, planes, ships and the like, all outnumbering
their American counterparts. Thus begins the annual bean-count battle of Soviet
versus American weapons.

The message of ''Soviet Military Power 1987,'' just like its predecessors, is
that the Russians have so many weapons Congress must vote still more money to
match them. But the bright pictures and lurid text tell only part of the story.
It's true that over a period of steady military investment the Soviet Union has
purchased a formidable arsenal. But counting beans is absurd as the main measure
of military strength.

Whenever Soviet weapons get off the pages of ''Soviet Military Power'' and onto
a battlefield, they undergo a striking transformation. The half-billion- dollar
trove of Soviet equipment the Chadians reportedly captured last week didn't help
the Libyans sustain their invasion. The Soviet fighters and extensive air
defense system supplied to the Syrians didn't prevent the Syrian Air Force from
losing 79 planes against Israel's one loss in 1982. The Iraqis are not finding
that their largely Soviet equipment gives them a decisive edge over Iran.

Of course Soviet weapons might perform very differently in Soviet hands from the
way they do in the hands of Soviet clients. That's just the point that ''Soviet
Military Power'' misses. Tactics and training are also critical factors in
determining battles. Hardware alone is rarely decisive, or Americans would have
prevailed in Vietnam, Arabs against Israel, Goliath against David.

Even considering just weapons, American planes, missiles and ships are generally
of higher quality. To compare just numbers on each side ignores the choice made
by the Army, Navy and Air Force to spend their budget on smaller numbers of
presumably higher quality weapons.

''Soviet Military Power'' tells too little about the Soviet Union and too much
about the Pentagon's propensity to portray money and weapons as the only main
ingredients of military strength. With such cartoons, the Pentagon undermines
the credibility of its own powerful case for balancing Soviet military power.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MAXWELL D. TAYLOR, SOLDIER AND ENVOY, DIES

BYLINE: By ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 3090 words


Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor, a daring pioneer commander of airborne troops who became
a major force in determining American military and diplomatic strategy from
World War II through the Vietnam War and beyond, died Sunday night at Walter
Reed Army Hospital in Washington. He was 85 years old.

As a special emissary to South Vietnam for President Kennedy and as President
Johnson's Ambassador to South Vietnam during the American military buildup
there, General Taylor was one of the most influential figures in the American
military and diplomatic presence in Southeast Asia.

In the 1950's, when much of the military establishment favored nuclear strikes
as the main line of strategic defense, he spoke out repeatedly in favor of a
more flexible response and became one of the main architects of the modern army.
It was his belief that the infantryman was indispensable in the atomic age,
especially for fighting small-scale conflicts.

Influenced Kennedy Campaign

The general's views, articulated in his best-selling book ''The Uncertain
Trumpet,'' influenced Senator John F. Kennedy, who used some of the general's
arguments in his 1960 Presidential campaign and, as President, turned to General
Taylor for advice.

General Taylor headed a mission to South Vietnam in 1961 to determine the
Communist threat to that country, made recommendations on the possible
deployment of American troops in the conflict - and thus may have played a
fateful role in increasing United States participation in the war.

At other times in his career, General Taylor was a decorated battlefield
commander, commandant of West Point and American military commander in Berlin.
He led American and United Nations forces in the Korean War and, before his
final retirement, as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under President
Kennedy.

In announcing his death yesterday, the Pentagon said General Taylor had been
admitted to the hospital in mid-January. An Army spokesman, Maj. Bruce Bell,
reported that he died at 9:55 P.M. Sunday of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a
degenerative disease of the nerve cells that is better known as Lou Gehrig's
disease.

Tributes Are Expressed

Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger declared, ''Throughout his life,
General Taylor epitomized what it means to be a soldier, a diplomat and a
scholar.'' He said he would be remembered as ''one of the great military men in
American history.''

''America has lost one of the greatest soldier-statesmen in its history, and the
Kennedy family has lost one of our closest and dearest friends,'' Senator Edward
M. Kennedy said yesterday.

''General Taylor was that rare and gifted military leader in the nuclear age who
also understood the importance of nuclear arms control. As chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, his support made the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963
possible,'' the Massachusetts Democrat said.

''To President Kennedy, that treaty was the finest achievement of his
Administration, the first step back from the nuclear brink, and it could not
have happened without Maxwell Taylor. We shall miss his courage, his leadership
and his friendship.''

Jumping Into Normandy

The tall, ramrod-straight general was a hero in the invasion of Sicily and Italy
and, when he parachuted with the 101st Airborne Division into Normandy on D-Day
in June 1944, he became the first American general to go into battle on French
soil. He was a major figure in the winning of the Battle of the Bulge.

General Taylor might as easily have pursued an academic career. He had been a
top honors graduate of West Point and later taught languages there. Fluent in
several languages, he was as familiar with Virgil and Polybius as he was with
Caesar and Clausewitz.

It was typical of the general, for example, to quote Polybius, a Greek historian
of the pre-Christian era, when he testified before a Congressional committee in
1966 on the principle that guided the American bombing of North Vietnam: ''It is
not the purpose of war to annihilate those who provoke it, but to cause them to
mend their ways.''

Born Aug. 26, 1901, in Keynesville, a small town in north-central Missouri,
Maxwell Davenport Taylor was the only child of John Earle and Pearle Davenport
Taylor. His father was a lawyer for a railroad. Young Maxwell was much
influenced by the Civil War tales of his maternal grandfather, who fought for
the Confederacy. When he was 5 years old, he wrote years later, he decided he
wanted to go to West Point. He was an active debater at Northeast High School in
Kansas City, graduated at age 15, and went on to Kansas City Junior College.

While there, he took the entrance examinations for both the United States
Military Academy and the Naval Academy. Although the future general had always
excelled in such studies as Latin, Greek and Spanish, his knowledge of geography
was so limited that he failed the Annapolis examination.

Why He Wasn't an Admiral

''If the Strait of Malacca had been in Europe, I might have wound up an admiral
instead of a general,'' General Taylor said years later.

At West Point he was a cadet captain, editor of the student newspaper and in
1922 graduated as the youngest cadet, fourth from the top of his class
academically. As a second lieutenant in the Corps of Engineers, he attended the
Engineers School in Virginia for a year before being assigned to duty in
Maryland, Hawaii, and Washington state.

In the years after World War I, while the United States was all but disarmed
militarily, advancement was slow in the regular Army. Lieutenant Taylor, who had
transferred to the 10th Field Artillery in 1926, did not win his captain's bars
until 1935.

Before that, marked as a bright young officer, he had been assigned to Paris to
perfect his French, and on his return was sent to West Point to teach French and
Spanish. He also attended the Army's Field Artillery School and, after a
two-year course at the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth,
Kan., was posted to the United States Embassy in Tokyo to learn Japanese. In
1939 he served as an assistant military attache in Beijing.

An Accidental Paratrooper

After a course at the Army War College in June 1940, Major Taylor accompanied
Gen. Matthew B. Ridgway on an inspection of defense forces in nine Latin
American countries, and then took command of a field artillery battalion. By the
time World War II broke out, he was chief of staff to General Ridgway, then
commander of the 82d Infantry Division, which had been chosen as the nucleus of
the Army's first two airborne divisions.

''I thus became a paratrooper almost entirely by accident,'' said General
Taylor, who was promoted from colonel to brigadier general in December 1942,
made artillery commander of the 82d Airborne, and shipped out with his division
in March 1943. The 82d trained in Morocco before joining the invasion of Sicily
and Italy in July 1943.

Much of General Taylor's future military career was to hinge on a daring act in
the fall of 1943, when he volunteered for what has been called one of the most
dangerous missions of the war.

Marshal Pietro Badoglio had just secretly surrendered the Italian forces to the
Allies, but a strong anti-Badoglio faction of Italians still controlled Rome,
and the city was cordoned by German troops. An Allied airborne invasion of Rome
was considered, to coincide with the Badoglio surrender announcement. Gen.
Walter Bedell Smith, chief of staff to Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Allied
Commander, needed a high-ranking emissary to slip into Rome and determine the
feasibility and necessity of an airborne landing.

Warned of Risks

General Taylor and Col. William Tudor Gardner of the Army Air Corps landed in a
small boat at night at the Italian port of Gaeta, where they were met by
frightened Badoglio agents who warned them that, should partisans of either side
discover them on Italian soil, they could be stood against a wall and shot. The
American officers drove into Rome through enemy lines, going only so far as to
remove their military caps to conceal their identities.

Finding that the Italians were not strong enough to root out the Germans in and
around the city, General Taylor used his radio to call off the Allied airborne
attack and avoid the almost certain loss of hundreds of his men's lives.

General Eisenhower later wrote of General Taylor: ''The risks he ran were
greater than I asked any other agent or emmisary to take during the war - he
carried weighty responsibilities and discharged them with unerring judgment and
every minute was in imminent danger of discovery.''

The Rome mission won General Taylor a Silver Star and, a few months later,
command of the 101st Airborne Division and promotion to major general. After he
parachuted with his troops into Normandy, he won a Distinguished Service Cross
and the nickname ''Mr. Attack.''

Led Invasion of Netherlands

After 33 days of intensive battle in France, General Taylor took his division
back to England, where the 101st was attached to the First Allied Airborne Army.
On Sept. 17, 1944, he led the 101st in the airborne army's invasion of the
Netherlands and, in 73 days of hard fighting, suffered a minor wound.

Called to Washington on a special mission, he was not present at Bastogne,
Belgium, when the Germans launched an overwhelming last-ditch offensive, the
Battle of the Bulge, in the Ardennes forest in December 1944. As the 101st
heroically held out against intensive attacks, General Taylor rushed back to the
front to assist in the drive to relieve Bastogne, which was accomplished by Gen.
George S. Patton's Third Army in January 1945.

Then it was back to West Point. In September 1945, General Taylor was installed
as the 37th superintendent of the Military Academy. At 44, he was the youngest
superintendent since Gen. Douglas MacArthur, who assumed the post in 1919 when
he was 39.

General Taylor was credited with completely overhauling the West Point
curriculum, which had drifted toward a great emphasis on engineering and the
physical sciences. ''The cadets should not live in a mental cloister,'' he said.
''Their interests must be catholic, avoiding the small horizons sometimes
attributed to military men.''

The new superintendent also de-emphasized football at West Point, a national
powerhouse at the time. The game against Notre Dame, once an annual event, was
dropped after the 1947 contest and not resumed until 1957.

Chief of Berlin Government

In January 1949, General Taylor became Chief of Staff of American Forces in
Europe. That September, he was appointed the first commander of the American
Military Government in Berlin, which the Allies had divided into American,
British, French, and Soviet sectors.

His conduct as leader of the 3,000-man Berlin garrison in a constantly ticklish
situation - there was much friction between the Soviet commander and the Allied
commanders - won General Taylor a high-level post in the Pentagon, where he
served from 1951 to 1953 as Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations and
Administration.

General Taylor, who succeeded Gen. James A. Van Fleet as commander of the Eighth
Army and United Nations forces in Seoul early in 1953, planned strategy for some
bitter fighting in the closing months of the Korean War. He did so while hewing
to instructions from President Eisenhower, who was trying to arrange an
armistice, not to rout the enemy but to contain him. After an armistice was
signed July 17, 1953, the general remained in Seoul to arrange prisoner
exchanges, reinforce South Korea's army, and direct the Eighth Army's efforts to
help rebuild the war-torn country.

When General Taylor became Army Chief of Staff in June 1955, he succeeded
General Ridgway, who had alienated President Eisenhower by pushing for a large
army. It was a time of change and the President, despite his own Army
background, had sided with the Air Force view favoring, as the country's first
line of defense, development of a massive nuclear strike-and- retaliation
potential.

Conflict on Military Policy

General Taylor came into almost immediate conflict with the chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. Arthur W. Radford, who had President Eisenhower's
staunch backing and favored the massive nuclear strike-and-retaliation line. It
was General Taylor's view, which he expressed with increasing frustration, that
the nation's military policy should be based on ''flexible response.''

''Air power is our initial line of defense,'' he conceded, ''but no one has
proved to my satisfaction that we will have only world wars to be settled only
by big bangs. Specific cases have a way of differing from expected patterns, in
many ways, but infantrymen at one time or another become indispensable. Nothing
we have discovered or expect to discover will reduce the need for brave men to
fight our battles. The atom bomb is no weapon to counter a coup d'etat. Airborne
troops appear to be an ideal force to police the free world.''

But at meetings of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Taylor's ideas usually
fell on deaf ears. He later recalled he had been outvoted on 20 of 23 major
issues by Admiral Radford and the Air Force Chief of Staff. And so, in 1959, he
resigned as Army Chief of Staff and requested retirement.

''For four years I have struggled to modernize the Army, and my success was
limited,'' he said, adding with heavy sarcasm: ''So I decided I would do one
thing for the country and withdraw an obsolescent general from inventory.''

Book Presents Position

General Taylor's service to his country was far from over, however.

He wrote ''The Uncertain Trumpet,'' its title taken from I Corinthians 14:8:
''For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself for
battle?'' The book severely criticized the Pentagon's organization, reviewed
General Taylor's controversies with the Joint Chiefs of Staff under President
Eisenhower and advocated scrapping the Joint Chiefs of Staff. General Taylor
recommended substituting a single Chief of Staff with control of an integrated
military budget.

General Taylor served briefly as board chairman of an electric company serving
Mexican communities and as president of the Lincoln Center for the Performing
Arts in New York City.

Following the Bay of Pigs catastrophe in 1961, President Kennedy, who had
publicly assumed full responsibility for the debacle, yet felt he had been
ill-served by the Central Intelligence Agency and the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
called on General Taylor to conduct an investigation of the affair. The general
concluded that, in the future, the C.I.A. might be allowed to continue
small-scale undercover activities but should not be permitted to take an
operational role in major undertakings of the magnitude of the Cuban invasion.

Drafted by Kennedy

President Kennedy, who had become disenchanted with the advice he was getting
from the Joint Chiefs, created the new White House post of Military
Representative of the President and persuaded General Taylor to return to active
duty and accept it in July 1961. The President also made General Taylor his
personal watchdog over the nation's intelligence apparatus.

Mr. Kennedy depended on the general for advice on the crisis over Berlin, which
led to construction of the wall that separated East Berlin from West Berlin, and
other military-political problems, notably the gathering storm in Vietnam.

Considering General Taylor's past difficulties with the Joint Chiefs of Staffs,
his appointment by President Kennedy, in September 1962, to be chairman of that
body was not without irony. The general made no rush to make over the defense
establishment in his own image, however, apparently because of the escalating
Vietnam War. He did note, however, that the nature of that conflict, the Cuban
crisis, and other ''small wars'' lent strength to his argument that highly
mobile forces capable of distant strikes had only begun to demonstrate their
usefulness.

Ambassador to Saigon

General Taylor continued as chairman of the Joint Chiefs after President Kennedy
was assassinated on Nov. 22, 1963, and succeeded by Lyndon B. Johnson. Two years
later, as Vietnam was receiving more and more military support from the United
States, President Johnson asked the general to become Ambassador to Saigon. He
resigned that post in 1965, but continued to serve as a special consultant to
Mr. Johnson until 1969.

In 1984, General Taylor listed what he called three major lessons the United
States should have learned from the Vietnam War.

''The first is that before we ally ourselves to another country, we must
ascertain to what extent they can exploit our help,'' he said. ''We know the
great effort we expended on Vietnam. The large percentage of the effort was
unusable.

''Second, we should declare war. President Johnson thought the Tonkin Gulf
Resolution ample, but it was not. Many of the opponents of the war were noisy
and felt that they were being patriotic by complaining about the policies of
President Johnson. In case of war, we would have said they had to rally around
the flag, which they did not do.''

The third lesson of Vietnam, General Taylor said, was ''you should never let
television on the battlefield.'' He added: ''In World War II, the press was
admirable because they felt they were American citizens and that their country
was sacred. In Vietnam there was the feeling on the part of some of the press
that their task was to destroy the American command and to work against what was
being done. That kind of thing should not be tolerated.''

In retirement, General Taylor occasionally testified before Congressional
committees concerned with military matters, and continued to write articles for
military and foreign affairs publications. Among his books were ''Responsibility
and Response'' (1967) and ''Precarious Security'' (1976).

General Taylor maintained a home on Washington's Embassy Row with his wife, the
former Lydia Gardner Happer, whom he married in 1925 and who survives him. Also
surviving are their two sons, John Maxwell, who went to Williams College, and
Thomas Happer Taylor, who was a West Point graduate and Army officer.

Of his son Thomas, General Taylor once remarked: ''He did something at the
Academy that I could never do. He made the choir.''

The Army spokesman, Major Bell, said the funeral will be at 10 A.M. Thursday at
the Memorial Chapel of Fort Myer, Va., to be followed immediately by burial at
Arlington National Cemetery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor (NYT, AP & UPI)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Soviet-China Talks End With 2 Sides at Odds

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 236 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 20


The Soviet Union and China completed weeklong talks today on normalizing
relations, but diplomats said they remained at odds over the problems of
Afghanistan and Cambodia.

A statement issued by the official Soviet press agency Tass said Deputy Foreign
Ministers Igor A. Rogachev and Qian Qichen had held ''profound discussions'' on
regional conflicts.

They also exchanged views on the state of political, economic, scientific and
cultural relations between Moscow and Beijing and confirmed that both countries
wished to seek a further improvement in their relations, Tass said.

They also decided to hold a further round of talks in Beijing in October.

China has insisted that there can be no major improvement in relations between
the two powers while Soviet forces remain in Afghanistan and Vietnamese troops
remain in Cambodia.

Soviet officials say that although they are ready to discuss these problems with
China, they cannot be negotiated since they are questions of Soviet relations
with Kabul and Hanoi's relations with Phnom Penh.

Mr. Rogachev and Mr. Qian began talks last Tuesday, the latest round in a series
as part of the effort by Mikhail S. Gorbachev to mend ties with China. Mr.
Gorbachev has already pledged to move some of the Soviet Army units out of
Mongolia whose presence has been called by China the third of the ''three
obstacles'' to better relations between Moscow and Beijing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEWS;
NBC NEWS'S 'TRILLION FOR DEFENSE'

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 697 words


THE title explains it: ''A Trillion for Defense: What Have We Bought?'' A lot of
hardware, ammunition and weapons systems, the NBC News special answers, although
not always sensibly or well. Interservice rivalries, improper purchasing
procedures and a lack of policy planning hurt the process. The criticisms are
not new, but the special, on Channel 4 at 10 o'clock tonight, presents them in
fresh, timely fashion. The program is worth watching.

Implicit in the program seems to be the notion that we face neither nuclear war
nor large-scale conventional war. There may be wishful thinking in this. After
all, hundreds of thousands of soldiers stare hostilely from both sides in
Europe. If war did come, it could involve huge forces. Even in Vietnam, the
United States had up to 500,000 troops in place at one time. Meanwhile, nuclear
weapons are a fact of life; strategic planners take them into account.

Nonetheless, ''A Trillion for Defense'' - produced by Robert Rogers - sees the
military problem lying elsewhere. ''Future wars,'' Garrick Utley, an NBC
correspondent, says at the start, ''will most likely be small, against
guerrillas and terrorists.'' These would be wars that Army Rangers, Navy Seals
and other specialized forces are trained to fight.

''But the generals and admirals who run the armed services tend to think of the
big war,'' Mr. Utley continues, ''and spend most of their time and money
preparing to fight it.''

Consequently, the specialized forces seem to be neglected. As Sam Nunn, chairman
of the Senate Armed Services Committee, says in an interview, ''Year after year,
they get relegated to the very bottom of the pile on priority.''

As evidence, the program cites the attempt to rescue the hostages in Iran in
1980 and the invasion of Grenada in 1983. In Iran, Delta Force helicopters
malfunctioned. On Grenada, military units from the different services could not
stay in radio contact. In a now famous incident (Clint Eastwood memorialized it
in the movie ''Heartbreak Ridge''), a soldier on Grenada used a credit card to
call a military base in the United States. He asked the base to get in touch
with naval vessels only a few thousand yards away.

''A Trillion for Defense'' recalls that Lebanon was the scene of a somewhat
similar problem in 1984. The battleship New Jersey fired its 16-inch guns at
artillery that was shelling the marines at the Beirut airport. Army radar was
able to pinpoint the location of the artillery, but could not pass the
information to the New Jersey's guns. The result, says Gen. Edward C. Meyer, the
former Army Chief of Staff, was misdirected firing by the New Jersey.

''You had what I call 'to whom it may concern' rounds going out into the area,''
General Meyer declares, ''and you had large Lebanese villages that had major
casualties, and you started to have a greater disaffection of the civilians in
that area.''

Part of the problem, General Meyer and others on the program agree, is the lack
of coordinated planning. When the New Jersey was recommissioned, for example, no
one insisted that its guns be able to pick up Army radar.

Subsequently, Mr. Utley asks a solemn question about the defense spending of the
last six years: How much of the ''trillion-plus dollar buildup could end up down
the tubes?''

The question is never really answered, but that's not a fault of NBC News.
Defense spending has too many imponderables built in. In the absence of war, for
one thing, we can't tell if everything works or not. On the other hand, it is
clear there has been wastage.

Thus ''A Trillion for Defense'' raises some familiar targets - $600 toilet seats
and $1,100 plastic caps -and some that are less known. Congress, as a favor to
coal states, forced the Pentagon this year to buy 300,000 tons of coal. This is
some 200,000 tons more than the military can use. Congress, however, is more
likely to complain about the toilet seats.

The program, written by Mr. Utley and Mr. Rogers, concludes with a warning about
defense spending and its effect on the Federal deficit. The warning seems
slightly gratuituous. ''A Trillion for Defense,'' though, is an ably reported
work on an important topic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 22, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

200-MILLION AGENT ORANGE AWARD IS UPHELD BY U.S. APPEALS COURT

BYLINE: By ARNOLD H. LUBASCH

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 555 words


A Federal appeals court yesterday affirmed most of a complex plan to distribute
more than $200 million among 250,000 Vietnam veterans and their families who
filed claims for injuries from the herbicide Agent Orange.

In a series of nine decisions issued in Manhattan, the United States Court of
Appeals for the Second Circuit basically upheld a settlement plan first approved
in 1984 by Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in Brooklyn.

Judge Weinstein issued a brief statement last night saying, ''The court will
make every effort to get the money to the veterans as soon as possible, subject
to further appeal.''

The special master supervising the settlement, Kenneth R. Feinberg, said the
appeals court had recognized that the complex issues required ''extraordinary
remedies.'' Whether distribution of the money can begin immediately, he said,
depends on whether the various parties appeal to the United States Supreme
Court.

Under the approved plan, some 20,000 totally disabled veterans are to receive
about $12,000 each. The appeals court rejected a proposal to create a foundation
for the remaining claimants, but said Judge Weinstein could approve specific
projects for their benefit.

The appellate decisions were written by Judges Ralph K. Winter, Roger J. Miner
and Ellsworth A. Van Graafeiland, the panel that heard the arguments in a series
of appeals.

''By any measure,'' Judge Winter wrote in the main 88-page decision, ''this is
an extraordinary piece of litigation. It concerns the liability of several major
chemical companies and the United States Government for injuries to members of
the United States, Australian and New Zealand armed forces and their families.''

The injuries, the veterans argued, were suffered as a result of exposure to
Agent Orange in Vietnam, where the United States forces used the herbicide to
defoliate large areas where enemy forces were hiding, Judge Winter continued.

The appeals court decided the legal issues in the case, Judge Winter noted. He
added, ''We do take note, however, of the nationwide interest in this litigation
and the strong emotions these preceedings have generated among Vietnam veterans
and their families.''

'A Payment of Nuisance'

In a settlement of numerous lawsuits, seven manufacturers of Agent Orange
contributed to a $180 million fund that has grown to about $220 million. The
seven are the Dow Chemical Company, the Monsanto Company, the Diamond Shamrock
Corporation, Uniroyal Inc., the T. H. Agriculture and Nutrition Company, the
Thompson Chemical Company and Hercules Inc. Judge Weinstein has ruled that the
veterans from Australia and New Zealand should share in the fund.

Various parties, including some veterans, appealed parts of the settlement.

Judge Winter described the settlement as ''essentially a payment of nuisance
value'' because of the ''understandable sympathy'' that juries would feel for
the plaintiffs.

Despite the ''grievous medical problems'' encountered by many Vietnam veterans
and their families, Judge Winter said, various studies ''offer little scientific
basis for believing that Agent Orange caused any injury.''

Other difficult legal problems arose, the judge said, in trying to hold chemical
companies liable for selling a product that the Government ordered for use in a
war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 23, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: DEPT. OF MONUMENTS;
Trees: Homage for Police Officers

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 591 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 22


Washington is a city of proliferating monuments, bronze, concrete, marble and
steel, winged figures halted in flight, bold heroes frozen forever astride
horses stopped in time.

But if all goes as planned, the newest tribute to fallen heroes will be a living
thing, a milelong circle of flowering trees that will honor law enforcement
officers who died in the line of duty.

The National Law Enforcement Memorial would be placed on the Ellipse between the
White House and the Washington Monument. A proposal for its design will be
unveiled Thursday before the National Capital Memorial Commission, which
includes representatives of the Interior Department and two other Federal
commissions that must approve any site and design.

Among those presenting the proposal is Jan Scruggs, the prime mover behind the
creation of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, a stark V-shaped wall on the Mall
that is one of the most visited sites in the capital.

A Double Row of Trees

The central element of the law enforcement memorial is not a piece of heroic
statuary, but rather a double row of trees that would create a bower over a
walkway around the perimeter of the Ellipse, which is now often surrounded by
parked cars and concession vans.

The trees, of a variety yet to be decided, would have their tops and sides
trimmed flat.

A flag would fly at half staff each time a law enforcement officer was killed in
the line of duty anywhere in the nation. About 1,500 have been killed in the
past 10 years, nearly one officer every two days, according to the National Law
Enforcement Memorial Fund, which planned the project and is trying to raise $5
million to have it constructed.

The designer of the proposed memorial, Davis Buckley, a Washington architect,
describes it as ''a radical approach'' to the making of monuments. He said he
believed the prominence of the site was justified by the ''supreme sacrifice''
of the law enforcement community.

A design that is integral with the landscape, Mr. Buckley said, would also be
both unobtrusive and distinctive. ''Another angel or another horse would not
distinguish itself in this area,'' said a member of the planning group, which
spent the past few years selecting an appropriate site and a design that would
be acceptable to disparate law enforcement agencies that supported the idea.

Morever, Mr. Buckley said he believed that the landscaping concept should serve
as an alternative model for future monuments in a capital area that is rapidly
running out of space to put them.

''There are an unlimited number of proposals for monuments but a limited amount
of land,'' said Patri-cia Kennedy, a member of the professional staff of the
Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee. She helped to draft a bill that
Congress approved last year setting comprehensive standards for alloting space
for new memorials.

The National Parks Service says that only about 50 sites appropriate for
monuments remain in the capital city, and in 1986 alone, Congress received
proposals to establish 21. Five were approved, commemorating veterans of the
Korean War, black participants in the Revolutionary War, women in the armed
forces, the American armored forces and a park dedicated to Francis Scott Key.

Other proposals included monuments to military glider pilots, native American
and Hispanic military veterans, war correspondents and Prince Volodymyr the
Great of the Ukraine.

Authorization for the National Law Enforcement Memorial was approved by Congress
and signed by President Reagan in 1984.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 23, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EX-REP. EDITH GREEN, 77, IS DEAD; EARLY OPPONENT OF VIETNAM WAR

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section D; Page 31, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 671 words


Former United States Representative Edith Green, a leading advocate of aid to
education and women's rights and an early opponent of the Vietnam War, died of
cancer Tuesday night in Tualatin, Ore. She was 77 years old.

Mrs. Green, a Democrat, started out as a schoolteacher and went on to serve 10
years in Congress.

After defeating Tom McCall, who later became Governor of Oregon, Mrs. Green
represented the state's Third Congressional District from 1954 to 1974. She rose
to the second-highest position on the House Education and Labor Committee and
served as chairwoman of its Subcommittee on Higher Education. In that capacity,
she pushed for passage of legislation creating the first Federal scholarships
for college undergraduates.

Senator Mark O. Hatfield, a Republican who was a friend of Mrs. Green for 40
years, said yesterday: ''She was probably the most powerful woman ever to serve
in the Congress. On any important legislation, such as women's rights or
education or dealing with minorities or poor people, she could switch people's
votes on the floor through the power of her intellect and her ability to
persuade. People listened because when Edith Green spoke, she spoke from the
heart as well as the mind.''

Role in Anti-Poverty Legislation

In 1967, for example, Mrs. Green played a key, though behind-the-scenes, role in
passage of major anti-poverty legislation proposed by President Johnson. In
large part through her efforts, a coalition of Republicans and Southern
Democrats against the bill was splintered when she drafted and lobbied for an
amendment that met the demands of some of the Southerners. Despite those
efforts, President Johnson and Mrs. Green did not like each other, largely
because of her early opposition to the buildup of troops in Vietnam.

Mrs. Green, a native of South Dakota, went to Willamette University in Salem,
Ore., in the late 1920's and, after graduating, started teaching elementary
school in Salem, according to a son, James S. Green of Gresham, Ore. She became
involved in politics after working with the Oregon Education Association.

She was a delegate to the 1956 Democratic National Convention and a member of
the platform committee. At the urging of the candidate, she gave a seconding
speech for the Presidential nomination of Adlai E. Stevenson. Four years later,
she was asked to second the nomination of John F. Kennedy for President. At the
time, she was serving as chairman of the Kennedy campaign committee in Oregon.
President Kennedy later named her as a member of the Presidential Commission on
the Status of Women. And he also offered her the ambassadorship to Canada, but
she declined.

Advocate for Women's Rights

Mr. Green said his mother was a supporter of women's rights, but without
stridence. ''She realized that she had to work with the men before she knocked
them over,'' Mr. Green said. ''The key is to work with them, she said, and she
was very good at it. I think her colleagues would testify to that.''

Mr. Hatfield said Mrs. Green ''probably had more direct personal role in writing
education-related legislation than any other person.'' He also described her as
''foremost in the effort to bring about equal pay for equal work.''

And, the Senator continued: ''She also was remarkable in this business that I'm
in, in that she could walk away from it, which she did at the height of her
career. She did not run again when she could have been re-elected for life.''
Mrs. Green did not seek re-election in 1974.

After retiring, she became a professor of government at Warner Pacific College
and in 1976 she served as co-chairwoman of the National Democrats for Gerald
Ford. In 1979, she was appointed to serve on the Oregon Board of Higher
Education.

Besides her son James, Mrs. Green's survivors include another son, Richard, of
Annandale, Va.; two sisters, Ruth Costello of Berkeley Springs, W.Va., and
Mildred Cleaveland of San Andreas, Calif.; and four grandchildren. week, but
details were not complete yesterday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Edith Green (NYT)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TAYLOR IS LAID TO REST NEAR SOLDIERS OF 3 WARS HE FOUGHT IN

BYLINE: By BERNARD TRAINOR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 23


Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor, one of the nation's best-known soldiers, was laid to
rest today close to the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Arlington National
Cemetery. That tomb contains the remains of soldiers from the three wars in
which he had seen combat.

The soldier-statesman, who had been an adviser to presidents, died here on
Sunday at the age of 85.

In an emotional eulogy of the general in services in the Fort Myer chapel
adjacent to the cemetery, his son Thomas said it must be left to history to
judge Maxwell Taylor's role in America's military involvement in Vietnam. His
listeners were a mixture of the military, judicial and Congressional hierarchy,
statesmen of the Vietnam era, old friends and military comrades.

The flag-drapped coffin was transported from the chapel to its final resting
place on a black artillery caisson drawn by six ebony horses. Behind came a
riderless horse bearing the general's saber and a pair of boots reversed in the
stirups, symbolic of a fallen warrior. An Army band accompanied the entourage.
Marching with it was an honor guard of incredibly young-looking enlisted men
drawn from all the services. A solitary soldier carried the general's personal
flag emblazoned with the eagle and four stars of a former Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff. #19-Gun Salute to General Tourists at the Tomb of the Unknown
Soldier paused as a battery of field guns boomed out a 19-gun salute to the old
soldier. An Army chaplain gave the last blessing and when the notes of taps
ceased to echo, the band wheeled about and marched off to a jaunty tune, as
though to remind the mourners that while a leader was gone, the business of
soldiering went on.

General Taylor was described by one mourner as not only a soldier but also a
Renaissance man, grounded in philosophy and the classics and proficient in
languages.

One of the general's two sons, Thomas H. Taylor, eulogizing his father in chapel
services at Fort Myer, recounted the highlights of his father's career from the
years of slow promotions between World Wars when the officer spent 13 years in
the grade of second lieutenant to his final struggle against the ravages of Lou
Gehrig's disease.

The old soldiers in the congregation sat a little taller as Mr. Taylor referred
to Normandy, Holland and Bastogne, the scenes of the bitterest battles of his
father's career.

Mr. Taylor noted his father's role in changing the nation's defense policy of
the 1950's from one of massive nuclear retaliation to a policy of ''flexible
response.''

Role in Vietnam Struggle

It was in keeping with this policy of being prepared for ''limited war'' that
General Taylor, both as a special adviser to President Kennedy and as Ambassador
to Vietnam, encouraged American armed resistence to Communist-inspired ''wars of
national liberation.'' Partly as the result of the Taylor advice, the United
States intervened militarily in South Vietnam to prevent its takeover by the
Communist-led forces of North Vietnam.

Referring to this ill-fated venture, Mr. Taylor said his father's role ''would
be judged by history,'' but even now, he said, ''it can be seen as a benign
alternative to the 'boat people' of Vietnam and the 'killing fields' of
Cambodia.''

A former sergeant with the 101st parachute infantry division, Fred C. Patheiger,
recalled General Taylor's comments just before the group parachuted into
Normandy on D-Day, June 6, 1944, when Allied troops invaded the continent. ''All
paratroopers are hell-raisers,'' the general said. ''During the first 24 hours
after you jump, raise all the hell you can.'' Mr. Patheiger added, ''And that's
exactly what we did.''

Many who fought under General Taylor's command in the 101st Airborne Division
were at graveside to pay their last respects. Men now in their sixties, they
stood ramrod erect and still had the cocky air of elite troops. All of them had
praise for the general and his coolness in battle.

Not only the American paratroopers of World War II mourned the loss of Maxwell
Taylor. Notified in England Wednesday of General Taylor's death, Lieut. Gen. Sir
Michael Gray, commanding officer of Britain's parachute regiment, expressed in a
telephone interview the paras' respect to the officer, who along with British
and other American paratroopers jumped with his airborne division into Holland.

He spoke of General Taylor's ''inspiration, leadership and comradeship.''

A veteran of the 101 Airborne ''Screaming Eagles,'' speaking of General Taylor's
fight against the debilitating illness that took his life, said, ''It's the only
fight he ever lost.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of burial of Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor at Arlington National
Cemetery (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WEEKENDER GUIDE

BYLINE: By Tim Page

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1031 words


Friday

2 BY MENOTTI
  Gian Carlo Menotti, who is composer, librettist, director, conductor and arts
administrator all rolled into one, has now staged two of his operas - ''Amelia
al Ballo'' (1937), written when Mr. Menotti was 23 years old, and ''Tamu-Tamu''
(1973), with a libretto in both English and Indonesian - for performances this
weekend at the Juilliard School. Mark Stringer will conduct the Juilliard
Symphony. ''Tamu-Tamu,'' a gloomy allegory influenced by the Vietnam War, has
never been published, and the Juilliard production will introduce the work to
New York. ''Amelia,'' a comic opera in one act, had its world premiere in
Philadelphia in 1937 and was staged at the Metropolitan Opera in 1938.
Performances will take place tonight at 8, Sunday at 3 P.M., and Tuesday at 8 in
the Juilliard Theater, 155 West 66th Street. Admission is $10. Information:
874-7515.

EGLEVSKY BALLET
  The Eglevsky Ballet is to combine familiar works (''Swan Lake, Act II Pas de
Deux,'' George Balanchine's ''Allegro Brillante'') with more recent creations
(Michael Vernon's ''Twelfth Night'' and a new piece by Saeko Ichinohe) at the
Maguire Theater, State University College at Old Westbury, L.I., this weekend.
There are to be three performances - tonight at 8, and tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.
Admission is $14.50 and $17 for the evening performances, $13 at the matinee.
Mr. Vernon is the artistic director of the Eglevsky Ballet; Katherine Healy, a
ballerina, will be the guest artist. At the matinee performance, Mr. Vernon will
provide narration. Information, reservations and directions: (516) 746-1115.

'WORLD IS MADE OF GLASS'
  Quite a bit of 20th-century theater has made much of psychology, but Morris L.
West's ''World Is Made of Glass'' is actually based on a true case study by Carl
Jung. This weekend the American Ensemble Company will present the American
premiere of ''The World Is Made of Glass'' at the Church of the Holy Scapular,
339 East 28th Street. Robert Petito will direct; the cast includes Sheila
Saunders, Sal Condoluci, Joan Nimmo and Susan Gregory. Performances take place
tonight and tomorrow at 8 and Sunday afternoon at 3. Admission is $8.
Information: 571-7594.

SATURDAY

MANHATTAN ARCHEOLOGY
  Saturday afternoon from 1 to 4, the Museum of the City of New York, Fifth
Avenue at 103d Street, will present a symposium entitled ''Archeology Around the
Town,'' an afternoon of slides and discussion focusing on recent archeological
excavations throughout the city. The presentations will include ''Buried History
at the 1661 John Bowne House, Flushing, N.Y.,'' ''Messages From the Dead: Social
and Cultural Information from Gravestones, Long Island, N.Y., 1630-1800'' and
''Barges and Piercesheds: The Archeology of New York Harbor.'' The symposium is
free and open to the public. Information: 534-1672.

DO YOU BELIEVE IN MAGIC?
  The Society of American Magicians presented its first ''Salute to Magic'' in
New York on April 15, 1909. The celebration continues Saturday night at 8, when
Mike Caveney, Dale Salwak, Ken Turner, Constantine, Lyn and Ken, and other
illusionists, manipulators and comedians converge on the Hunter College
Auditorium, Park Avenue and 69th Street. Terry Seabrooke, whom the society
recently voted the ''Magician of the Year,'' will be on hand to present his own
special brand of magical mayhem. The ''Salute to Magic'' is believed to be the
oldest continuing magic show in the United States, and this will mark its 78th
anniversary. Admission is $10 and $18. Information: 873-3043.

IN TANDEM
  Saturday morning at 10:30, the ''Trevira Twosome'' couples' race will begin
and end at Tavern on the Green in Central Park (near Central Park West and 67th
Street). The race, open to couples only, begins with a 10-mile race, and then
continues with a two-mile ''mini-fun run'' immediately thereafter. It's too late
to enter the ''twosome'' officially this year -some 4,000 runners signed up
before the April 15 cutoff date - but you're welcome to watch from just about
any place in Central Park. The race is sponsored by Hoechst Fibers Industries
and is under the auspices of the New York Road Runners Club, Information:
869-3850.

SUNDAY

THE BOROUGHS BY BIKE
  Some 20,000 bicyclists are expected to ride 36 miles Sunday in the 11th Annual
Citibank-American Youth Hostel Five Boro Bike Tour. The route goes from Battery
Park up the Avenue of the Americas through Central Park to the top of Manhattan
and through the Bronx, Queens, Brooklyn and Staten Island, winding up (after a
restful ride on the Staten Island Ferry) back in Battery Park. All the roads
will be cleared of traffic, so bicyclists can proceed at their own pace. Rain or
shine, the tour begins at 7:30 Sunday morning. The $5 fee entitles participants
to a detailed information kit with a map of the route and a free safety vest.
Information: 431-7100.

MEADOWFAIR ON S.I.
  The Staten Island Children's Museum will present Meadowfair, an all-day family
arts festival, Sunday afternoon starting at noon at Snug Harbor. The festival
will include outdoor games, arts workshops, crafts, food, performances - in
short, the proverbial ''fun for the whole family.'' As in previous years,
Meadowfair will conclude with a balloon launch. Each balloon will carry a tag
that announces its date of launch and offers a cash reward for the person who
returns the balloon that has traveled the farthest. The Staten Island Children's
Museum is at 1000 Richmond Terrace, Building M, at Snug Harbor, an 80-acre park
in Livingston, S.I. Information: (718) 273-2060. In case of rain, the festival
will take place on May 3.

SUNDAY IN THE PARK
  Meanwhile, back in Manhattan, the Stuyvesant Park Neighborhood Association
presents its annual Stuyvesant Park Festival, with food, drink, antiques,
collectibles, entertainment and crafts. The park is at 16th Street and Second
Avenue; proceeds will benefit the magnificent old trees that grace the
Stuyvesant, the city's oldest fully fenced public park. The fair will take place
from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; rain date: May 3. Information: 684-4077.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. OFFERS VIETNAM A NEGOTIATOR

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 278 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 24


The Reagan Administration has proposed to Vietnam that Gen. John W. Vessey Jr.,
the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, visit Hanoi as a Presidential
representative to discuss the fate of missing servicemen.

But State Department officials said the visit, which was proposed last week,
would not take place unless the two nations could agree on how to move forward
discussions on the issue.

''We're not sending a Presidential envoy unless a policy-level, advance
delegation goes to Hanoi first,'' Charles E. Redman, the State Department
spokesman, said today.

There has been no response from the Vietnamese to the proposal, which was also
presented privately last month by H. Ross Perot, the Texas industrialist who
worked for the White House last year on issues relating to prisoners of war and
those missing in action.

Mr. Perot's mission, which Mr. Redman said was undertaken ''at his own
initiative,'' was reported today by The Washington Post.

In an interview today, Mr. Perot said the Vietnamese had been pleased by the
idea of talks with General Vessey. He denounced Mr. Redman's statements, saying
it was counterproductive to set conditions for the visit.

Mr. Perot said: ''They feel, and I am quoting them, that we send people over who
are minor officials, who only make demands, who are rude and arrogant. A
Presidential negotiator is the right answer, and Vessey is the right man.''

Mr. Redman said today that ''our difficulties in moving ahead'' on the issue are
primarily due to Vietnam's refusal ''to engage in any technical or policy level
talks, in order to reconfirm our understanding of the nature of the
P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam War Resister Enters 2 Guilty Pleas

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 178 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, April 24


An opponent of the Vietnam War who spent 17 years underground has agreed to
plead guilty to a Federal felony charge and a state assault charge stemming from
protests in 1969 and 1970, his attorney said.

The man, Terrence Jackson of Eugene, Ore., who was known as Silas Trim Bissell
until he legally changed his name last March, will plead guilty May 1 to a
Federal charge of possession of an unregistered destructive device in an
attempted bombing at the University of Washington in 1970, his attorney, Larry
Finegold, said.

Mr. Jackson will also enter a guilty plea in King County Superior Court to a
second-degree assault charge stemming from the striking of a police officer at a
Nov. 14, 1969, anti-war demonstration in downtown Seattle, Mr. Finegold said.

The 44-year-old Mr. Jackson is a member of the family that founded the Bissell
carpet-cleaner company.

The Deputy County Prosecutor, Linda Jackie, said her office would recommend a
10-year suspended sentence on the assault charge and that any sentence be served
concurrently with Federal punishment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

RADIO STATION CENSORS ITSELF AFTER F.C.C. ACTION

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 54, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 561 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, April 24


A radio station threatened with criminal prosecution for broadcasting a graphic
play about homosexuality says that it has pulled possibly sensitive programs off
the air and may sue the Federal Communications Commission.

The F.C.C. said last week that the play, ''Jerker, or the Helping Hand,''
broadcast last fall by KPFK, was clearly indecent and ''may have crossed the
line'' to obscenity for graphic depictions of homosexual sex.

The agency referred the case to the Justice Department for prosecution, its
first such action in 12 years.

The play centers on an erotic telephone conversation between two men, one a
disabled Vietnam veteran and the other an AIDS victim, who fall in love even
though they never meet.

KPFK is a public radio station owned by the Pacifica Foundation. Tarabu
Betserai, the station's general manager, said at a news conference Thursday that
lawyers for Pacifica who specialize in Federal communications law had advised
the foundation to sue.

Pacifica will not file legal papers for at least 10 days because the foundation
had not received notification from the Justice Department that an investigation
had begun, according to David Salniker, Pacifica's executive director. In
addition to KPFK, Pacifica operates stations in San Francisco, New York, Houston
and Washington.

'Shock Radio' Label Denied

The broadcast has been unfairly linked to the ''shock radio'' used by some disk
jockeys, Mr. Betserai said.

''We are not shock radio, we are not raunchy radio, we are socially responsive
radio,'' Mr. Betserai said.

Mr. Betserai, Mr. Salniker and an American Civil Liberties Union representative,
Duncan Donovan, said Thursday that the show was directed at homosexual listeners
and was intendedn to help stop the spread of acquired immune deficiency
syndrome.

The F.C.C. said it had intervened after a minister in Orange County complained
about the broadcast and its depictions of oral and anal sex.

Mr. Salniker said the agency's threat had forced KPFK to take some programs off
the air because ''we simply don't know what's appropriate.''

''We are pulling things off the air that are not considered controversial
ordinarily,'' he said. ''We pulled one reading off because of language.''

Other Programming Affected

KPFK previously had Alice Walker read ''The Color Purple'' on the air. But, Mr.
Salniker asked, because the book involves incest, ''does that mean we can't run
it now?''

''We believe this is the first time the F.C.C. has sought criminal charges for
programming of this type,'' Mr. Salniker said.

New guidelines are scheduled to be printed soon in the Federal Register
broadening definitions of indecency.

Sally Lawrence, chief of the news media division for the F.C.C., said the agency
would comment only after a suit had been filed.

The commission has taken no action against a station for indecency or obscenity
since a broadcast in 1975 of George Carlin's ''seven dirty words'' monologue.
That was also broadcast by Pacifica.

The Carlin broadcast led to a 1978 Supreme Court decision, which set an
indecency standard for the airwaves.

Mr. Salniker said Pacifica stations had complied with the limits of the Carlin
decision, running sensitive shows after 10 P.M. and prefacing them with
disclaimers.

Mr. Donovan said he believed that the commission's . action threatened free
speech.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THOUSANDS PROTEST U.S. POLICY IN CENTRAL AMERICA

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 32, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 874 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 25


Tens of thousands of demonstrators, many representing churches and organized
labor, marched through the streets of Washington today to protest American
policy in Central America.

The Rev. Jesse Jackson, an unannounced candidate for President, spoke to the
crowd from the steps of the Capitol, criticizing President Reagan and his
Administration. ''When we fight to bring America out of Central America with the
C.I.A., we're right,'' he said. ''When we fight to free South Africa, we're
right.''

Some prominent labor leaders, including Lane Kirkland, president of the
A.F.L.-C.I.O., had tried to persuade unions to boycott the protest rally and
march. But the event drew substantial support from labor unions, with possibly a
third of the marchers bearing union placards or insignia.

Labor Leaders in Conflict

Twenty-four labor leaders were listed as members of the steering committee for
the rally, among them the presidents of the United Automobile Workers, the
American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, the Communications
Workers of America and the National Education Association.

Despite the participation of some of its most substantial member unions, the
A.F.L.-C.I.O. had maintained that some groups backing the demonstration
supported Communist elements in Central America.

Organizers said the march drew 100,000 participants, while the United States
Capitol Police estimated the turnout at 75,000 and the National Park Police put
the figure at 35,000. Estimates of the number of protesters were conflicting
because of the logistics of the march. Demonstrators gathered in the morning at
the Ellipse behind the White House, then marched to the Capitol, leaving many
still at the Ellipse and others still in the streets as the Capitol rally began
in early afternoon.

The peaceful march today was a prelude to planned civil disobedience on Monday
morning at the Central Intelligence Agency headquarters in Langley, Va.

Reagan Called 'Desperate'

Protestors, including Daniel Ellsberg, Amy Carter and Abbie Hoffman, have said
they planned to block traffic and invite arrest to protest covert C.I.A.
activities in Central America and elsewhere.

Mr. Ellsberg, who attended today's rally and spoke to protesters, said that
''five to six hundred people, including myself, plan to get arrested.''

Mr. Ellsberg, the prominent liberal who has said he made public the secret
Pentagon Papers in the Vietnam War era, characterized Mr. Reagan as
''desperate'' and predicted that the President would be tempted to divert
attention from the Iran arms deals and subsequent diversion of funds to the
Nicaraguan rebels by waging war in Central America. Mr. Reagan was at Camp
David, Md., today, where he delivered his weekly radio address.

The steering committee formed to sponsor the march, representing 35 church,
labor and peace groups, listed as its objectives the ''support of peace and
freedom'' in Central America and South Africa, an end to American aid to armed
anti-government contra forces in Nicaragua and prohibitions against ''U.S.
government and corporate support'' for South Africa's policy of racial
separation.

Scene Reminiscent of 1960's

The boycott recommended by Mr. Kirkland and some other labor leaders stemmed
from the membership in the coalition of groups that Mr. Kirkland said went
beyond opposition to the Administration's policy of intervention in Central
America by ''embracing the Sandinista regime'' in Nicaragua and by giving ''open
support to to the Marxist-Leninist guerrillas in El Salvador.''

However, criticism of the demonstration from the more conservative quarters of
the labor movement was generally discounted by protest leaders today.

Kenneth T. Blaylock, president of American Federation of Government Employees,
estimated that as many as 45,000 union members had marched today and said:
''There a difference of opinion, obviously, within organized labor about the
problems of Central America. But that doesn't bother me. We are right.'' Daniel
Kearny, a retired national vice president of the American Federation of
Government Employees, said: ''There is no real division in the ranks. The only
split I see is with Lane Kirkland.''

The marchers pushed off from the rain-soaked turf of the Ellipse in wind gusting
to 20 miles an hour. The temperature was 47 degrees.

Beside union banners and church placards, the uniforms of protest included caps
and T-shirts giving evidence of service in the ''brigades'' of American
volunteers who have gone to Nicaragua to help harvest coffee and other crops and
to build school buildings. Women wore earrings bearing the Vietnam War-era peace
symbol.

Many of the younger demonstrators said they were the sons and daughters of civil
rights and anti-war demontrators of earlier decades. ----Second Rally in San
Francisco SAN FRANCISCO, April 25 (AP) -Thirty thousand people, including labor
and religious leaders, marched here in the Western part of today's protest
rally.

The march on a warm, sunny day went peacefully, with no arrests, said Police
Inspector Ken King, who provided the official crowd estimate.

As in Washington, marchers here protested Administration policy on Central
America and nuclear weapons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of demonstrators marching near the Capitol in Washington
(NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Hearings Set to Administer Agent Orange Settlement

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 56, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 116 words


A Federal judge has scheduled two hearings on plans to carry out the $200
million settlement of the Agent Orange suit.

Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in Brooklyn announced
that he would hold a hearing Friday on administering the settlement fund. The
judge said he would welcome the views of class members as well as their lawyers.

A second hearing on several other issues concerning the complex settlement is to
be held May 26, he said.

The settlement, which was essentially affirmed last week by the United States
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, involves plans to distribute more than
$200 million to thousands of Vietnam veterans and their families.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARGENTINA SEEKS JUSTICE FOR PAST WITHOUT LOSING IT'S FUTURE

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES


IN the renewed debate over human-rights violations that has come with the Army
rebellions of recent days, some Argentines are talking about the excesses that
the military committed during the mid-1970s, recalling court testimony of the
bestial molestation of women and the torture of men.

But other remembrances go farther back, to what preceded the military crimes, to
frequent attacks on police stations by guerillas blasting away with automatic
weapons. Still other people begin by sympathizing with the claims of rebellious
officers that soldiers who merely followed orders should not be tried for what
they did.

Then those people usually end up by remembering that the military's
counterinsurgency campaign degenerated into thuggery and other violence that had
nothing to do with fighting guerrillas.

That combination of feelings contributed last week to the great outpouring of
support for President Raul Alfonsin and the Government when they had to deal
with a crisis that began 10 days ago, and spread through four army units. The
refusal of an army major to answer a court summons in a human-rights trial
sparked the rebellions and found sympathy throughout the middle and lower levels
of the officer ranks.

By living the crisis almost as intensely as the Government, the political
opposition, labor, business and the public had a chance to see the depth of the
problem faced by the President. The rebellions were snuffed out, but, in the
process, the crisis destroyed the Army high command, and the new leadership
named last week has yet to prove that it can impose on the army the discipline
the President needs.

Argentina is going through a wrenching and recurring debate because it is trying
to do what probably no other nation in Latin America has done. It is trying to
judge, within the constraints of Western civilization, a past in which civilized
constraints were grossly flouted.

The nation cannot impose justice as foreign victors might on a defeated army. It
wants to avoid judging soldiers on the basis of political criteria or seeming to
put the entire armed forces on trial as an institution. Rather, Argentina seeks
justice on the basis of evidence acceptable in courts operating on Western
principles of jurisprudence.

This is occurring in a young and sometimes volatile democratic setting, where
the army whose members are being tried is still intact and has the duty to
defend the country. An estimated 200 to 450 men still stand accused. So far, 10
men have been convicted, including five former military commanders, and are
serving sentences ranging up to life in prison. Four other military commanders
were acquitted, and two other military officers were acquitted in kidnapping
cases but are still charged with torture.

Elsewhere, the passing of judgment on military men of a prior regime has been
done differently or not at all. In 1980, when the new Sandinista Government
convicted more than 5,000 members of the defeated National Guard of war crimes,
most convictions were based on membership in a repressive organization, not for
specific crimes. In El Salvador and Guatemala, where thousands of political
detainees have died, almost no one has even pretended to gather usable evidence.

In Brazil, where torture allegations were widespread during the late 1960's,
little effort was made later to establish guilt, and a 1979 amnesty covered
crimes of both the security forces and the left. In Uruguay and Chile, amnesty
was used to avoid trials.

Many Argentines make comparisons between the situation here and the the court
martial of United States Army Lieut. William L. Calley Jr., who was convicted of
murdering 22 civilians in Vietnam, sentenced to life imprisonment in 1968, but
had the sentence reduced and served only three years under house arrest at an
army base. But the Calley trial occurred in a country where political structures
were not at risk.

Most Argentines have a clear understanding of the chronology of events since the
early 1970's that led them to this point, and they recite it with remarkable
balance. They point to weak civilian governments and the concurrent growth of
rampant violence by two guerrilla groups, the almost welcome return of the
military to power in 1976, the relatively quick success against the guerrillas,
and then the excesses -the torture and murder of men and women that resulted in
an estimated 9,000 dead or missing.

Col. Horacio Ballester, one of the leaders of a group of retired officers called
Military Officers for Democracy, said: ''Even in Franco's Spain they had a war
tribunal, where it was all above board; sentences were excessive and tough but
legal, and the bodies were turned over to the families.'' In Argentina, he
continued, ''it was all illegal, and they threw the bodies into the sea or
buried them without names.''

Mr. Alfonsin's challenge is to find a way to secure at least enough justice to
discourage the military from repeating the past, but also to hold together the
society and assure that his successor as president is as freely elected as he
was. However he handles the situation, the events of recent days have shown that
much of Argentine society is willing to share the burden.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of President Raul Alfonsin and rebel soldiers (Sygma/Diego
Goldberg); photo of cheering crowd (Sipa/La Penna)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
Limits to Lawsuits In War and Peace

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON AND LAURA MANSNERUS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 269 words


Whatever misjudgments it commits and injuries it causes, the Government cannot
be sued without its consent. And while Congress has provided limited consent,
two Federal courts last week confirmed that especially where the military and
its contractors are concerned, the limits are broad and the consent narrow.

In Manhattan, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit upheld
most provisions of a settlement that Vietnam veterans and their families reached
with manufacturers of agent orange, the defoliant that the plaintiffs said had
caused a host of ailments. But the court, which expressed doubts about the
plaintiffs' evidence, also affirmed that the ''military contractor defense''
shielded the companies from claims by people not covered by the settlement.

While approving the ''nuisance value'' payments, the court said allowing the
''deliberately risky activities of the military'' to give rise to lawsuits could
impair military activities and even national security.

In Salt Lake City, the Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit reversed verdicts
for plaintiffs who had attributed cancer cases to nuclear weapons tests in the
1950's. The court held that the testing was a ''discretionary function'' and
therefore exempt from the Federal Tort Claims Act, which permits negligence
suits against the Government.

The cases were the first ''mass tort'' suits to test the defenses, said Kenneth
R. Feinberg, the special master overseeing the agent orange settlement, and
raised compelling issues of redress. ''How do you treat these cases?'' he said.
''The Government walks away from them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: APRIL 26, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1511 words




                                                      Weeks
This                               Last                  On
Week                               Week                List Fiction

 1                                    1          6           FINE THINGS, by
                                                            Danielle Steel.
                                                            (Delacorte,
                                                             $18.95.) The
                                                            vicissitudes of a
                                                            son of the 60's on
                                                            his
                                                             way to the 80's.

 2                                    2          12          WINDMILLS OF THE
                                                            GODS, by Sidney
                                                            Sheldon.
                                                             (Morrow, $18.95.)
                                                            The nightmarish
                                                            experiences
                                                             that befall a
                                                            woman and her
                                                            family after her
                                                             appointment as
                                                            Ambassador to
                                                            Rumania.

 3                                    5          13          THE EYES OF THE
                                                            DRAGON, by Stephen
                                                            King.
                                                             (Viking, $18.95.)
                                                            A fairy tale,
                                                            complete with an
                                                            aged
                                                             king, two princes,
                                                            an evil wizard and
                                                            a mouse.

 4                                    3          7           BOLT, by Dick
                                                            Francis. (Putnam,
                                                            $17.95.) The
                                                             jockey-hero of
                                                            ''Break In'' has to
                                                            contend with a
                                                             romantic crisis, a
                                                            family feud and an
                                                            international
                                                             arms-selling
                                                            intrigue.

 5                                    4          5           DESTINY, by Sally
                                                            Beauman. (Bantam,
                                                            $19.95.)
                                                             The 30-year
                                                            romance of a couple
                                                            with diverse
                                                             backgrounds and
                                                            ambitions.

 6                                    7          3           TEXASVILLE, by
                                                            Larry McMurtry.
                                                            (Simon &
                                                             Schuster, $18.95.)
                                                            From the 50's to
                                                            the 80's in
                                                             Thalia, Tex. - a
                                                            sequel to ''The
                                                            Last Picture
                                                            Show.''

 7                                    8          3           THE LADIES OF
                                                            MISSALONGHI, by
                                                            Colleen
                                                             McCullough.
                                                            (Harper & Row,
                                                            $12.95.) Men may
                                                             dominate but women
                                                            rule in an
                                                            Australian town at
                                                             the turn of the
                                                            century.

 8                                    6          39          RED STORM RISING,
                                                            by Tom Clancy.
                                                            (Putnam,
                                                             $19.95.) The West
                                                            tries to stave off
                                                            the Russians in
                                                             World War III.

 9                                    9          3           THE THANATOS
                                                            SYNDROME, by Walker
                                                            Percy.
                                                             (Farrar, Straus &
                                                            Giroux, $17.95.)
                                                            The continuing
                                                             battle between
                                                            good and evil seen
                                                            through a
                                                             psychiatrist's
                                                            adventures in 1996.

10                                   12          26          FLIGHT OF THE
                                                            INTRUDER, by
                                                            Stephen Coonts.
                                                             (Naval Institute,
                                                            $15.95.) Navy
                                                            aviators at war
                                                            over
                                                             Vietnam.

11                                                        1  NO DEALS, MR.
                                                            BOND, by John
                                                            Gardner.
                                                             (Putnam, $13.95.)
                                                            James Bond returns
                                                            to solve a
                                                             case of ritual
                                                            killings of amazing
                                                            similarity.

12 *                                 10          30          THE PRINCE OF
                                                            TIDES, by Pat
                                                            Conroy.
                                                             (Houghton Mifflin,
                                                            $19.95.) Complex
                                                            family
                                                             relationships in
                                                            South Carolina's
                                                            low country and
                                                             New York City.

13                                   15          33          IT, by Stephen
                                                            King. (Viking,
                                                            $22.95.) Childhood
                                                             horrors haunt six
                                                            men and a woman who
                                                            grew up in
                                                             a small Maine
                                                            town.

14                                                        2  SANTORINI, by
                                                            Alistair MacLean.
                                                            (Doubleday,
                                                             $16.95.)
                                                            Espionage,
                                                            treachery and
                                                            retrieval of a
                                                             sunken atom bomb
                                                            in the Aegean.

15                                                        1  THE ENIGMA OF
                                                            ARRIVAL, by V. S.
                                                            Naipaul.
                                                             (Knopf, $17.95.)
                                                            An Indian writer
                                                            from Trinidad
                                                             settles down in
                                                            England's West
                                                            Country.

                                                      Weeks
This                               Last                  On
Week                               Week                List Nonfiction

 1                                    1          17          A SEASON ON THE
                                                            BRINK, by John
                                                            Feinstein.
                                                             (Macmillan,
                                                            $16.95.) A
                                                            chronicle of one
                                                            season
                                                             spent with the
                                                            Indiana University
                                                            basketball team.

 2                                    2          9           COMMUNION, by
                                                            Whitley Strieber.
                                                            (Beech Tree/
                                                             Morrow, $17.95.) A
                                                            professional writer
                                                            tells of the
                                                             visits of
                                                            ''intelligent
                                                            nonhumans'' to his
                                                            home.

 3                                    4          10          THE FITZGERALDS
                                                            AND THE KENNEDYS,
                                                            by
                                                             Doris Kearns
                                                            Goodwin. (Simon &
                                                            Schuster, $22.95.)
                                                             Three generations
                                                            of the Kennedy
                                                            family.

 4                                    3          11          THE FATAL SHORE,
                                                            by Robert Hughes.
                                                            (Knopf,
                                                             $24.95.) Australia
                                                            from penal colony
                                                            to its gradual
                                                             emergence as a
                                                            flourishing nation.

 5                                    8          2           THIS 'N THAT, by
                                                            Bette Davis with
                                                            Michael
                                                             Herskowitz.
                                                            (Putnam, $17.95.)
                                                            The actress's
                                                             memories and
                                                            opinions.

 6                                   11          3           HOLD ON, MR.
                                                            PRESIDENT! by Sam
                                                            Donaldson.
                                                             (Random House,
                                                            $17.95.) A White
                                                            House television
                                                             correspondent
                                                            comments on his
                                                            assignment.

 7                                    6          21          A DAY IN THE LIFE
                                                            OF AMERICA.
                                                            (Collins
                                                             Publishers,
                                                            $39.95.) The nation
                                                            on May 2, 1986, as
                                                             recorded in
                                                            pictures by 200
                                                            photojournalists.

 8                                    5          6           BOONE, by T. Boone
                                                            Pickens Jr.
                                                            (Houghton
                                                             Mifflin, $18.95.)
                                                            The autobiography
                                                            of an oilman
                                                             and
                                                            corporation-takeove
                                                            r entrepreneur.

 9                                   10          8           INTIMATE PARTNERS,
                                                            by Maggie Scarf.
                                                             (Random House,
                                                            $18.95.) Changing
                                                            patterns in love
                                                             and marriage.

10 *                                  7          51          FATHERHOOD, by
                                                            Bill Cosby.
                                                            (Dolphin/
                                                             Doubleday,
                                                            $14.95.) Anecdotes
                                                            and ruminations
                                                             from the
                                                            television star and
                                                            father of five.

11                                    9          11          ECHOES IN THE
                                                            DARKNESS, by Joseph
                                                             Wambaugh.
                                                            (Perigord/Morrow,
                                                            $18.95.) A case
                                                             involving the
                                                            murder of a high
                                                            school teacher.

12 *                                 14          3           LOVE, MEDICINE &
                                                            MIRACLES, by Bernie
                                                            S.
                                                             Siegel. (Harper &
                                                            Row, $15.95.) A
                                                            surgeon stresses
                                                             the importance of
                                                            the patient's mind
                                                            and emotions
                                                             in treating
                                                            serious illness.

13                                   13          59          YOU'RE ONLY OLD
                                                            ONCE! by Dr. Seuss.
                                                             (Random House,
                                                            $9.95.) A checkup
                                                            at the Golden
                                                             Years Clinic in
                                                            pictures and rhyme.

14                                   12          6           BETTY: A Glad
                                                            Awakening, by Betty
                                                            Ford with
                                                             Chris Chase.
                                                            (Doubleday,
                                                            $16.95.) A former
                                                            First
                                                             Lady's recovery
                                                            from alcoholism and
                                                            drug abuse.

15                                   15          15          THE SEARCH FOR
                                                            SIGNS OF
                                                            INTELLIGENT
                                                             LIFE IN THE
                                                            UNIVERSE, by Jane
                                                            Wagner.
                                                             (Harper & Row,
                                                            $15.95.) Acerb
                                                            observations on
                                                            life
                                                             today; script of
                                                            the show starring
                                                            Lily Tomlin.

16 *                                                    177  A LIGHT IN THE
                                                            ATTIC, by Shel
                                                            Silverstein.
                                                             (Harper & Row,
                                                            $13.50.) Light
                                                            verse with
                                                            drawings.

                                                      Weeks
This                               Last                  On
Week                               Week                List Advice, How-to and
                                                            Miscellaneous


 1                                    1          29          MEN WHO HATE WOMEN
                                                            & THE WOMEN WHO
                                                             LOVE THEM, by
                                                            Susan Forward and
                                                            Joan Torres.
                                                             (Bantam, $16.95.)
                                                            How to cope with
                                                            overbearing
                                                             men.

 2                                    3          26          THE FRUGAL GOURMET
                                                            COOKS WITH WINE,
                                                             by Jeff Smith.
                                                            (Morrow, $16.95.)
                                                            Recipes to be
                                                             prepared at
                                                            moderate cost.

 3                                    2          5           HOW TO BE YOUR OWN
                                                            NUTRITIONIST, by
                                                             Stuart M. Berger.
                                                            (Morrow, $16.95.)
                                                            Ways to create
                                                             a diet regimen for
                                                            health and energy.

 4                                    4          85          WEBSTER'S NINTH
                                                            NEW COLLEGIATE
                                                             DICTIONARY.
                                                            (Merriam-Webster,
                                                            $14.95.) A
                                                             standard reference
                                                            work in a 1983
                                                            revision.

 5                                    5          45          THE ROTATION DIET,
                                                            by Martin Katahn.
                                                             (Norton, $15.95.)
                                                            A regimen based on
                                                            the
                                                             Vanderbilt
                                                            University Weight
                                                            Management
                                                             Program.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable fro those of the
book above.

And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THAT NIGHT, by Alice McDermott. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
   $14.95.) A brief, elegiac, lyrical, morally complex novel centered
   on a teen-age love affair sometime ago on Long Island.

AN INSULAR POSSESSION, by Timothy Mo. (Random House,
   $19.95.) Why the good do evil, and vice versa, is the conundrum at
   the heart of Mr. Mo's grand-scale historical novel of 19th-century
   China and its colonial exploiters, all richly drawn and lively.

HOW I GREW, by Mary McCarthy. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
   $16.95.) ''There is no dampness in my emotions,'' Miss McCarthy
   writes in this account of her early life, and there isn't; facts are
   extracted from memory by a strict, piercing inward stare.

TEMPORARY SHELTER, by Mary Gordon. (Random House,
   $16.95.) Frightened and suffering women inhabit these 20 short
   stories, women scared for their children, their lovers, themselves;
   gloom penetrates the author's personal, diarylike manner.

A HISTORY OF THE JEWS, by Paul Johnson. (Harper & Row, $25.)
   An estimable one-volume account covering the last 4,000 years, by
   the distinguished and omnivorous British journalist and film
   writer whose earlier productions include ''A History of
   Christianity'' and ''A History of the English People.''

WHERE IS NICARAGUA? by Peter Davis. (Simon & Schuster,
   $18.95.) The documentary film maker (''Hearts and Minds'') visits
   Nicaragua as an intelligent amateur, a curious gringo offering
   penetrating questions rather than answers about the country as a
   revolutionary experiment and as an icon in the American mind.

STARING AT THE SUN, by Julian Barnes. (Knopf, $15.95.)
   Precision of language, ironic detachment, a talent for incarnating
   ideas: these are the author's tools in a brilliant novel about a
   woman living between God and technology in the 21st century.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FADED GLORY, VANISHED HOPES By John Logue. 230 pp. Boston: Little, Brown &
Company. $16.95.

BYLINE: By HENRY MAYER; Henry Mayer is the author of ''A Son of Thunder,'' a
political biography of Patrick Henry.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 31, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 452 words


DREAMS of bygone glory dominate the lives of a diverse group of Alabamians in
John Logue's intriguing novel, set in the capital city of Montgomery in 1967.
The populist Governor, Jesse Stuart, recalls his youthful hopes that his gifts
as a baseball hero would lift his family from rural poverty. A cynical newsman,
Jack Harris, yearns for the passion and commitment that had distinguished his
coverage of the famous bus boycott. A black clergyman, James Boone Jr., guiltily
regrets his loss of faith; his parishioner, Arabella Jackson, whose son has died
in Vietnam, wants to bury him on a beloved hillside, now annexed to the city's
whites-only cemetery. In covering this dramatic story, Jack Harris runs into an
even more explosive one: the Governor is secretly selling criminal pardons to
secure his family's fortune before news of his mortal illness becomes public.

There is material here for several novels. Mr. Logue, who is the creative
director of Southern Living magazine, nicely catches the inky ambiance of the
newsroom before the computer terminal took over, and he has created a persuasive
narrative voice for Jack Harris, the editor-narrator. Yet the author allows
Harris to tell only portions of the story, disconcertingly shifting in and out
of third-person narration in ways that sever the dramatic links his complicated
tale requires. Moreover, perhaps his experience as the author of three mystery
novels has led Mr. Logue to take technical shortcuts in which violent action
substitutes for acuity in characterization.

The story is set precisely in January 1967, yet the mood of the novel seems
distinctly late 1970's. Harris walks in front of Martin Luther King Jr.'s church
on Dexter Avenue, musing about ''a movement now as forgotten as the river,''
without mentioning the great Selma march past that very spot not two years
before. Boone complains that the burial of a black soldier shouldn't cause an
uproar because ''nobody here wants to think about this war anymore,'' a
sentiment that seems totally wrong for Alabama in 1967. Similarly, the police
are stern with the surprisingly small number of redneck opponents of the
soldier's burial and astonishingly courteous to the black mourners.

As the soldier's family watches his internment, an angry white family scrambles
in the clay to remove a coffin from the adjacent plot. Having failed to rouse a
violent protest, they have obtained a court order allowing them to open the
grave rather than allow their mother to be buried near a Negro. Despite the
historical discontinuities of the mood, Mr. Logue has written a powerful epitaph
for the social conflict that still gripped Alabama in 1967.


BOATS AGAINST THE CURRENT

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BUILDING COLLAPSE TAKES A TOLL ON EXHAUSTED RESCUE WORKERS

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1108 words


After four days of tension, hard labor and anguish, many of the 200 workers
searching for victims in the rubble of a collapsed apartment building in
Bridgeport, Conn., have themselves become casualties of the tragedy.

Physically and emotionally drained by a nightmarish task of seeking - and
sometimes finding - the bodies of friends and loved ones, some of the volunteers
have pushed themselves to exhaustion, working around the clock and then begging
to go on working.

Others have erupted angrily at what they see as political intrusions and
exploitation by a large, aggressive press corps that, as often happens at scenes
of disaster, has swarmed and badgered with questions, cameras and microphones.

While frayed tempers and angry outbursts have not been common among the workers,
unmistakable signs of stress have prompted authorities to deploy teams of
psychiatrists and psychologists at the site to offer counseling and occasionally
to order workers to halt for rest.

More Subdued Mood

Extra counseling, the establishment of more rigid working hours and a diminished
press presence appeared to have brought a more subdued mood to the site
yesterday, after peaking on Friday and Saturday in a series of sometimes ugly
incidents. But for many workers, it was still an emotional roller coaster.

''It's the frustration of knowing there are individuals buried under the rubble
who are friends and family members,'' said Mayor Thomas W. Bucci, who was jeered
by workers when he took a small group of reporters onto the site Saturday
afternoon.

''They're moving from denial and hard work to anger and great sadness,'' Dr.
Judianne Densen-Gerber, one of three psychiatrists at the scene, said yesterday
after four more bodies were pulled from the tangled mass of concrete and twisted
steel that was to have been L'Ambiance Plaza, a 13-story building on the edge of
the central business district.

A total of 28 men were feared dead in the Thursday afternoon collapse. The four
bodies found yesterday brought to 15 the number of known dead, including 12
recovered victims and 3 located but not yet extricated. In addition, 13 more
victims were missing and presumed dead in the rubble.

From time to time throughout the search, scenes of emotion and sometimes ugly
confrontation have been played out in and around the collapse.

Yesterday, members of two families awaiting word on the fate of loved ones cried
softly as they stood at the edge of the rubble near an American flag fluttering
on a pole. Outside Kolbe Cathedral High School nearby, another grieving family
was approached by a photographer.

''Get that woman away from me,'' one member of the family screamed, breaking
into sobs.

On Saturday, a rescue worker asked for comment by a reporter turned suddenly,
his face flushed with anger. ''I don't care where you're from or who you're
with,'' he said. ''Leave us alone!'' Later, Mayor Bucci led a small group of
pool reporters - chosen to represent hundreds of others - onto the site.
Suddenly a worker shouted to them, demanding that they leave. The Mayor
identified himself.

''I don't care who you are,'' the worker shouted. ''I've got friends of mine in
there who are buried and I want to get them out.'' Other workers, standing atop
the rubble, burst into applause as Mr. Bucci and the group left.

Asked about tensions yesterday, Jonathan Best, the city's director of emergency
services, called the situation ''emotionally charged.''

''The majority of people here are dealing with a stress level which is very high
for construction workers,'' Mr. Best said. ''This is a construction accident.
These people are their peers, their friends, their families.''

Mr. Best, a portly man who has had little sleep himself since the collapse,
seemed tired but calm as he directed a variety of operations and tasks,
including that of providing information to news organizations.

Hundreds of reporters, photographers and radio and television crews have crowded
the site since the accident, and the press, competitive as is often the case at
incidents of wide interest, has behaved with an aggressiveness that has piqued
the anger of families, searchers and officials alike.

On occasion, members of the press have pushed and shoved one another to get
pictures and interviews, thrust microphones or cameras into the faces of
unwilling people and peppered volunteers, officials, relatives of victims and
others with questions.

A television crew Saturday night got into a confrontation with the police after
being ordered off an upper floor of a nearby apartment building where it was
seeking an overview. Another crew was barred from the roof of a building after a
camera fell, nearly striking someone below.

Relatives Join in Search

A part-time reporter and photographer for The New York Post, Paul Adao, was
taken into custody Saturday night and accused of crossing a police line at the
site. He denied the accusation, said the police were harassing him and was
released yesterday in $1,000 bail.

Besides 50 police officers, firefighters and other city employees, the search
team has been composed of about 150 construction workers who were employed at
L'Ambiance or were brought in from other projects in the Bridgeport area. About
100 were on the site yesterday.

Some relatives of victims have also been allowed to join the search, so that
emotional involvement - through friendships or family ties - has run high on
every shift. Exhaustion also been a factor.

''Some have been working excessive periods of time,'' said Dr. Charles Zigun, a
psychiatrist at the site. He said some had worked 36 hours at a stretch, and
shifts of 12 or 24 hours were not uncommon. He told of four men who had worked
''four to five hours, face to face with a dead colleague.''

Aware of the problems of fatigue and stress, city officials imposed 12-hour
limits on work shifts, evacuated the site at shift changes to prevent some from
working on and had all workers wear special identification to guard against
unauthorized volunteers.

They have also minimized body-handling by the workers, insisting that bodies be
moved by emergency medical personnel, and ordered ambulances to cut their speeds
moving on and off the site to reduce tensions.

Even when the last body has been found, the emotional problems are not expected
to diminish. Dr. Densen-Gerber called it post-trauma stress and compared it to
the depression experienced by many Vietnam veterans, who survived when comrades
died.

''The real danger,'' she said, ''is when the men who survive go home and
reflect: 'Why me? Why did I live? Why did the person next to me die?' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Tony Tufaro at site of building collapse (NYT/Suzanne
DeChillo)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HUNDREDS ARRESTED AT C.I.A. IN PROTEST ON FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 27


Three days of protests against Reagan Administration policies in Central America
and South Africa ended today with the arrest of hundreds of demonstrators who
sat down in front of entrances to the Central Intelligence Agency in the morning
rush hour.

Fairfax County, Va., police officers, with jurisdiction over the south gate of
the C.I.A. facility, arrested 355 protesters. Some of the demonstrators went
limp and were dragged into police vans. Others walked. United States Park
police, with jurisdiction over the north gate, arrested 183 protesters, while
the Federal Protective Service arrested 19.

C.I.A. officials said they believed that the protest was the largest held
outside the agency, which is nestled near a forest of pines and poplars in
suburban Virginia. The relatively unviolent demonstration included teen-agers in
''punk'' haircuts, grandmothers, priests, college students and activists of the
1960's and 1970's.

Ellsberg Recalls Other Protests

''Reminds me of the 70's,'' said Daniel Ellsberg, the former Government official
who made the Pentagon Papers public, moments before he sat down to cheers with
dozens of protesters at the south gate. ''But people seem older now, more
middle-aged. And they don't seem to see the police as enemies.''

Nearby, the Rev. Joseph Nangle, a Catholic priest who spent years in Chile and
Peru, glanced around and said, ''It's kind of a 60's crowd. That's not bad. We
stopped the Vietnam War that way.''

Bill Coulter, public information officer for the Fairfax police, said those
arrested would be charged with ''obstructing the free passage of others,'' which
carries a maximum penalty of a $1,000 fine and a year in jail. Many protesters
were either released after receiving a summons at the scene or following an
appearance before a local magistrate.

''I would describe the atmosphere as almost carnival-like,'' said Mr. Coulter.
''No problem whatsoever.'' Although the protesters succeeded in closing the
main, or south, gate for at least four hours, agency officials insisted that the
bulk of the employees were working. Many employees arrived before dawn, thus
missing the demonstrators. ''It's pretty well business as usual,'' said Kathy
Pherson, a C.I.A. spokeswoman.

Carter and Hoffman Missed

Among those arrested were Mr. Ellsberg and Philip Berrigan, the antiwar
protester. Many demonstrators were disappointed that Amy Carter, former
President Jimmy Carter's daughter, and Abbie Hoffman, were not among them.

''I think she has school obligations,'' said Leslie Cagan, national coordinator
of the protest, called ''the National Mobilization for Justice and Peace in
Central America and Southern Africa.'' Miss Carter is a 19-year-old-sophomore at
Brown University.

Some C.I.A. employees arriving for work walked impassively past the
demonstrators, many of whom shouted ''Join us!'' or ''Murderers! Murderers!
Guilty!'' Several bystanders who opposed the demonstators were heckled but left
alone.

George Hanks, a retired mechanical engineer from nearby McLean, Va., carried a
sign reading: ''Go Home Amy - You Too Abby.''

''I heard about this on the 11 o'clock news last night and just decided to come
down,'' he said. ''I have no great affection for the C.I.A., but I don't
particularly care much for people who think that everything the United States
does outside the country is wrong.''

U.S. Policies Protested

Nearby, demonstrators chanted, ''The whole world is watching,'' and one held up
a picture of a child in Central America whose legs were missing. The placard was
scrawled with the words, ''A Small C.I.A. Crime.'' Many of the demonstrators
carried signs with names of Nicaraguans, Salvadorans or black South Africans who
are missing, imprisoned or dead. Noisy endorsement of the Sandinista Government
in Nicaragua marked the protest.

''Si, si, Sandinistas, no, no, C.I.A.,'' the demonstrators shouted. Several
began shouting at two youths, carrying American flags and a photograph of
President Reagan.

''The contras are freedom fighters!'' one of the youths, Karl Strohminger, a
student at Towson State University in Maryland, exclaimed to several
demonstrators.

A protester responded furiously: ''The Sandinistas are opening up schools and
hospitals. The C.I.A. are murderers.''

In the absence of Miss Carter, Mr. Ellsberg was plainly the star protester of
the event, treated with the respect accorded elder statesmen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of police dragging away protester at C.I.A. headquarters (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: HEARTH AND HOME;
SENATOR GORE? IS HE THE ONE MARRIED TO TIPPER?

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1037 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 27


In the capital, Albert Gore Jr., the handsome young Senator from Tennessee who
is the latest entry in the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination has
been written about so much that Newsweek labeled the phenomenon 'Gore chic.'

But, in an unusual twist on the usual story, it is the Senator's wife who,
outside Washington, is the more celebrated member of the family.

With her campaign to clean up sex and violence in rock-and-roll imagery, Mary
Elizabeth (Tipper) Gore has become the Dr. Moriarity of the heavy metal set.

The Critics of Tipper

''Next, Tipper Gore will want to put swimming trunks on Michelangelo statues,''
complained one rock singer, Don Dokken, in Metal Edge Magazine.

A satire in Spin Magazine, ''Tipper Gore's Diary,'' has the Senator's wife
banning such rock classics as ''Teen Angel'' and ''Leader of the Pack'' because
of their theme of romantic violent death, and then sighing: ''This is exhausting
and sordid work, and sometimes I regret having taken it on. I would much rather
be spending the afternoon at home, tending my rosebushes and catering to
Albert's big contributors.''

Baking, Running, Promoting

At home in Arlington, Va., just outside Washington, the real Tipper Gore is not
tending rosebushes or catering to her husband's contributors or regretting
anything.

She is baking sugar cookies with her children, planning her role in her
husband's Presidential campaign and promoting her new book, ''Raising PG Kids in
an X-Rated Society.''

And, in the process, she is helping to redefine the role of the candidate's wife
as a more independent one, and she is coloring her husband's campaign in
not-so-subtle ways.

While she has a high degree of name recognition, it is not all positive - and
that creates a tricky political situation for her husband.

The All-American-looking mother of four does not let it bother her that she has
a negative image in the entertainment industry.

''I know they think I'm a prudish, uptight, sex-disliking Washington housewife
with nothing better to do than eat bon bons all day,'' she said.

She first catapulted to national attention during the 1985 Senate Commerce
Committee hearings on the putative excesses of the music industry, when - with
her husband watching from the panel - she talked of raunchy rock lyrics and
violent imagery on video and stage imagery used by such groups as the Beastie
Boys, Twisted Sister and Motley Crue.

The rock star Frank Zappa attacked Mrs. Gore and the other well-connected
Washington women who banded together to found the Parents Music Resource Center,
as ''cultural terrorists.''

The once-shy Mrs. Gore, who is 38 years old. was not cowed, however, and her new
book expands her crusade to exorcise, or at least label, material in music,
television, movies and magazines that she says send messages of impersonal sex,
hatred, sexism and suicide.

''Something,'' she mourns in her book, ''has happened since the days of 'Twist
and Shout' and 'I Love Lucy.' ''

The book, issued this month by Abingdon Press, a religious publishing house, is
already in its third printing and is so stuffed with gory and salacious examples
that it sports its own parental advisory label.

The political experts agree that Mrs. Gore's book promotion will have an imprint
on her husband's race, giving it a more moralistic tone, but they are divided
over whether this will help or hurt Senator Gore.

Some argue that it will help by charming the right wing of the Democratic party,
where the Senator is not particularly strong because of his youth, his moderate
stands and his father's liberal legacy as a member of Congress from Tennessee
for more than three decades.

But others disagree, privately singing a tune called ''Tipper Don't Preach,'' a
takeoff on the hit song ''Papa Don't Preach'' by Madonna, one of the artists
Mrs. Gore has criticized.

Geoffrey Garin, a Democratic pollster, said Mrs. Gore could alienate many young
professionals who should be her husband's natural constituency. At 39, he is the
youngest candidate in the field.

''I don't think people in their 20's and 30's really relate that well to what
Tipper Gore is saying,'' Mr. Garin said. ''The more this gets into the slightest
suggestion of censorship, the more it will start to turn off the baby boomers.''

Mrs. Gore says she thinks her book will be irrelevant to her husband's campaign.
''In the book, I am speaking for myself, and in his Presidential race my husband
will speak for himself,'' she said, adding with a surprised giggle. ''We're a
two-career family.''

She says her husband has been ''cute'' about the book and is very proud of her.
Her oldest daughter, 13-year-old Karenna, once quoted as saying she ''hated''
the crusade, is teased by some of her classmates. But, Mrs. Gore said, ''she
understands and I help her deal with it.''

Mrs. Gore, who was a liberal activist in the 1960's who marched in Boston
against the Vietnam War and in favor of the civil rights struggle, is sensitive
to the criticism that her crusade infringes on First Amendment rights.

''It is important to note that there is a difference between wanting to restrain
and control and wanting to suppress and censor,'' she writes. ''It's the
difference between saying 'Put the horse back in the barn' and 'Burn the barn
down.' ''

She said people who read her book would understand that there was a
''qualitative'' difference in current music and other youth-oriented media that
moved beyond the merely rebellious.

''There's a big difference from Elvis Presley singing 'Little Sister' to Prince
singing 'Sister,' which is a glorification of incest,'' she said. ''Then you go
from Elvis's swinging hips to Blackie Lawless pretending in his act to slit the
throat of a woman naked from the waist up and chained to a torture rack.''

She is warming to her subject now. ''There's a big difference between the rock
group Lizzie Borden spitting blood at their audience and Cole Porter singing
'Birds do it, bees do it' or the Rolling Stones singing 'Let's Spend the Night
Together.' ''

''Give me innuendo again,'' she finished breathlessly.

But soon Mrs. Gore has to leave. Her children's sugar cookies are ready to come
out of the oven.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tippy Gore with children before Easter (NYT/paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
'It's Called Competition'

BYLINE: By Dave Anderson

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 915 words


In the weight room at Giants Stadium last week, several members of the Super
Bowl XXI champions were working out when Phil McConkey noticed that George Young
had wandered in.

''Don't hang out down here,'' McConkey told the Giants' general manager. ''Get
upstairs and look for some wide receivers.''

George Young laughed. Here was a wide receiver telling the general manager to
search for a wide receiver who might make Phil McConkey expendable. But that's
McConkey, fearless as a wide receiver, fearless in returning punts and kickoffs,
and fearless in talking to the general manager about improving the Giants' depth
at wide receiver in today's National Football League draft.

''I know the Giants want to draft some wide receivers,'' McConkey was saying
now. ''For me personally, that's uncomfortable. But it's called competition.''

McConkey's voice always has a challenging tone. And when he spoke of
''competition,'' he seemed to be relishing the challenge of what will happen in
July when training camp begins. That's the flip side of today's draft. On every
N.F.L. team, the emphasis is on the draft choices who might make the squad. But
in all the talk about the rookies, players on the roster's edge are wondering
which rookies will threaten their jobs.

''I have no control over who the Giants take,'' McConkey said. ''All I have
control over is what I do. Get my rest, eat the right food and work out.
Especially now that I'm 30, but I'm not a real 30. I had five years in the Navy,
five years of no real wear and tear on my body. But it's always going to be
tough.''

McConkey knows. After two seasons with the Giants, the 5-foot-10-inch, 170-pound
former Navy helicopter pilot was cut at the end of training camp last year.
Claimed on waivers by the Green Bay Packers, he played four games there. But
then the Giants lost Lionel Manuel, their most dangerous wide receiver, with a
damaged knee. Another team might not have wanted to swallow its pride by seeking
a player it had cut, but Coach Bill Parcells and George Young didn't even cough.

''All we knew,'' Young says now, ''was that Manuel was hurt.'' Upon his return,
McConkey chalked on the Giants' blackboard in their locker room that the grass
wasn't always greener elsewhere, not even in Green Bay.

''When he wrote that,'' Young said, ''it made an impression on a lot of our
players.''

McConkey was obtained for the Giants' 12th-round draft choice, the very last
choice in today's draft. Quite a bargain for a wide receiver who caught 16
passes for 279 yards and one touchdown, who doubled as a returner of 32 punts
and 24 kickoffs, and who waved a towel to stir up the loyalists not only at
Giants Stadium but also at Super Bowl XXI, where he snatched a deflected pass
for a touchdown in the 39-20 victory over the Denver Broncos.

''We've only won the Super Bowl and been in the playoffs three straight years,''
he said. ''But they still want new wide receivers. Everybody wants a
game-breaker, but if you look at our wide receivers, we're deep. We don't have
any marquee names, but some of those all-pros with 60 catches were sitting home
in the playoffs. Some of those guys just run the sideline. But we run those
17-yard in-cuts. And after we get racked, we get back up.''

As one of the Giants' most popular players, McConkey has been the most visible
of the Super Bowl champions in the off season.

''Motivational speeches, they call them,'' he said. ''I've spoken everywhere -
from the Friendly Sons of St. Patrick in Wilkes Barre to the Traders Forum for
Investment Bankers in Phoenix. And I've got a good one coming up. I'm speaking
at a dinner for Vietnam veterans in Buffalo, my hometown. The last two speakers
they had were General William Westmoreland and James Webb, now the Secretary of
the Navy. I mean, why do they want me? But I'll be there. And that's a
non-paying talk. But hey, you got to put back, too.'' McConkey has done a
Pontiac television commercial and an exercise video. He's been approached about
having his name on a blue-and-white towel for fans at Giants Stadium to wave.

''I just want to be able to wave back,'' he said, laughing. ''But if the roster
goes up to 49 players, I know I'll be all right. I think the Players Association
will use the size of the roster as a bargaining chip in the labor negotiations.
But no matter what happens, I've lived all the fantasies I had as a kid. Not
just winning the Super Bowl, but being around the great players. In Miami a few
weeks ago, I was at a roast for Larry Csonka, a dinner for the Mark Buoniconti
Miami project. I was sitting up on the dais with Zonk and Jim Kiick, Dick
Butkus, Ray Nitschke, Gale Sayers, Willie Lanier. When you're a kid, that's what
you dream about.''

McConkey estimates that the Super Bowl victory has created ''six figures'' of
extra income for him.

''But it's slacking off now,'' he said. ''I've got to get ready for camp, just
like everybody else on our team is. We've got 40 guys lifting almost every day.
I know one thing, we try harder than anybody else.''

When the Giants make their first-round choice today, Phil McConkey expects to be
lifting weights at Giants Stadium. But for him, awaiting the identity of that
choice isn't pressure.

''Pressure,'' he often says, ''is trying to land a helicopter on an aircraft
carrier in the middle of the Mediterranean at night. Hey, that's pressure.
Playing football isn't pressure. Football is fun.''

Even if the Giants draft a few wide receivers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Phil McConkey (NYT/Vic DeLucia)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 29, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PROMINENT HARVARD SCHOLAR BARRED BY SCIENCE ACADEMY

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 28


The National Academy of Sciences, the nation's leading honor society for
scientists, rejected a prominent Harvard political scientist today after a
bruising internal struggle over whether his work amounted to ''pseudoscience''
in which equations were used to dress up mere political opinion.

The rejected nominee was Samuel P. Huntington, director of the Center for
International Studies at Harvard and currently president of the American
Political Science Association, who is one of the most highly regarded and
frequently quoted scholars in his field. He has served as a consultant to the
State Department, Defense Department and the National Security Council, where he
also served on the staff in the Carter Administration.

His rejection by the Academy in secret balloting today appeared to reflect
misgivings about the quality of his scholarly work and, more profoundly, an
eruption of long-simmering tensions between ''hard'' scientists, such as
mathemeticians and chemists, and ''soft'' scientists working in the social
sciences.

Today's election, held in closed session at the Academy's headquarters near the
Lincoln Memorial, chose 61 new members and 15 foreign associates. It capped a
year of furious internal debate after Dr. Huntington was rejected a year ago in
a similarly tense election, whose results were kept secret.

The Academy's repeated repudiation of a pillar of the political science
community has touched a nerve in the academic world and is sure to provoke
greater friction as the results become widely known.

The Academy, a private organization that was founded in 1863, serves two primary
functions. It elects outstanding scientists to its membership, conferring
prestige that most scientists consider second only to the Nobel Prize. And it is
an advisory organization that convenes, through its National Research Council,
committees of experts to provide technical advice to the Federal Government.

The Academy for most of its history has been dominated by hard scientists, but
in the early 1970's it began a concerted effort to elect more social and
behaviorial scientists to its membership, partly in an effort to increase its
range of expertise for advising the Government on complex policy issues. On the
eve of this year's election, the Academy's roster of 1,462 members included 177
social and behavioral scientists, of whom 41 were social or political
scientists.

'A Ton of Documentation'

Dr. Huntington's candidacy was strongly endorsed by the social and behavioral
scientists in the Academy. But his nomination was challenged on the floor and
opposed by a substantial number of the more than 500 members at today's meeting.
At least one-third of those present had to oppose Dr. Huntington to knock him
off the ballot, and some members say the opposition was significantly higher
than that.

The attack on Dr. Huntington was led by Serge Lang, a Yale mathematician now on
leave at Harvard, who has gathered and sent to all Academy members over the past
year what he calls ''a ton of documentation'' challenging Dr. Huntington's
scholarly work, as ''pseudoscience'' and ''nonsense.''

Dr. Lang criticized Dr. Huntington's use of mathematical equations to describe
the relationship between such factors as economic development, social
frustration and political instability in changing societies and his assertion in
one major book that ''the overall correlation between frustration and
instability was 0.50.'' Such use of equations, ratios, and decimal figures are
''a type of language which gives the illusion of science without any of its
substance,'' Dr. Lang wrote. He also objected that Dr. Huntington has passed off
political opinion as if it were science.

Jubilant after today's election, Dr. Lang said: ''I'm pleased that the Academy
has upheld some scientific standards. A number of serious questions concerning
the way some political scientists practice their field have arisen and have been
given added legitimacy by today's vote. These questions transcend the current
election.''

Dr. Lang's views reflect those of a large and influential group of the Academy's
scientists.

One of them, Edward Anders, professor of chemistry at the University of Chicago,
recently urged his colleagues to reduce the number of slots reserved for social
and behavioral sciences in the annual Academy elections. ''I have repeatedly had
misgivings about some of the candidates in social and political sciences, and
less frequently about those in psychology and economic sciences,'' he wrote in
January. ''My suspicions have been amply confirmed by the Huntington debacle.
Any section that nominates poorly qualified candidates lacks either good
candidates or good judgment. The proper punishment is to reduce their quota.''

Dr. Huntington, who had not yet been informed by his supporters of the results,
said today, ''To an outside observer, the Academy would appear to be afflicted
with an acute case of Lang-itis.'' He declined further comment but agreed that
he had previously explained that he used mathematical equations as a ''shorthand
way'' of summing up a complex argument rather than as a rigorous quantitative
tool.

Dr. Huntington's nomination was supported by some of the most eminent social
scientists in the Academy, including Herbert Simon, a Nobel Prize winner in
economics. Eleven political scientists in the Academy, including Dr. Simon,
circulated a letter suggesting that Dr. Huntington appeared to have been opposed
''in part on political grounds.''

Dr. Huntington's strong support for the Vietnam War and his self-described
conservative political philosphy have often aroused opposition among liberal
academics. But Dr. Lang said his crusade was rooted not in political
disagreements but rather in concern about scientific standards.

Dr. Huntington has twice been judged one of the top 10 political scientists in
polls of his peers, and he ranked sixth among all political scientists in the
number of times his work was cited in the scholarly literature in the early
1980's.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'JERKER,' ON AIDS

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 380 words


ROBERT CHESLEY'S two-character drama, ''Jerker, or the Helping Hand,'' is a cry
of anguished solidarity from the heart of San Francisco's homosexual world, a
segment of society where the AIDS epidemic has taken an especially devastating
toll.

The play consists of 20 telephone calls between J.R. (Jay Corcoran) and Bert
(John Finch), strangers whose anonymous telephone-sex relationship turns into a
morale-boosting dialogue on homosexual pride. Conversations that begin as
intricate, kinky safe-sex fantasies change in mood and quality as rough
''playtime'' stories metamorphose into tender ''bedtime'' stories that look back
nostalgically to the 1970's.

''Jerker'' accurately bills itself as ''a pornographic elegy with redeeming
social value,'' and its gamy language and simulated autoeroticism are definitely
not for squeamish tastes. But they serve a poignant purpose by pointing out,
more bluntly than any other play dealing with acquired immune deficiency
syndrome, how the epidemic has threatened one of the fundamental reasons for an
entire group's very existence - its freedom of erotic expression - and
challenged its hard-won self-esteem. Over the course of the drama, we learn that
J.R. is a paraplegic Vietnam veteran. And in a stridently angry and simplistic
diatribe, he contrasts the evil morality of war to the ''really, truly basically
good'' promiscuous way of life that the epidemic has cut short.

The play's staging underscores the protagonists' isolation, vulnerability and
fear as the two men, each lying nude on a bed on opposite sides of the stage,
connect by telephone and by Bert's telephone answering machine, which, toward
the end of the drama, becomes a harbinger of doom.

''Jerker'' is smoothly staged by Nicholas Deutsch and well acted by Jay Corcoran
and John Finch. Mr. Finch in particular brings a rich blend of humor, pathos and
warmth to the more fully fleshed role of Bert.

SEX BY TELEPHONE

JERKER, by Robert Chesley; directed by Nicholas Deutsch; production and lighting
design by John Wright Stevens; production stage manager, Maude Brickner.
Presented by Gene Paul Rickard. At the Sanford Meisner Theater, 164 11th Avenue,
between 22d and 23d Streets.
J.R....Jay Corcoran
Bert...John Finch
Another man...Jay Berkow

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW FACE;
IN 'ALL MY SONS' ROLE, A CHANCE TO PAY A DEBT: JAMEY SHERIDAN

BYLINE: By LESLIE BENNETTS

SECTION: Section C; Page 30, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 764 words


AS a boy Chris Keller was an Eagle Scout, as a soldier a courageous and selfless
leader and now, as a young man learning the family business, he is an honorable
worker, a compassionate son and a loyal friend. ''You're the only one I know who
loves their parents,'' observes his fiancee.

And so when Chris discovers the truth about the father he idolized and the
prosperous business he will inherit, he is confronted with an unbearable choice.
Having learned that his father knowingly sold defective airplane parts that sent
21 World War II pilots to their deaths and then shifted the blame to his best
friend, does he insist that his father face up to punishment, thereby destroying
his family - or does he permit his father to get away with his crime, thereby
violating everything he believes in and destroying himself?

Passionate and idealistic, the character of Chris provides the moral fulcrum of
Arthur Miller's ''All My Sons,'' and in its current revival at the Golden
Theater the play has found a powerful Chris in Jamey Sheridan. Whether shyly
wooing the girl of his dreams or wresting himself back from violence, so
consumed with rage and grief that he seems about to implode, Mr. Sheridan
creates a compelling Chris who steals the audience's attention even when the
focus is on other characters.

''All My Sons'' was written nearly 40 years ago, but when Mr. Sheridan first
read the play last fall he was overwhelmed. ''I wept at my desk,'' he said.
''Some people talk about how preposterous the plot is, but the real things
people do are so much more outrageous than anything an author can dream up. The
O-rings and the space shuttle, the Pentagon, Ivan Boesky and that gang - you
don't have to look far to do this show.''

Haunted by Survivor's Guilt

The 35-year-old actor, who was excused from draft during the Vietnam War because
of a football injury that wrecked his knee, has also found a deep personal
resonance in Chris, who is haunted by guilt about surviving a war that killed
his brother and fellow soldiers.

''This guy talks about 'Why did I live?,' and here I got away with murder,'' Mr.
Sheridan said. ''I feel like the dead fill my room, piles of dead; I feel like
they're grabbing me by the back of my neck, saying 'Talk!' This thing is a
chance to pay a debt. I didn't even have to make the choice of whether to run or
go. I always told myself I would have run, because I didn't believe in the war,
but that's a lot easier said than done - and everyone does have a duty to their
country, even if it's civil disobedience. I felt saved when I got to do this,
because I finally got the chance to stand for something.''

The backstage dressing room where Mr. Sheridan prepares to help re-create the
Keller family each night is lined with faded sepia pictures of his own family,
including a snapshot of his ruggedly built father on the beach at Malibu with
four towheaded youngsters. One of them was Jamey (''That's what I've been called
since I was 2 weeks old''), who grew up in Encino, Calif. His father, an
Australian who died when Jamey was 11, did ''about 85 different things,'' Mr.
Sheridan reported, ranging from horse-race announcer to police officer to
television actor.

Mr. Sheridan originally intended to make his life in modern dance, but by the
time he was 24 years old he had reinjured his knee and given up hope of a
professional dancing career. ''Now I know I'm better off,'' he said. ''My career
as a dancer would be long over by now.''

The Sergeant in 'Biloxi Blues'

His acting career has included various Off Broadway and regional theater credits
as well as earlier Broadway stints in ''Major Barbara,'' ''The Man Who Came to
Dinner,'' and ''Biloxi Blues,'' in which he played the tough drill sergeant last
year.

These days Mr. Sheridan, who lives in Brooklyn with his girlfriend, is reveling
in his current role. He himself offers no simplistic resolution to Chris's
anguish. ''I don't have the answer,'' he said. ''It's such a rich experience to
do something that challenges people's feelings like this. A lot of people are
pretty blase; they've never seen the play, they've never read it, but they think
they know what it's about. This kind of destruction happens at our dinner
tables; big things happen, and everyone lets them slide. The end of this play is
like having a gun in your hand. It's painful, but if you can't feel pain, what
good are you? It's not important that people remember this play or anyone
involved in it, but I hope it makes them think about what's going on, and about
the need for vigilance.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jamey Sheridan (T. Charles Erickson)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 1, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Advertising;
JWT Fills U.S. Unit's Top Posts

BYLINE: By Philip H. Dougherty

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 958 words


DON JOHNSTON, chairman and chief executive of the JWT Group, who of late has
been beleaguered by Wall Street and the trade press, announced yesterday that
the administrative and creative heads of J. Walter Thompson's New York office
would additionally run J. Walter Thompson U.S.A.

Those officials - Stephen G. Bowen Jr., president, and James B. Patterson,
chairman and creative director - will be joined on a new operating committee for
the domestic company by William C. Thompson Jr., newly returned from
McCann-Erickson and designated director of marketing and operations, and Terence
D. Martin, chief financial officer of both the holding company and the agency.

                  $ ?                     *  *  *

Mr. Johnston, who is also chairman and chief executive of the worldwide Thompson
agency, reported additionally that he is doing away with much of the JWT Group
except for its legal and fiscal staffs.

''Now,'' he said, ''everyone that is in the business is on the business.''

That meant the elimination or movement of six or so senior executives and eight
to ten people on their support staff.

''Once you take people off the line and out of day-to-day responsibility for
clients' business, you get a structure that isn't as responsible,'' Mr. Johnston
said at one point in an interview, adding later, ''I had become 100 percent
Group, and I realized I wanted a full-time job.''

He got one in January when he dismissed Joseph W. O'Donnell, hand-picked as
chairman and chief executive of the Thompson agency, and John E. Peters,
president and chief operating officer. Mr. Johnston took on Mr. O'Donnell's job.


                    $ ?                   *  *  *

Last week, after a reported disagreement over how the agency should reach its
goal, Bertram Metter, chairman and chief executive of the domestic Thompson
company, quit.

There will be no chief executive title in the domestic agency. Mr. Bowen said it
was not needed.

He also said that there was ''some healing to be done'' and ''an element of
trust to be worked on.''

In the past, he said, there was a great deal of inward focus among the employees
of the agency as ''good talents were put on a collision course with each
other.''

Commenting on how things will be, Mr. Patterson said: ''We want the best people
who are not egomaniacs. If you're not reasonable you're not going to work
here.''

                                         *  *  *

The JWT Group, a publicly held company, released its first-quarter financial
statement Wednesday. It showed a loss of $1.4 million. And it showed that the
United States operation of the agency was off 10 percent, a far poorer
performance than that of the agency as a whole.

James D. Dougherty, an analyst with County Securities U.S.A., pointed out that
while the company's expenses for compensation and related matters were up 13
percent, income from commissions and fees only increased 6 percent.

At one point during an interview in connection with his promotion Mr. Bowen
said, ''There has been a tendency over the years not to be as hard-nosed about
cost in relation to revenues as you have to be.'' And later he said that he did
not mean changing the agency either to ''a sweat shop or a revolving door.''

Last year, the domestic Thompson operation had revenues of $233.4 million on
$1.6 billion in billings, while the New York office, the largest, had $73
million in revenues on $489.6 million in billings. There are six full-service
offices and 18 service offices in the domestic operation.

                      $ ?                 *  *  *

Mr. Bowen said that the United States company has grown 128 percent since 1980,
and he and Mr. Patterson gave credit to both Burton J. Manning, Mr. Metter's
predecessor as chairman, and Jack Peters for ''setting up the U.S. company.''

''Our priority,'' he said, ''is to continue the resurgance of the U.S. company.
The key is creative, and during recent times there has been a little less focus
on that.''

Mr. Johnston said he was anxious for the New York operation to return to being
the flagship office.

''It's always been the biggest,'' he said, ''but not always the best.''

Steve Bowen acknowledged a mistake in his running of the New York office, the
kind that many agency executives are guilty of. After two tremendous
new-business years in 1984 and 1985, he decided to stop the new-business effort
in 1986 to let the agency digest what it had. That, he said, was a mistake. The
agency lost that all-important momentum.

''You've got to keep going. I should have kept the new-business effort intensive
as a realistic hedge against the world,'' he said.

                     $ ?                  *  *  *

Steve Bowen, 43 years old, graduated from Holy Cross College and served as a
Marine Corps captain in Vietnam. His father before him was a Thompson man, and
the son never worked for another agency. The same can be said of Jim Patterson,
40, who graduated from Manhattan College and got a master's in English from
Vanderbilt University. He is a successful novelist.

As much as anything else, their climb at the agency has been with the Burger
King account, now the biggest in the New York office and billing in the
neighborhood of $190 million. But because of the desperately competitive nature
of the fast-food business, there are tremendous pressures on the client and on
the agency to keep the business. And that is just one of the many tough
assignments the new men at the helm face, coast to coast.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Stephen G. Bowen Jr. and James B. Patterson

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 2, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EX-RADICAL ADMITS PLANTING BOMB IN '70 AT UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 32, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 341 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, May 1


Terrence Peter Jackson, a Vietnam-era antiwar protester formerly known as Silas
Trim Bissell, pleaded guilty today to a Federal charge stemming from an attempt
to blow up an Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps building in 1970.

Until his arrest in January, Mr. Jackson was said by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation to be the last fugitive member of the radical Weatherman faction
of Students for a Democratic Society.

A fugitive for 17 years, Mr. Jackson could be sentenced to a term up to 10 years
and fined $10,000 for the charge to which he pleaded guilty, carrying an
unregistered explosive device, in connection with planting the bomb at the
R.O.T.C. building at the University of Washington.

However, Mr. Jackson and his attorney, Larry Finegold, both expressed hope that
the plea bargain, under which a conspiracy charge was dropped in return for a
guilty plea on the bomb count, would keep him out of jail. Mr. Jackson is to be
sentenced June 19.

After entering the plea in Federal District Court, Mr. Jackson, 44 years old,
told reporters he did not regret his antiwar activity but said he felt
''mistakes were made.'' He said, ''It was absolutely essential that the antiwar
movement took place as it did.''

Mr. Jackson, who had his name legally changed to the one he has used since he
and his wife, Judith Emily Bissell, fled while free on bail bail in 1970, said
he ''would eventually have turned myself in.''

The couple had been arrested after planting a homemade bomb under the building
at the University of Washington. Because of a faulty wire connection, the bomb
did not go off.

After his guilty plea in Federal court, Mr. Jackson pleaded guilty to a state
charge of assaulting a policeman at a 1969 antiwar demonstration. Prosecutors
said they would recommend a 10-year suspended sentence in the case.

A member of the family that manufactures Bissell carpet sweepers, Mr. Jackson
said he intended to return to Eugene, Ore., where he worked as a physical
therapist in a hospital at the time he was arrested.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 2, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: MEETING OF DEMOCRATS SUCCEEDS BY BEING DULL

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 34, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 731 words

DATELINE: SANTA FE, N. M., April 30


The thin air of Santa Fe, which is 7,000 feet above sea level, did not seem to
have any noticeable effect on the behavior of Democratic Party officials who met
here this week. The two-day meeting of the Democratic National Committee was
uneventful, some would say dull, and therefore, by Democratic standards,
successful.

There was only one surprise, and it occurred outside the official meeting room.
Charles Whitehead, the Democratic state chairman in Florida, joined the Rev.
Jesse Jackson at a news conference at which Mr. Jackson, former Gov. Toney Anaya
of New Mexico and a number of liberal Democrats denounced United States military
maneuvers in Honduras.

Mr. Whitehead, a big, friendly man who owns a Ford dealership in Panama City and
belongs to the party's conservative wing, seemed out of place. Did he agree with
Mr. Jackson and the others that the United States had no business sending
National Guard units to Honduras on training exercises?.

''I oppose anything that could get us into a Vietnam in Central America,'' the
Florida chairman said deftly.

Mr. Whitehead's presence had less to do with American policy toward Nicarauga
than his desire to see Southern party leaders improve their relationship with
Mr. Jackson. Earlier that day, Mr. Whitehead and another Southern Democrat had
breakfast with Mr. Jackson to talk about political cooperation and mutual
respect.

''I think we have to pay greater attention to Jesse in the South,'' said Mr.
Whitehead, adding that his presence at the news conference was ''a first step''
in that direction.

Asked about his relations with Southern Democratic party officials, Mr. Jackson
said, ''We're overcoming culture shock and we are maturing. I think we have a
mutual appreciation of each other and the knowledge that we need each other.''

                                     *  *  *

FREE LUNCH AND RADIO

On the hospitality front, Gary Hart's campaign treated Democrats to a late-night
reception featuring an assortment of desserts. Senator Albert Gore Jr. of
Tennessee held the standard cocktail reception, as did supporters of Mr.
Jackson. Massachusetts Democrats offered the only free lunch at the Santa Fe
meeting.

While Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts was formally initiating his
Presidential candidacy Wednesday in Boston, where there was snow on the ground,
the free lunch lured Democrats in Santa Fe to a sun-splashed hotel courtyard at
which the only polite thing to do was to listen to the Governor's announcement
speech on radio. There was supposed to be a videotape of the Dukakis
announcement as well, but the satellite hookup did not work out.

Elaine Kamarck, deputy campaign manager for former Gov. Bruce Babbitt of
Arizona, said she would liked to have held a reception for the party officials
but could not afford it. ''I figure it would cost $5,000 to do a reception,''
she said. ''That's five new field organizers in Iowa.''

The Babbitt Presidential campaign will be counting its pennies for a while
because of its decision to spend more than $250,000 on an early television blitz
in Iowa, which holds the first voting contest of the 1988 primary campaign. A
series of Babbitt television commercials began appearing in major Iowa
television markets this week and will continue through June 30, followed by
mailings and telephone calls to the state's Democratic voters.

Mr. Babbitt, who has a strong organization in Iowa but is not well-known to the
voters, is the first Democrat in the 1988 field to put his campaign on
television. Ms. Kamarck said it was a ''roll of the dice'' that would use about
a third of the money the Babbitt campaign can spend in Iowa under Federal
election law.

                                     *  *  *

JUST THE FACTS

The resolutions committee adopted resolutions calling for an end to military aid
to the Nicaraugan rebels, supporting statehood for the District of Columbia and
opposing the movement to make English the nation's official language.

Surprisingly, the Democrats rejected a resolution calling on President Reagan to
''accept blame'' in the Iran-contra affair. Instead, the committee resolved that
Democrats should act ''responsibly, expeditiously and at all times in the public
interest'' in pursing the facts in the Iran affair.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Japanese Rebuked for Rise in Trade With Hanoi

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 680 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 1


As the United States and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations prepare for
new rounds of talks with Vietnam on missing Americans and the Vietnamese
occupation of Cambodia, the Japanese are being criticized in this region for
steadily expanding Hanoi trade.

Asean has sought to isolate Vietnam economically so long as 140,000 Vietnamese
troops remain in Cambodia.

Within the last week, Vietnam reported it had sold its first crude oil exports
to two Japanese firms, Nissho Iwai and C. Itoh & Company. At almost the same
time a consortium of 90 Japanese companies announced it was building a trade
center in Hanoi.

Japanese businesses, sometimes acting with the help of the Japanese Communist
Party, have been active in Hanoi for several years. Western diplomats in Hanoi
say the businesses are positioning themselves to be Vietnam's dominant
non-Communist trading partner when an unofficial but effective aid and trade
embargo is lifted.

Asean leaders say Japan's trade links undercut efforts to use the promise of
improved economic ties as a way of getting Vietnam to compromise on its
eight-year Cambodia occupation. In a formal protest in late April, envoys of the
six Asean countries - Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei and the
Philippines - asked the Japanese Government to dissuade Nissho Iwai from giving
unofficial economic assistance to Vietnam until Hanoi's forces are withdrawn
from Cambodia. Japan has provided no official economic aid to Hanoi since
Vietnamese troops toppled the Communist Khmer Rouge regime in 1979 and installed
another Communist Government that has been more cooperative.

Asean's protests over trade come as Indonesia's Foreign Minister, Mochtar
Kusumaatmadja, who speaks for the Association on the Cambodia question, is about
to visit both Washington and Hanoi to try to reopen stalled discussions with the
Vietnamese.

Also in May, Thailand's Foreign Minister, Siddhi Savetsila, will be going to
Moscow to raise again the issue of Cambodia with his Soviet counterpart. The
Soviet Union is Vietnam's main military and economic backer, and Asean wants
Moscow's help in getting Vietnam to withdraw its troops.

These trips follow a recent announcement in Washington that the Reagan
Administration is prepared to send the former chairman of the Joints Chief of
Staff, Gen. John W. Vessey, Jr., to Hanoi as a special envoy to hasten the
resolution of the cases of more than 2,000 missing Americans.

Hanoi-based diplomats say that Vietnam's recent actions may reflect political
disagreement on how to deal with the United States.

There are no trade or diplomatic links between Washington and Hanoi, although
economists say over $20 million in American goods reaches Vietnam through third
countries each year.

Asean countries, led by Singapore, trade with Vietnam and Cambodia, although the
amount of legal income is small. Smugglers supply the markets of Phnom Penh, the
Cambodian capital, and to a lesser extent Vietnamese cities, where goods from
relatives abroad often dominate some shops.

Hanoi, facing severe economic problames, is now promising to make more of this
private trade legal. Thai businesses have already expressed an interest in
broadening commercial ties, arguing that their activities should not be linked
to the Thai Government's demands that the 140,000 Vietnamese troops leave
Cambodia first.

All regional nations, most oil producers, have been watching the development of
Hanoi's oil industry with interest. There are assumed to be substantial reserves
off the coast of southern Vietnam in Vung Tau, but the Vietnamese, working with
the Soviet Union, are hampered in exploration and drilling by a lack of
equipment.

Some economists believe significant quantities of oil are being lost or wasted.
There are no pipelines, refineries or storage facilities in Vietnam.

His report said that four Japanese companies - Nippon Kokan, Nippon Steel,
Kawasaki Steel and Sumimoto Metal Industries - are thought to be negotiating
with Vietsovpetro, a state oil company, for pipeline construction contracts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AND THE NICARAGUAN REBELS: SIX YEARS OF QUESTIONS AND CONTRADICTIONS

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2186 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 2


The Reagan Administration's support for the Nicaraguan rebels has been marked by
contradictions - and the potential for misleading Congress - ever since
President Reagan approved support for the rebel forces nearly six years ago,
according to present and former Administration officials.

Early in the assistance program, a small cadre of committed officials at the
Pentagon, the White House, the State Department and the Central Intelligence
Agency - called the ''core group'' - stretched the rules to get support for the
rebel cause, a cause that has come to most engage Mr. Reagan's personal
interest.

In later years, the core group became known as the Restricted Interagency Group.

The officials said participants in the group came up with the idea for
organizing a succession of temporary exercises in Honduras, so that the American
military and intelligence infrastructure would be enlarged at a time when
Congress adamantly opposed a permanent presence in that country.

''It was amazing,'' marveled one former military official. ''They did something
in Honduras that was opposed by most of the bureaucracy and nearly all of the
Congress.''

Gen. Paul F. Gorman of the Pentagon, Duane Clarridge of the Central Intelligence
Agency and Thomas O. Enders of the State Department were the major players, with
Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, the National Security Council aide, mostly watching
as these officials ''played the system,'' the former official said.

The core group, said one former official close to its work, was expert in using
personal ties to military and intelligence officers to funnel assistance to the
rebel forces, known as contras, and, in some cases, to circumvent the spirit of
Congressional restrictions. Avoiding the Rules: A Plan for Planes One example,
according to documents on file at a Washington-based organization called the
National Security Archives, was Operaton Elephant Herd. This was a 1983 plan to
declare several planes used by the military as excess so they could be donated
to the contras. This effectively avoided a $24 million cap then in place on
aiding the rebels.

Members of Congress and others who have spent the last four months investigating
the Iran-contra affair for hearings that open Tuesday say they are now convinced
that the climate of those early years, when Congress had approved C.I.A. support
for the rebels, set the tone for the effort to circumvent a Congressional ban on
military aid imposed in 1984.

''I knew they would press to the edge of the law to aid the contras,'' said
Representative Lee H. Hamiliton, the Indiana Democrat who is chairman of the
House Intelligence Committee. ''In some cases, subsequent facts suggest they may
have gone over the edge, but that's for others to decide.''

With Congress passing two ambiguously worded amendments aimed at cutting off
military aid in 1984 and 1985, the stage was set for some at the National
Security Council to begin coordinating a private effort to get food, weapons and
other aid to the rebels.

One of the major questions as the hearings loom is how much senior officials,
including President Reagan, knew about these possibly illegal activities.

An investigator said that a note from Vice President Bush was found in Colonel
North's files offering warm thanks for ''all the work'' Colonel North had been
doing for the contras.

It was not clear what work the note referred to, but it was dated November 1985,
three months after the first public questions had been raised about the legality
of Colonel North's activities in news reports. The Vice President's office
declined to comment, although Mr. Bush has said previously he was not aware of
any improper activities by Colonel North.

Two former senior Administration officials deeply involved in Nicaragua policy
said the potential for misleading Congress was inherent from the moment
President Reagan was briefed on the goals of the program.

One former senior official recalled that at first ''it took some persuading'' to
get the President interested in the contra program in 1981.

When the idea was presented, according to the official, who attended the White
House meetings, Mr. Reagan was told the plan was for a small force that would
intercept arms shipments from the Sandinistas to the Marxist insurgents in El
Salvador. A New Goal: Lesson for Russians Mr. Reagan was not enthusiastic, the
official recalled, so his advisers changed the concept. The argument that
finally convinced the President was that the contras could be the United States
answer to a series of Soviet-supported third-world insurgencies that had seized
power in the 1970's, including those in South Yemen and Mozambique.

''We said: 'The United States should not accept the notion that the game was
over when the Soviet-backed governments took over,' '' the official said.

Mr. Reagan approved the program, even though, as the official recalled,
virtually no one in Government believed the rebels had any chance of winning a
military victory. The conflict between statements made to Congress and the
realities of field operations arose almost immediately.

In 1981 and 1982 the United States paid Argentina $15 million to secretly arm
and train the fledgling contra army, according to a former intelligence
official. The Administration told Congress privately that the rebels were being
trained only to intercept arm shipments to El Salvador, despite the different
view in the White House.

The official said Argentina was actually training the contras to invade
Nicaragua and wrest control of the government from the Sandinistas.

In 1983, after the Argentine Government had changed and the Central Intelligence
Agency had begun running the contra program, C.I.A. officers told contra leaders
they were being trained so they could March into Managua soon.

Moreover, Mr. Hamilton recalled that the program was sold to Congress using the
first rationale - that it would be a strictly limited, 500-man raiding force.
But members of Congress became increasingly worried as the numbers grew steadily
to nearly 10,000 people over the next two years. The rationale shifted as well,
with the Government saying their purpose was to pressure the Sandinista regime
into negotiations.

Within the Administration, talk of an invasion by American troops began to
increase, although officials now say no firm invasion plans were ever made.

Still, ''there were these guys in the White House who were just dying for an
excuse to send in the 82d Airborne,'' a former senior official said. ''The line
they had was that with 125,000 troops and 4,000 to 5,000 casualities, we could
occupy the country in four to six weeks.''

A senior State Department official of that period said he and others were so
openly opposed to the invasion idea that some National Security Council officers
got the idea that the State Department was not entirely enthusiastic about the
contra program either. Taking Over Policy From the State Dept.

As a result, Administration officials said, starting in 1984 the council began
taking over contra policy from the State Department. During this period Robert
C. McFarlane headed the council.

In August 1985, a senior National Security Council official proudly said,
''We've grabbed the action items on contra aid from State.''

In the contra program's early years, the Government's intelligence analyses were
far more optimistic about the rebels' prospects than reality warranted,
according to several Government officials who have read the analyses, which are
secret.

That helped lead officials to unrealistic expectations about what the insurgency
could accomplish if the contras could get just a little more help from the
United States.

At the same time, many of the predictions about Sandinista intentions proved to
be overly dire, while Nicaragua's vulnerability to attack was exaggerated.

''There was an awful lot of overselling and hyping,'' one senior Administration
official said. ''The political people, Casey and others, tended to magnify
elements they liked and downplay the others.'' He was referring to William J.
Casey, the former Director of Central Intelligence.

This official said the quality of the analysis slowly improved over the last two
years. A C.I.A. official noted that the agency's most recent secret intelligence
report on the contras showed that after six years they had failed to obtain
significant political support inside Nicaragua - a key goal of the contra
program. North's Role In Intelligence Report In the early years of debate over
contra policy, several Government officials said, senior officials carefully
shaped the intelligence reports so they would influence Congressional debate.

As an example, one Government official said that for a special national
intelligence estimate on Nicaragua, completed in mid-1983, the specific
questions to be answered in the analyses -the terms of reference, as the
directions are called - were written by Colonel North along with senior State
Department officials who supported the program.

That intelligence report, issued just before major Congressional votes on the
assistance issue, asserted that the Sandinistas were about to consolidate their
revolution and would soon begin destabilizing other governments in the region, a
process the report said could eventually threaten the Panama Canal.

''The parallels to Vietnam are eerie,'' a former official said. ''They kept
saying, 'Just give us another few months and $100 million and we'll be at Lake
Managua.' ''

One important motivation behind the Congressional investigations is evidence
that the Administration deceived both Congress and the American public about the
goals and progress of the contra program.

''The oversight process works if people in the highest levels of trust in the
Government obey the law and tell the truth,'' said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, a
Vermont Democrat who was vice chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee
until last year. ''If you have people at the highest level who lie and ignore
the law, I'm not sure there's any form of oversight that can work.''

But Mr. Hamilton, who was chairman of the House committee from 1984 to 1986,
acknowledged that Congress could have been more dogged in investigating the
widespread reports that Colonel North was organizing a private network to
support the contras.

''I could have done a better job,'' he said. ''But it's very hard to do a better
job when you are misled by high-ranking officials.''

During one session with the House Intelligence Committee in August 1985, called
after The New York Times published an account of Colonel North's activities, the
officer denied any role in the private operations he was running. The next day,
Rear Adm. John M. Poindexter, then the President's national security adviser,
sent him a note saying, ''Well done.'' An Air Network Skirts Congress Colonel
North and other Administration officials secretly circumvented a Congressional
ban on military aid to the contras with their private Project Democracy air
network. They argued that the National Security Council was not covered by the
ban, which applied only to intelligence agencies. But Administration officials
never told Congress they were interpreting the ban that way.

When President Reagan said during a televised address last year that the
Sandinistas were training Communist insurgents in Brazil, the Brazilian
Government said it was baffled by the assertion, and the State Department had to
acknowledge that there was no guerrilla movement in Brazil.

Part of the problem, a former senior Administration official said, was that ''it
was the first time that a totally covert operation became a totally overt
operation, and it came out of the closet one limb at a time - we didn't know how
to handle it from a press point of view or from a public point of view.''

Starting in 1984, the public emphasis changed from Nicaragua's alleged support
for Salvadoran guerrillas to the nature of the Sandinista regime itself.

By 1985, hardly anyone in the Government doubted that the Sandinistas were
Marxists whose interests usually ran counter to those of the United States. But
the Administration ''needed examples, anecdotes,'' an Administration official
said. ''Sometimes that caused problems.''

For example, for the 1985 debate over financing the contras, the White House
came across a newly minted Nicaraguan postage stamp of Karl Marx.

''Some still insist that the Marxist-Leninists pose no threat,'' Vice President
Bush said during a speech in Texas. And then he held up a facsimile of the Karl
Marx stamp. ''These are stamps, commemorative stamps, of Nicaragua,'' he said.

President Reagan later said the stamps were evidence that the Sandinistas were
''eager puppets for the Soviets and the Cubans.''

But the Nicaraguan Ambassador to Washington, Carlos Tunnerman, pointed out that
the Marx stamp was just one in a series depicting world leaders.

He produced other commemorative stamps from the same series, which depicted,
among others, George Washington, Christopher Columbus, Pope John Paul II and
Babe Ruth.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Nicaraguan rebels training along Honduran border (The Picture
Group/William Gentile); photo of work being completed in the Russell Building in
Washington (NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Barring a Prize-Winning Vietnamese Pianist

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 21, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 26


Not all those in Moscow who are being denied the right to travel abroad are
victims of Soviet restrictions. At least one, a pianist, has failed to get
permission from the United States to accept American concert engagements booked
for him since he won the Chopin piano competition in Warsaw in 1980.

The United States has not acted on visa applications made by the pianist, Dang
Thai Son, since 1983. Although he has received no explanation, the reason seems
evident to Mr. Son, 29 years old, who has built a recital and recording career
on four continents since his Warsaw triumph. The pianist is Vietnamese.

A 1983 American tour arranged by the I.C.M. concert management agency in New
York had to be canceled because the organizers were unable to get a visa for the
pianist. Another agent, Jacques Leiser, booked Mr. Son for the opening recital
of a summer festival in Newport, R.I., last year.

In honor of what was to be his American debut, the pianist prepared a program
that paired Charles Ives, the American composer, with Chopin. Mr. Son said he
was glad he learned the music of Ives, but he did not get a chance to present it
in Newport. His visa request again went without reply.

''I have played in almost every country in Europe except Luxembourg,'' he said.
''I have just returned from a two-month tour of Japan and have begun a
seven-year project to record the complete works of Chopin for Japanese Victor. I
have toured South America and Australia. But I have never played in the United
States.''

Mr. Son, who travels on a Vietnamese passport, has a busy schedule, booked
through 1989. He played in Switzerland in April and is off on his second South
American tour this spring before another visit to Japan. He spends only three
months of the year in Moscow, where he was brought in 1977 for study and where
his mother, brother and sister have followed him. Until he came here, his
mother, who graduated from conservatories in Paris and Prague, was his teacher.

His mother has remained a powerful influence over his artistic life and,
contrary to practice, he returned to the Conservatory after his 1980 success in
Warsaw. Until last year when he was graduated, he combined an international
career with student life.

''He did not have enough intellectual baggage,'' his mother said sternly,
explaining why she had ordered him back to school.

As a winner of a major competition, Mr. Son could have begun a full-time
performing career right after his prize and could have been teaching rather than
studying.

Even now, he continues lessons with distinguished teachers in Paris and
Switzerland during his tours.

Mr. Son said he was bemused by the similarities of his situation with those of
Soviet musicians whom he has met during his years at the Moscow Conservatory who
have had difficulties in obtaining passports to perform abroad.

School Went Underground

The pianist speaks, apparently with no ill feeling, of his years of life and
study in a town to which the Hanoi Conservatory was evacuated at the onset of
American bombing during the Vietnam War.

''The whole school went underground,'' he said. ''We had only a couple of
upright pianos, and there were so many students that we only had 20 minutes a
day at the piano each, which is not enough. The rest of the time we practiced on
dummy keyboards. Of course, when the the planes came to drop bombs, we all went
underground and there was no lesson.''

A diffident man who shuns politics, Mr. Son is embarrassed to talk of the war
with an American. He said he preferred to speak of something American that he
loved and for which, he says he is convinced, there was no equal: Steinway
pianos. His proudest possession is a Steinway grand that he bought from its
Soviet owner.

The pianist said his fondest dream was of going to the studio in New York where
the piano manufacturer, he had heard, allowed performers to choose from among
the instruments for their New York appearances.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER;
JULES FEIFFER'S WEST SIDE STORY

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1720 words


DURING THE FIRST SCENE change of ''Little Murders,'' which opens Wednesday at
the Second Stage, the sound of ''Abbey Road'' fills the theater. The Beatles
music, like the Jimi Hendrix and Sly Stone songs used for breaks later in the
play, provides one of the few obvious clues that Jules Feiffer's tragicomedy
itself arose from the cultural and political ferment of the late 1960's.

The crazy son in the show's fictive family, after all, looks like one of Grand
Central Terminal's legions of homeless. His sister's miniskirt, now as in 1967,
when the play first opened on Broadway, is the fashion of the season. The
sirens, gunshots and obscene telephone calls remain the soundtrack of Manhattan
life. And in the New York of Bernhard Goetz and Howard Beach, Mr. Feiffer's play
proves that no decade holds the patent on metropolitan paranoia.

''The reason why 'Little Murders' is still timely is that we're dealing with
people who came away from the struggles of the 60's -Vietnam, civil rights -
with the belief that nothing can be gained,'' Mr. Feiffer, who is 58 years old,
said in a recent interview. ''So let's circle the wagons and take care of
ourselves, because we can't take care of anyone else. What brings together the
family in the play is that sense of victimization that permits them to shoot
strangers.

''And I'm not surprised the play has lasted,'' he went on. ''I was more
surprised that 'Carnal Knowledge' hasn't become dated. I thought of that film as
the story of my generation; I actually believed relations between men and women
were changing for the better. But when I wrote 'Little Murders,' I wrote about
something I thought was emerging, something that would affect how our lives were
framed, and would affect them for at least a generation.''

Some elements of ''Little Murders,'' Mr. Feiffer conceded, have not traveled so
well. The character who takes photographs of feces, for instance, provoked shock
and laughter in 1967. Today's audiences seem to accept his profession as
perfectly reasonable. But a full generation after its short-lived premiere,
''Little Murders'' continues to ask what is to its author a depressingly
constant question: Why bother caring about anyone else? Or as one of his
characters puts it, ''The only true feeling is no feeling. The only way to
survive.''

Although Mr. Feiffer's earliest artistic efforts were informed by the Korean War
and McCarthyism - and both are mentioned in ''Little Murders'' - it was the
assassinations of the 1960's that inspired the play. ''I found that after J.F.K.
was shot I fell into a deep depression,'' Mr. Feiffer said. ''Which was odd
because I wasn't a big fan of his; he was the first actor in the White House.
And then when Oswald was shot, I thought there is a madness going on. And
because of my politics, I saw that madness in Vietnam, too. So the motive of the
play was the breakdown of all forms of authority - religion, family, the police.
Urban violence was always the metaphor in my mind for something more serious in
the country.''

Mr. Feiffer, though, first envisioned ''Little Murders'' as a novel. ''I never
intended to write a play,'' he recalled. ''Having gone to theater a lot and read
plays a lot since adolescence, I realized that if I ever wrote the sort of play
I wanted to write, it would close in a week. I felt I'd already done my
masochistic years at The Village Voice - eight years of cartoons without a
penny. But I felt this grim sense of what was going on and I didn't feel the
cartoons could express that fully. I also felt the cartoons were being too
easily accepted.''

So Mr. Feiffer, armed with 400 handwritten pages of incipient fiction, went to
the Yaddo writers colony for the summer. On the morning of the first day, he
read his work-in-progress for the other colonists; on the afternoon of the first
day, he ''went out to Saratoga Springs, bought a bottle of Scotch and drank the
whole thing because the book was terrible.'' Too embarrassed to return to New
York and the friends who had just given him a farewell party, Mr. Feiffer
returned to his original notes for ''Little Murders.'' There he found an outline
- largely discarded for the novel, but ideal for a play - and two major speeches
that would reach the stage virtually verbatim. In three weeks, the first draft
was done.

''And I realized that whatever the fate of the play, I was stuck as a
playwright,'' Mr. Feiffer said. ''I felt as at home with a play as with the
cartoon.''

Unfortunately, ''Little Murders'' fulfilled Mr. Feiffer's prophecy precisely,
pleasing the author and playing for one week on Broadway. Still, ''Little
Murders'' in retrospect stands as the turning point in Mr. Feiffer's career,
broadening his base from the cartoon (for which he won the 1986 Pulitzer Prize)
to a variety of plays, novels and screenplays. To suggest that Mr. Feiffer is a
unique species of writer is, as in science, to beg the proof behind the
hypothesis. For one thing, he is probably the only author to have anticipated
both Garry Trudeau's ''Doonesbury,'' with his long-running cartoon, and David
Rabe's ''Hurlyburly,'' with his screenplay for ''Carnal Knowledge.'' He has
proven himself equally adept at the quick windup of a comic strip and the moral
ambiguity and dislocating dramaturgy of modern theater.

As a tale of mutiny within the family stockade and barbarism without it,
''Little Murders'' also prefigured the range of the Feiffer drama to follow. The
domestic concerns emerged even more powerfully in the highly-praised 1981 play
''Grown-Ups,'' like its predecessor a box-office fiasco on Broadway. And the
social satire of ''Little Murders'' continued in ''The White House Murder Case''
and ''A Think Piece.''

Familial discord, of course, is as eternal and as eternally fascinating as
subjects get; for keeping him in business as a political commentator, however,
Mr. Feiffer graciously thanks the amnesiac American electorate. ''It's amazing
to me that we have to learn in the age of Reagan all the things we had to learn
with Johnson and then with Nixon,'' Mr. Feiffer said. ''We have to go through
all these crises every few years because we never absorb them and translate them
into an improved political philosophy.''

That might upset Feiffer the human being. But to Feiffer the writer, human folly
is mother's milk. ''I love the Reagan Presidency,'' Mr. Feiffer declared.
''What's depressing about it is fighting the same battles about the Soviet
monolith and whether disarmament is a bad thing. What I find fascinating about
the Reagan years is that, while he's described as Teflon, the Teflon is really
the American people. Whatever he did - Bitburg, the homeless, Lebanon, whatever
- all of this didn't leave a mark on the public. Not until he was caught in bed
with the Ayatollah did it turn on him.''

Is there, though, a point of diminishing returns for a satirist? The novelist
Philip Roth, for one, opined in the early 1960's that reality was becoming so
surreal that it was outstripping fiction's ability to outrage and lampoon. ''I
think that was a fair comment 15 years ago,'' Mr. Feiffer answered, when posed
with the maxim. ''I'm not sure it applies any more. A statement like that is
just another form of denial. This sense of altered reality has been with us
since at least the 60's, and has roots beyond that. It's not that satire has to
take a back seat to reality. It's that we have to accept reality, and stop
editing it to suit ourselves.''

His point, in a way, applies to the reception for ''Little Murders'' itself.
Thanks to revivals by the Circle in the Square Theater and the Royal Shakespeare
Company, and to a film adaptation, ''Little Murders'' survived its initial
Broadway disaster. The current production, directed by John Tillinger, lured a
cast including Christine Lahti, Mike Nussbaum and Frances Sternhagen. Still,
like most of Mr. Feiffer's plays, ''Little Murders'' has frequently been
described as farcical or absurdist, terms that imply safe distance from the real
world.

''I always thought of 'Little Murders' as a sort of documentary,'' Mr. Feiffer
said. ''I, like anyone else who writes for a living, bridles at being labeled.
The point is that critics can't tolerate not putting you in a group. They want
to have a brand name for you, or to invent one.

''When I see that family onstage in 'Little Murders,' only when it's operating
as a family does the play make sense to me. When it has the reality of a real
family, the play plays. Otherwise, it's just a series of jokes. Jokes that work.
But that's boring. If it was just jokes, I wouldn't pay to see it.''

MULTIPLE 'MURDERS'

''Little Murders'' died a quick death the first time it was staged in New York.
The play, fresh from its world premiere at the Yale School of Drama, opened at
the Broadhurst Theater on April 25, 1967, and closed after only seven
performances despite its unusual and gifted cast: Barbara Cook (in photo),
Heywood Hale Broun, Phil Leeds, Richard Schaal, Ruth White. There were also two
relatively new faces: David Steinberg, a 24-year-old comedian from Chicago's
Second City, and Elliott Gould (also in photo), then 29, who had begun his stage
career as a chorus-line dancer and had drawn good notices on Broadway for his
leading role in ''I Can Get It for You Wholesale.''

''The comedy comes to a point where it can no longer keep a grin on its face,
not even a twisted one,'' wrote Walter Kerr in The New York Times. ''Mr. Feiffer
gives over the business of suggesting serious comment from inside a lazy,
lunatic stance, and like a too successfully reformed gag man, goes straight.''

Mr. Feiffer took the play to London, where the Royal Shakespeare Company
produced it to kinder reviews.

In 1969, Alan Arkin resurrected ''Little Murders'' in New York, staging it at
the Circle in the Square, with a cast that included Linda Lavin, Elizabeth
Wilson and Vincent Gardenia. The play fared better Off Broadway, running for 400
performances.

Mr. Arkin then directed and appeared in a critically acclaimed screen version of
the play. Joining him in the 1971 film were actors from both New York stage
productions - Mr. Gould, Miss Wilson and Mr. Gardenia - and Donald Sutherland,
who had appeared the year before with Mr. Gould in the movie ''M*A*S*H.''   -Jan
Benzel

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jules Feiffer

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COPPOLA RETURNS TO THE VIETNAM ERA, MINUS APOCALYPSE

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2126 words

DATELINE: SONOMA, Calif.


ON THE EDGE OF NORTHERN California's wine country, a huge turn-of-the-century
Victorian manor has been transformed by Hollywood magic into a home in
Ypsilanti, Mich., circa 1945. Beside it, in a sooted brick factory building that
seems nearly as old as the mansion but was erected only a few weeks ago, Francis
Coppola is directing the actor Jeff Bridges as he portrays a man - the postwar
auto maker Preston Tucker - pursuing a dream.

Mr. Coppola is back on set only hours after finishing the final cut of ''Gardens
of Stone,'' a movie set in the Vietnam War era. It was the fifth movie he had
finished in five years, he said, but it seemed more than that.

''It's been nonstop, one after another,'' he said during a break in the filming.
''One a year, never stopping,'' he added, waving his hand.

''I just decided to pay everything off,'' he explained, alluding to the $15
million in debts that he said he had incurred while pursuing his own dream, the
establishment of a high-tech film production studio that was to be a paradise
for creative film makers independent of the Hollywood establishment.

The dream collapsed in 1982. Mr. Coppola, heavily in debt, lost his 23-acre
Zoetrope studio after its first film, ''One From the Heart,'' an expensive,
off-center picture about love and life in America, bombed at the box offfice and
with most critics, and another picture from the studio, ''Hammett,'' fared
almost as badly.

''Gardens of Stone,'' opening in New York on Friday, is a story, based somewhat
loosely on a novel by Nicholas Proffitt, a former Newsweek correspondent, about
a group of soldiers assigned during the Vietnam War to the Old Guard, an elite
Army ceremonial unit based just outside Washington. Their duties, among other
things, included burying the war's dead in Arlington National Cemetery.

James Caan and James Earl Jones portray senior sergeants made cynical by life
and combat who take an idealistic, eager-for-battle enlisted man, played by D.
B. Sweeney, under their wing as the country sinks deeper into the quagmire of
the war. Anjelica Huston plays Mr. Caan's girlfriend.

In its examination of the effects of the war on one group of soldiers and those
around them, ''Gardens of Stone'' - the title refers to the tombstones at
Arlington - continues Hollywood's renewed concern with the war that began with
''Platoon,'' Oliver Stone's 1986 Academy Award-winning movie. And it may be seen
as a companion piece to ''Apocalypse Now,'' Mr. Coppola's 1979 surrealistic
vision of the madness of war as viewed from the jungles of Southeast Asia -
Vietnam revisited.

But as he discussed ''Gardens of Stone'' over lunch recently, Mr. Coppola
outlined themes in the picture - the critical importance of family ties, ritual,
honor, tradition and loyalty - that seemed to have at least as much in common
with ''The Godfather,'' his Oscar-winning 1972 film about the Mafia, as with
''Apocalypse Now.'' He said that it was not his intent to make an antiwar movie.

''Obviously, there is a message there, that we are sworn to protect our children
and we keep putting them in situations that make that impossible, that you want
to save your kids but you end up burying them, all dressed up in ritual. But I
didn't associate 'Gardens of Stone' with 'Apocalypse Now.' ''

'' 'Apocalypse' was big and sort of mystical and incorporated the dark themes of
Joseph Conrad's 'Heart of Darkness,' '' he said. ''Gardens of Stone,'' tells a
''small story'' centering on the relationship of a surrogate father, Mr. Caan,
and his son, Mr. Sweeney, both members of a larger ''family,'' the Army, as the
older soldier tries to teach the youth everything he knows to help him survive
in Vietnam, ''and then loses him.''

''I went to military school, and I've always been fascinated by the role of
ritual in the military, particularly the code of honor,'' Mr. Coppola said.

He said that he was even more interested in the chance to depict the Army in an
unconventional light: not merely a team of military men but a kind of
specialized family whose members shared tradition, loyalty and affection.
Moreover, he said, Mr. Proffitt's book and the screenplay by Ronald Bass
afforded him an opportunity to focus on soldiers, especially noncommissioned
officers, not as cliche figures but as complex individuals.

Apparently the Army liked the project. It not only gave Mr. Coppola the run of
Fort Myer, Va., Arlington National Cemetery and portions of Fort Belvoir, Va.,
it assigned technical advisers from the Old Guard to coach Mr. Caan, Mr. Jones
and other actors in how to behave as military men. And it provided Mr. Coppola
with enough men and materiel to invade a small country: uniforms, weapons, 450
soliders for a precision march review, 15 soldiers for bit parts and nearly 600
other soldiers and military dependent as extras.

Even the background score, written by Mr. Coppola's father, Carmine, is played
in the film by an Army band.

In exchange for its ample help, Mr. Coppola conceded that the Army demanded and
received a right to censor the script. He said, however, that except for
limiting the amount of foul language spoken by the film's characters, taking
pains to assure that ''the Army's leadership appeared honorable and competent,''
and insuring that military scenes were technically accurate, the Pentagon did
not place many obstacles in his way.

Lieut. Col. John Myers, the Army's principal liaison officer on the film
project, said: ''From the Army's standpoint, the film's depiction of the
military is beyond reproach.''

At 48 years old, Mr. Coppola remains among a handful of directors - Woody Allen,
Steven Spielberg, George Lucas, perhaps a few others - whose track records and
names alone are likely to induce a studio to finance a new movie.

But at least for now, he is not the high-flying creator of sprawling, expensive
epics like ''The Godfather,'' ''The Godfather, Part II'' and ''Apocalypse Now,''
nor is he the confident dreamer who envisaged singlehandedly revolutionizing the
movie production business.

Since ''One From the Heart,'' he has directed ''The Outsiders,'' ''Rumble
Fish,'' ''The Cotton Club,'' ''Peggy Sue Got Married,'' ''Gardens of Stone'' and
now ''Tucker,'' not to mention directing Michael Jackson in ''Captain Eo,'' a
three-dimensional film for exhibition at Disney theme parks in California and
Florida.

Except for ''The Cotton Club,'' a troubled picture that he took over in
midproduction when the producer Robert Evans needed a director in a hurry who
had a credible track record to keep the project afloat financially, the pictures
have been relatively modest. ''Cotton Club,'' he said, ''was an unbelievable
experience,'' but he said he needed the money.

''Have you become sort of a hired gun?'' he was asked.

''Very definitely,'' he responded without hesitating.

As Mr. Coppola, whose dark beard has begun to reveal streaks of gray, spoke
about ''Gardens of Stone,'' he seemed curiously uninvolved with it emotionally.
It did not seem to be a film he felt a burning desire to make, like ''The
Godfather,'' ''Apocalypse Now'' or even ''One From the Heart.''

Perhaps the apparent ambivalence was linked in part to a personal tragedy
connected to the picture: During the filming of ''Gardens of Stone'' in
Washington, his 22-year-old son and assistant, Gian Carlo, was fatally injured
in a boating accident on Chesapeake Bay.

Even now, as he recalled the incident, the irony did not escape Mr. Coppola. A
young man dies as his father is trying to teach him his craft.

''In a way, the movie paralleled my own life,'' he said, averting his eyes.

After making 17 movies, Francis Coppola says he is beginning to understand how
the ''old directors'' such as John Ford turned out so many high-quality movies
despite the high volume of production required by Hollywood's old studio system.

''As you get more experience,'' he said, ''you develop a technique, and I think
you work faster.''

Mr. Coppola's directorial style borrows something from Broadway -and Japanese
video cassette recorders.

Unlike most movie directors, he puts his ensemble of performers through at least
two weeks of rehearsals before a new movie starts filming.

As if it were a theatrical play, the players rehearse the movie in sequence, not
in the conventional undisciplined fashion of Hollywood, in which there is no
sense of order to the shooting of the pictures and actors are often required to
perform the final scene of a movie six weeks before they act in the opening
scene.

During the rehearsals and in the actual shooting of a picture, Mr. Coppola said
that if it is appropriate, actors are encouraged to improvise gestures or
dialogue ''and fill in any gaps in the screenplay.''

While Mr. Coppola's dream of creating a high-tech studio based heavily on the
use of video equipment to cut production costs is gone, a portion of it survives
in a shiny Airstream house-trailer that is stuffed with video equipment and
television monitors and always parked close to one of his film sets.

''The way I work, I use video a lot,'' he explained as he showed off the
trailer. All of the preliminary rehearsals, he said, are recorded on tape and
then one version of each is assembled into a full-length rough draft of the
film. This draft is used a to determine if the story is working well and to
provide the director with a preview of the finished product. ''This is the Off
Broadway version of the movie,'' Mr. Coppola said.

Once actual filming starts, he continued, each scene is also photographed on
videotape, giving the director and his cast instant access to the footage and
speeding changes if they are necessary. ''Sometimes I bring an actor in here,''
Mr. Copolla said. ''We look at the tape and we talk over how we might be able to
do something differently. I use it as a kind of sketchpad.''

During a conversation that stretched over two hours, Mr. Cappola seemed
chastened by the experience of his financial and cinematic debacle during the
early 1980's and acknowledged that perhaps it had occurred because his ambition
and ego had distorted his sense of reality.

Asked specifically if he thought in retrospect that his huge success with ''The
Godfather'' and its sequel had excessively raised his sense of self-importance,
Mr. Coppola nodded. .

''I don't think I ever became conceited, but maybe I became too ambitious and
enthusiastic; maybe that's the same thing.''

At least, Mr. Copolla said, his one-film-a-year schedule was pulling him out of
his financial problem.

''I'm in enormously better shape now than I was,'' he said, adding that he
expected the debts to be paid ''in the next couple of years. I'm starting to see
the light of day.'' The commercial success of ''Peggy Sue Got Married'' appeared
also to have encouraged him.

While the director said he had grown weary of being a ''hired gun,'' he said he
was happy to be able to pursue a project that he had conceived many years ago: a
biographical film about Preston Tucker, who set out to create a revolutionary
automobile following World War II and managed to produce 50 vehicles despite
resistance from Detroit and other obstacles, but ultimately fell short of
revolutionizing the automobile industry.

Mr. Coppola, who owns two Tuckers himself as part of what appears to be a
passion for acquiring and toying with mechanical gadgets, said more than 40 of
the surviving 45 Tuckers will be in the movie. The film is being produced by
Lucasfilm, the company headed by Mr. Coppola's friend, George Lucas.

His next project, he said, will be a short film that he describes vaguely as
''being about a 13-year-old girl'' and is envisaged as one element of a movie
comprising three unrelated stories, each made by a different director. Although
Mr. Coppola said he can't discuss the project, reports from Hollywood indicate
Woody Allen and Martin Scorsese have also been asked to take part.

Mr. Coppola also is working on an original screenplay for a picture that he said
he might want to direct someday. He would describe it only by saying, ''In some
ways it draws parallels between the Rome of 63 B.C. and modern New York.''

His debts notwithstanding, Mr. Coppola is not in need of charity. He lives with
his family in a sprawling home in the nearby Napa Valley that was once owned by
the Inglenook wine people, and it's likely he can earn considerably more than $1
million a picture as a director, even as a hired gun.

When the debts are paid, he said he and his wife wanted time to travel, he
wanted more time to write, and both wanted less financial pressure. ''My plan is
to get into 'amateur' status, when the stakes are not that great, so that if
something doesn't work out, it really doesn't matter that much.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of James Caan, in Francis Coppola's new ''Gardens of stone'' and
Dennis Hopper and Martin Sheen in ''Apacalypse Now''

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION;
CAPITAL MARCHES: PROTESTS AT C.I.A. ECHO 60'S, 70'S

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 261 words


IN counterpoint to an anti-Administration protest Monday that ended with more
than 550 arrests, one man carried a sign reading: ''Go Home Amy - You Too
Abby.''

Amy Carter and Abbie Hoffman were not actually in the crowd that gathered in
Fairfax County, Va., to block entrances to the Central Intelligence Agency in
protest of covert activities in Central America and elsewhere. But Daniel
Ellsberg and Philip Berrigan, prominent in the of the movement against the
Vietnam War, were among those arrested. The next day, two other well-known
activists, Dick Gregory and Hosea Williams, staged a second protest, and were
charged with trespassing.

''It's kind of a 60's crowd,'' said the Rev. Joseph Nangle, a Catholic priest
who spent years in Chile and Peru. ''Reminds me of the 70's,'' Mr. Ellsberg
said. ''But people seem older now, more middle-aged. And they don't seem to see
the police as enemies.'' A spokesman for the Fairfax County police described the
relatively nonviolent demonstration as ''almost carnival-like,'' and Kathy
Pherson, a spokeswoman for the C.I.A., said most of its employees were able to
get to work through other entrances.

Demonstrations had begun two days earlier across the Potomac where tens of
thousands of marched in the capital. The A.F.L.-C.I.O. had urged unionists to
boycott the rally, maintaining that some groups in the sponsoring coalition not
only opposed Administration policies in Central America but supported Communist
elements there. But 24 union leaders were among the organizers and the labor
turnout was heavy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of police officers removing a protester outside C.I.A.
headquarters in Langley, Va. (Keystone/Mark Philips)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GARRY HART THE ELUSIVE FRONT-RUNNER

BYLINE: By E.J. Dionne Jr.; E.J. Dionne Jr. is chief national political
correspondent of The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4693 words


PLEASE,'' SAID THE frustrated politician on the other side of the Formica
breakfast table in a New Hampshire hotel, ''keep your mind open to the
possibility that I'm not weird.''

Gary Warren Hart was doing something he doesn't like to do: he was talking about
himself, his childhood, his parents, his religious beliefs, his marriage.

It was an infuriating experience for Hart, the leading Democratic Presidential
candidate, because his psyche has been probed more often and more deeply than
that of any other contender. He has sat for interview after interview in which
the questions focused not on arms control or economics - subjects he knows much
about - but on who he is really. He has been forced to reveal more about himself
in the last four years than most politicians do in a lifetime. Yet many in
politics and the press still insist that they don't know him.

And so this self-controlled man will sometimes explode when those he perceives
as dime-store Freuds try to get at his deepest motivations, his darkest secrets.
A week after the New Hampshire interview, the candidate was in a small plane
flying from Austin to Denver, where he lives. He had just answered a few
questions about his transition from a boy who would be a minister in the
conservative Church of the Nazarene to a man who would be a Democratic
politician. ''I'm going to answer about three more of these, and then I'm not
going to answer any more,'' he said, his blue eyes at once fierce and cool. ''I
was 13 at the time. It's nonsense. Who cares what Ronald Reagan was thinking
when he was 13? Or Joe Biden?''

There was nothing at all odd about his struggle with his pietistic Nazarene
upbringing, he insisted. ''My struggle was with the institution. Thomas
Jefferson had that struggle and so have half or more of the thoughtful people in
the world. It is not unique to me. And is it something that plagues me today?
No. I am very normal and very healthy.''

Then he laughed, as he often does at the ironies of politics. He imagined what
his words would look like in print and realized that in the public search for
the private man, everything Gary Hart says about Gary Hart could be used against
him. ''I can see this: 'Hart insists that he is very normal. In a wide-ranging
and lengthy interview, Hart insists that he is not weird.' '' HART IS WITHOUT
QUESTION one of the most intelligent figures of contemporary American politics.
In just 12 years, from 1972 to 1984, he went from being George McGovern's
campaign manager to a Presidential candidate who challenged almost everyone's
political calculations. He nearly took the Democratic nomination away from
Walter F. Mondale, the man whom all the smart folks said could not be touched in
his party.

Moreover, Hart saw sooner than most that the time had come to change generations
in American politics and to update the Democratic Party's message. As early as
1973, he was speaking of ''the end of the New Deal,'' of the need for an
activist but less intrusive Government. Compassion did not mean bureaucracy, he
said. And in a phrase that offended some older Democrats but made the point, he
insisted in 1974 that he and the new generation of Democrats were not just ''a
bunch of little Hubert Humphreys.''

NOW, HART, WHO AN-nounced his candidacy on April 13, is way ahead in the polls
for the 1988 nomination, and every Democrat seems to have listened to him. Other
contenders are sounding so many of Hart's 1984 themes that quite a few
politicians have described the '88 race as one among different versions of Gary
Hart. Indeed, the new Democratic conventional wisdom often seems to have been
built from planks in the '84 Hart platform. These include increased spending for
education, coupled with greater demands on teachers; ''military reform,'' words
that have come to mean being both tough and prudent on defense spending; the
need to make America more competitive in the world economy; above all, a sense
that it is possible for Government to attend to social needs without producing
copies of New Deal and Great Society programs.

Hart wants to build on this advantage by trying to get the campaign to focus on
''substance'' and ''issues.'' Among the Democrats running for President, Hart
has by far the most detailed approach to national problems. His lectures last
year on foreign policy at Georgetown University were praised even by those who
disagreed with them. He co-authored ''America Can Win,'' on military reform. On
almost every issue, from education to trade, the candidate who suffered in 1984
from the question ''Where's the beef?'' now has enough of the stuff to supply
Wendy's for a decade.

But when Walter F. Mondale turned that slogan on Hart in 1984, he was referring
not just to issues, but to Gary Hart himself, the man who changed his name from
Hartpence and misrecorded his age. Hart's current opponents are trying to
suggest, without saying so directly, that he is lacking some deeply personal
element. Indeed, no candidate suffers as much from scurrilous talk as Hart
-about his relations with his wife and other women, about his own psychological
makeup.

For an agonizing week after announcing his candidacy, Hart found that in
Presidential politics, ''character'' can indeed overwhelm ''sub-stance'' and
''issues.'' The day after he announced, he was drawn into conversations with
reporters about a whispering campaign concerning his alleged womanizing, giving
currency to the very rumors that infuriate him. At the end of the week, United
States marshals seized the proceeds at two Hart fund-raisers in Los Angeles.
Hart still has $1.3 million in debts from his 1984 campaign, and an angry
creditor was seeking payment. Some of Hart's Democratic opponents couldn't
resist using the episode to make ''character'' the issue once again.

Thus does a candidate who is certainly capable of equalling or out-thinking his
competitors on the issues find himself fighting a shadow war against himself.
And everything, it seems, is once again fair game.

''Do you want a record kept of everything you've ever said in your life to
anybody and have it thrown back at you 15 years later?'' Hart asked in
frustration when questioned about his 1972 statement that ''I never reveal who I
really am.'' ''My problem,'' said the 1987 Gary Hart, ''is that I've revealed
too much about myself.''

And if character is the issue, then Gary Hart - who has published two novels,
studied existentialist philosophy and likes little better than to discuss movies
and popular culture - is fully prepared to go on the offensive.

''See, I think you've got the coin reversed,'' he says. ''I think I'm the
healthy one. I think you ought to be asking all those other guys who have done
nothing but hold public office and have no other sides to their personalities:
Why they don't write novels and why they don't read Kierkegaard, why they don't
broaden themselves out?''

''Why is it,'' he asks, ''that somebody like me is thought the oddball?''

OTTAWA, KAN., THE place where Gary Hart was born as Gary Hartpence in 1936 -
not, as he for a time said, 1937 - is the first stop for those who seek
enlightenment on the man. The city of 11,561, about 60 miles from Kansas City,
is an agricultural center that has managed to survive tough times.

If the Plaza movie theater on Main Street has the feel of ''The Last Picture
Show,'' the analogy to that film about the life and death of small-town America
is otherwise unjust. Ottawa has hung on and even managed to refurbish its
downtown, which boasts a splendid Victorian public library building and even a
New York-style deli. But in the process of surviving, Ottawa has lost many of
its brightest sons and daughters.

Young Gary Hartpence showed few outward signs that he would be one of those to
leave town and shake the world. His grades were good - ranging from 86 to 96 -
and he was active in other areas, editing the school newspaper, managing the
basketball team and acting in plays. He worked at Scotty's hamburgers as a car
hop for 20 cents an hour. And he would cruise Main Street, sometimes ending up
at the airport were he and some friends would dance to music from the car radio.

Even then, Hart didn't have a conventional political disposition.

''Some people in the school will just walk into a group and slap everybody on
the back and call 'em by their first name and just start talking,'' said Jim
McCrea, a friendly, extroverted bear of a man who is the town's former Mayor and
was a year ahead of Hart in high school. ''He didn't seem comfortable with it.
He wasn't that type.''

Hart likes to offer the image of a rambunctious childhood, but the only blot on
his local record uncovered by legions of journalists was the time a friend stole
a chemistry test in advance and Gary and a couple of other students memorized
the answers. He now regrets doing it.

What troubles Hart most about the public inspection of his past is speculation
about his mother. In fact, one of Hart's main political problems today may be
that his parents, Carl and Nina, who died in 1972, are not around to dispel the
mystery that has come to surround them and their son.

Carl Hartpence was, by all accounts, including Hart's, the less complicated
parent. He held a variety of jobs and was never particularly successful, though
he kept his family fed, clothed and sheltered and was well-liked in town.

''He was just one of those guys who could take anything anyone could dish out
and go along with it,'' said Bob Brenner, a longtime Ottawa resident and former
husband of Hart's sister.

One of those things was Nina's propensity to move. The local paper, The Ottawa
Herald, recently traced 16 separate addresses for Carl and Nina Hartpence while
Gary was a boy. According to Hart's uncle, Ralph Hartpence, the moves came from
Nina's ties to a real-estate dealer and her skill as a housekeeper: ''They'd fix
and clean it all up and sell it, see?'' One day, he recalled, the family ''moved
over to a new house and didn't like the situation, so they moved back the same
day.'' Hart says he has never given much thought to the moving.

The ongoing interest in Nina Hartpence stems from her image in some accounts as
a severe, fastidious, at times sickly woman - and from her membership in the
Church of the Nazarene, an offshoot of Methodism that forbids its members to
smoke, drink or dance. (The church manual says practices such as dancing ''tend
to break down proper inhibitions and reserve between the sexes.'') Nina Hart
steered her son toward the ministry, and he preached a few sermons while in high
school.

Hart says his mother was ''bothered by her lack of education, somewhat
insecure.'' But he maintains that she was capable of merriment and was, if
anything, less exacting than her church.

The Church of the Nazarene was formed around the turn of the century by
congregations joined in the belief that mainline Methodism was soft-pedaling the
doctrine of ''entire sanctification.'' This miraculous experience of the Holy
Spirit involves ''a cleansing of the inner self and an em-powering for
service,'' according to a Nazarene tract. Like many Christians who were moved by
their faith to social activism, Hart now lays heavy stress on Christianity's -
and John Wesley's - advocacy of the poor and downtrodden. The words
''empowerment'' and ''service'' play central roles in his speeches to this day.

This form of social emphasis, however, came later. In Ottawa, which would reject
Hart's ultimate hero, John F. Kennedy, by nearly 3-to-1 in 1960, Republicanism
was the norm and religion was about - religion. And so after graduation, it
seemed natural that Gary Hartpence, future minister, would pack off to Bethany
Nazarene College, near Oklahoma City, to pursue his studies and his salvation.
The latter would come in an unexpected way.

BETHANY NAZARENE College was not the most promising place for Gary Hart to begin
his quest. It was small, sectarian, and at the time unaccredited (it has since
grown, won accreditation and become Southern Nazarene University). But he
prospered there, learning much that he had not known, a lot of it from one man,
Dr. J. Prescott Johnson.

As Johnson, Gary's philosophy professor, tells it, he looked at the record and
intellect of this promising young man and decided to introduce him to thinkers
who were well outside the Nazarene purvue.

In effect, the journey with Johnson was ''an opening up,'' as the professor, who
is now retired, puts it. It was a search for a series of truths that troubled
other students at Bethany Nazarene - and some officials at the college, which
Johnson eventually left. Gary Hartpence lost his first election for president of
the student body, partly because he was regarded as insufficiently religious,
too much a free-thinking philosopher in the Prescott Johnson mold. It was Hart's
first experience with the political costs of unorthodoxy. He ran a second time
and won.

Key to Hart's intellectual development were Plato and Soren Kierkegaard. (He is
listed as Gary ''Plato'' Hartpence in a yearbook picture of the philosophy club,
which he served as president.) Plato laid the groundwork for what later became
Hart's intensely philosophical and coolly rational approach to politics - and
encouraged his disdain for the cruder manifestations of political passion. It
was Plato who favored the idea of philosophers emerging into the sunshine of
enlightenment and then ''returning to the cave'' of messy, worldly politics to
provide thoughtful leadership to others.

Prescott Johnson said recently that he saw the Platonic obligation to ''go back
into the cave'' as a clue to Gary Hart's current approach to politics. ''I think
he senses that he's more at home in the intellectual arena than he is in the
manipulative political context,'' Johnson said. ''And that creates, I think, a
suffering that he has to undergo. . . . Being a politician is not his innate
disposition.''

When questioned about ''returning to the cave,'' Hart dissolved into laughter
and said he wouldn't dare discuss the matter. ''The cave!'' he exclaimed.
''Let's don't start that. That ain't going to play in Iowa.''

But earlier, in New Hampshire, he had spoken of how Plato's mistrust of passion
had impressed him. ''There are those in politics who substitute emotion and
passion for substance, content and what I would generally call governance,'' he
said. ''Who, because they don't know where the country ought to be going or how
to get there, rely more heavily on their ability to stir up people's emotions.''

But, Hart added, this doesn't mean that people like him ''don't have deep
feelings. It's that we probably distrust those who only have deep feelings.''

Johnson offered Gary Hartpence a formidable intellectual challange in the
writings of Kierkegaard, one of the forefathers of existentialism who emphasized
the solitary individual standing before God and the need to question easy
rationalizations for faith. For someone who takes Kierkegaard seriously - and
Hart was rereading him during a recent campaign trip -grace can never again come
cheap.

The result, for Hart, was a move from pietism to a highly intellectualized,
existential Christianity and finally to an ethical stance that is primarily
social and political. While he says he still thinks of himself as a religious
person - there was a brief flap in 1984 about his friendship with a female
Native American spiritualist -Hart is not a regular church-goer and he describes
his present-day commitment as the pursuit of peace and justice in this world.

Eventually, Hart's intellectual evolution had a practical impact. It led him
away from the ministry toward a desire to teach philosophy. When he got to Yale,
that ambition was itself transformed by John F. Kennedy's 1960 campaign into a
political commitment.

MOST OF THIS, OF course, happened in the 1950's, and there was nothing in Gary
Hartpence's behavior that could be seen in any way as presaging the student
rebellions that were to send campuses into turmoil just a few years later. One
Bethany Nazarene yearbook includes a large picture of a flat-topped, jug-eared
Hartpence next to one of Oletha Ludwig, a strikingly pretty young woman who,
like Gary, was included in a national student ''Who's Who'' listing.

Miss Ludwig was a decidedly important person on campus. Her father had been
president of the institution and was an official of the church in its Kansas
City headquarters.

In an autobiographical essay, there is a striking suggestion that young Gary
Hartpence knew that marriage to Oletha would be a step up in the world. ''Always
attracted by a challenge,'' Hart wrote, ''I pursued her. And her obvious disdain
for me - a bumpkin - made her even more appealing.'' They married two months
after graduation.

At the Harts' rustic mountain home amid the evergreens, 25 miles from Denver,
Lee Hart explains that she was drawn to Gary Hartpence as her opposite - an
introspective, quiet, intellectual.

Andrea, the Harts' voluble 23-year-old daughter, pipes up: ''Dad was describing
to me once how he always thought when he first met you that you were from that
real rich family.''

Mrs. Hart laughs. ''Is that why he married me?''.

''He thought you were, like, the president of the school's daughter or
something, and you were really rich and here was this poor little boy,'' Andrea
says.

''We probably appeared that way,'' says Mrs. Hart. ''We hardly were.'' Both Gary
and Lee Hart say their 28 years of marriage have not been easy. They have
separated twice, in 1979 and in 1981, and reporters following them in 1984 often
noted how distant they seemed from each other.

The reports of womanizing anger the Harts and many of their friends. Hart says
his main problem has been that, unlike some other politicians, he and his wife
are honest about the troubles they have had and their efforts to patch up the
marriage. He says he never hid the fact that he dated during their separations -
and is again suffering from his honesty.

Some of Hart's friends also say that his love for the Hollywood life and his
close friendship with the actor Warren Beatty, which began during the 1972
McGovern campaign, fuel the rumors. ''Just because Gary is a friend of Warren
Beatty's,'' says Lee Hart, ''doesn't mean that Gary necessarily has the
reputation Warren has -which, by the way, may be overplayed also.''

Hart did not help his cause with certain comments he made in 1972, while he was
McGovern's campaign manager. ''I have almost no personal life at all - I lead a
completely political existence,'' he told a reporter then. ''If one party
doesn't share the same interests, you've got a problem. Let's just say I believe
in reform marriage.''

''It was a very stupid thing to say,'' he now says. ''Lee was living in Denver
and I was living in Washington and I was unhappy because my kids were little and
I didn't see them much. I learned,'' he adds. ''There's no reward for being
candid. In fact, there are penalties for being candid. People say, 'Why are
politicians such conniving, calculating S.O.B's?' It's because who knows what
oddball thing you say is not going to come back 15 years later to be some
profound insight into your character.''

''Follow me around. I don't care,'' he says firmly, about the womanizing
question. ''I'm serious. If anybody wants to put a tail on me, go ahead. They'd
be very bored.''

Lee Hart, a warm and feisty woman, defends her husband. She says the rumors are
''not worth dealing with'' and that reports about the difficulties in their
marriage tend to place too much blame on her husband. There were, she says,
''things I would initially want to blame on Gary, but ultimately would have to
realize that I was the one.'' Mrs. Hart, who bore the main responsibility for
raising Andrea and John, their 21-year-old son, says women of her generation
''have had to realize when they get angry, oftentimes it's because they've
fallen into the trap of making their husband's bed and making him lie in it.''

Still, Gary Hart seems to be a man, in the words of a campaign aide, who ''likes
to court danger.'' And more than most people, he seems to have contemplated the
contradictory drives of human nature.

Earlier, aboard the plane to Denver, Gary Hart had mused about Dostoyevsky,
another of the major influences on his world view. He said that one of the
lessons of ''The Brothers Karamazov'' is the conflict between ''the Apollonian
and the Dionysian,'' between ''the spiritual-and-moral versus the
physical-and-emotional.''

Are people torn between the two sets of impulses? ''Most thoughtful people
are,'' he replied.

And how did he decide whether to put one or the other aside?

He grinned. ''Good try,'' he said. He wouldn't touch the question.

GARY HART BE-lieves that one reason he is seen as ''different'' is that he has
made a shift few in public life have made: from campaign manager to Senator, in
two years, and then to Presidential candidate.

To manage the 1972 McGovern campaign was to preside over an enormously
successful primary effort that upset all predictions - and then be at the helm
of a general-election disaster. Hart insists that he is not a ''McGovernite,''
as the term has come to be used to attack left-wing Democrats, and that McGovern
probably was not a McGovernite either. He says he was attracted to McGovern
because of the candidate's opposition to the Vietnam War - and because he had
stood in at the Democratic National Convention in 1968 for the forces loyal to
the slain Robert F. Kennedy.

If there is a single subject on which Gary Hart is, well, passionate, it is the
Kennedys. It was John Kennedy's 1960 campaign that inspired him to a vocation in
''public service,'' as he always puts it. John Kennedy made politics legitimate,
and Hart's excitement over the campaign prompted him to go to Yale Law School
after he finished Yale Divinity School. When the talk turns to Robert F.
Kennedy, Hart, the political outsider, lights up.

''How is it that a former Attorney General of the United States, son of one of
the most wealthy and powerful men in America, brother of a President of the
United States, got to be the symbol of the outsider?'' he asks. ''How did that
happen? When he had built a reputation of being 'arrogant, powerful'?''

''His brother's death tilted the equation,'' Hart goes on, sounding a bit like
the preacher his mother wanted him to be. ''I think Robert Kennedy realized that
you can have all the wealth in the world, you can reach the office, you can seek
to achieve social acceptability, prominence and all the rest, and it doesn't
save you.'' This language, which has echoes of St. Paul's letters, is not
surprising from a man who also uses Pauline language to describe his
relationship to his profession: ''In politics but not of it.''

That is the way some of his former Senate colleagues see him: as the man who
would sometimes leave the floor and watch the debate from the galleries.

Some of his former colleagues, including Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New
York, dismiss as ''preposterous'' the idea that he was an outsider with few
friends in the Senate. Moynihan speaks admiringly of Hart's intelligence and of
his courage in opposing the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings budget-balancing act as
constitutionally questionable and an abrogation of Congressional responsibility.

But other Senators worry about Hart's distance from the system, and he expects
few endorsements from his former colleagues. One Democratic Senator, who
respects Hart, wondered recently why it was that a group of his colleagues tried
so hard to promote the Presidential candidacy of Senator Dale Bumpers, an
Arkansas Democrat who declined to run. To this Senator, who asked not to be
named, the Bumpers boomlet was in part a reflection of the unease over Gary
Hart.

Hart, who decided to avoid an expensive and bruising battle for re-election by
retiring from the Senate in 1986, provides a precedent for his lack of support
among his colleagues: his hero, John F. Kennedy.

In ''The Double Man,'' the novel Hart co-authored with Senator William S. Cohen,
a Maine Republican, the hero is described as ''simply not interested enough in
being a legislator.''

''He felt superior,'' the passage continues. ''Hell, he was superior.'' The
character, it turns out, wanted ''more than anything else - to be President.''

Asked about the passage, Hart grins. ''Cohen wrote that.''

GARY HART IS IN HIS element: A beautiful old New England home in the New
Hampshire factory town of Franklin. He has just answered a series of tough
questions on issues -arms control, his real passion; nuclear power; the economy.
It is a small group and he looks very comfortable.

Finally, Eugene Daniell Jr., the 82-year-old former Mayor and doyen of Franklin
politics, speaks up. Hart, he says, is vastly better than in 1984, a much
improved, more impressive version of himself. The partisan crowd laughs and
cheers, though Hart can't resist saying that he thinks he was pretty good in
1984.

THOSE WHO FOLLOW HART see a man far more at ease with himself than he was four
years ago. Always comfortable and even charming in private conversation and
small groups, he now seems more willing to share himself with a wider audience.
With old friends William P. Dixon and William Shore and veteran liberal
organizer Paul Tully playing leading roles in his campaign, he seems ready to
delegate authority and prevent the fearsome internecine battles that may have
fatally crippled his 1984 effort.

His homecoming last month to his native Ottawa, where he came close to tears
while talking about his parents, was a symbol of the change that has occured in
the public Gary Hart, representing the sort of thing he could not have abided in
1984.

Yet the Ottawa trip, designed to demystify his childhood, seemed only to spur
even more curiosity about the man. All the facts about his life, even the
ordinary ones, become part of a great mystery. They all feed the legend of the
man who reinvented himself, emptied himself out; the religious, small-town boy
who changed his name while at Yale and now hangs out in Hollywood with Warren
Beatty.

Gary Hart faces one of the most unusual dilemmas ever presented a Presidential
candidate. He must prove that he is extraordinary enough - indeed, ''different''
enough - to bear the burdens of the Presidency. Yet he must also prove that he
is really quite ordinary, not so different from the people he would lead. This
is a game that is very hard to win. He is required to engage in forms of
self-revelation not demanded of other candidates. Yet the very process of
self-revelation makes him stand out.

Prescott Johnson, Hart's college mentor, expresses the paradox well. He thinks
his former student has ''the possibility of greatness'' precisely because he has
successfully synthesized so many unusual experiences and ideas. But Johnson
worries that others might not see things as he does. ''People are suspicious of
somebody who really does stand out,'' he says. ''They're afraid of him. Somebody
who dares to claim that he has inner resources as an individual and has thought
things through - sometimes that does not, except in moments of extreme crisis,
go down well with a lot of people.''

Hart, says Johnson, had a feeling ''of not being established or accepted, a
feeling of difference, that you're not one of us.''

''In the Nazarene Church,'' he goes on, ''you get this whole business about
we're strangers and pilgrims in this land. We're not of the world.'' Then
Johnson laughs. ''But I don't know. I shouldn't psychoanalyze Gary,'' he says.
''He'll kill me.''

When Gary Hart is read Prescott Johnson's final three words, his stern response
is: ''He's right.'' He has never felt like a stranger in this world, he says.
Then Hart himself laughs, knowing that having everyone analyze you is one of the
prices of being Gary Hart.

Still, he insists, the search for a hidden Gary Hart will always prove
fruitless. ''You're looking for something that doesn't exist,'' he says.
''You're looking for a level to me that probably is not there.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Garry Hart (Greg Mathieson) (pg. 28-33); photo of J. Prescott
Johnson, a philosophy professor (Paul Meride) (pg.38)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: MAY 3, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 49, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1480 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   7    FINE THINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
                 $18.95.) The vicissitudes of a son of the 60's on his
                 way to the 80's.

 2      2   13   WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
                 (Morrow, $18.95.) The nightmarish experiences
                 that befall a woman and her family after her
                 appointment as Ambassador to Rumania.

 3      6   4    TEXASVILLE, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon &
                 Schuster, $18.95.) From the 50's to the 80's in
                 Thalia, Tex. - a sequel to ''The Last Picture Show.''

 4      4   8    BOLT, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $17.95.) The
                 jockey-hero of ''Break In'' has to contend with a
                 romantic crisis and an arms-selling intrigue.

 5      3   14   THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
                 (Viking, $18.95.) A fairy tale, complete with an aged
                 king, two princes, an evil wizard and a mouse.

 6      7   4    THE LADIES OF MISSALONGHI, by Colleen
                 McCullough. (Harper & Row, $12.95.) An
                 Australian town at the turn of the century.

 7      9   4    THE THANATOS SYNDROME, by Walker Percy.
                 (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) The continuing
                 battle between good and evil, seen through a
                 psychiatrist's adventures in 1996.

 8      5   6    DESTINY, by Sally Beauman. (Bantam, $19.95.)
                 The 30-year romance of a couple with diverse
                 backgrounds and ambitions.

 9      8   40   RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam,
                 $19.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians.

10     11   2    NO DEALS, MR. BOND, by John Gardner.
                 (Putnam, $13.95.) James Bond returns to solve a
                 case of ritual killings of amazing similarity.

11     12   31   THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy.
                 (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family
                 relationships in South Carolina and New York City.

12            1  GUARDIANS OF THE WEST, by David Eddings.
                 (Del Rey/Ballantine, $16.95.) Kings, sorcerers,
                 gods and men in a 7,000-year war.

13     15   2    THE ENIGMA OF ARRIVAL, by V. S. Naipaul.
                 (Knopf, $17.95.) An Indian writer from Trinidad
                 settles down in England's West Country.

14     10   27   FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts.
                 (Naval Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over
                 Vietnam.

15     13   34   IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood
                 horrors haunt six men and a woman.

16 *          1  WINTER HAWK, by Craig Thomas. (Morrow,
                 $18.95.) Thwarting a Russian plot to launch a ''Star
                 Wars'' weapon on the eve of the signing of a
                 disarmament treaty.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   18   A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein.
                 (Macmillan, $16.95.) A chronicle of one season
                 spent with the Indiana University basketball team.

 2      2   10   COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber. (Beech Tree/
                 Morrow, $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the
                 visits of ''intelligent nonhumans'' to his home.

 3      7   22   A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                 Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                 recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.

 4      5   3    THIS 'N THAT, by Bette Davis with Michael
                 Herskowitz. (Putnam, $17.95.) The actress's
                 memories and opinions.

 5      6   4    HOLD ON, MR. PRESIDENT! by Sam Donaldson.
                 (Random House, $17.95.) A White House television
                 correspondent comments on his assignment and
                 the ways of the news media.

 6      8   7    BOONE, by T. Boone Pickens Jr. (Houghton
                 Mifflin, $18.95.) The autobiography of an oilman
                 and corporation-takeover entrepreneur.

 7      4   12   THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf,
                 $24.95.) Australia from penal colony to its gradual
                 emergence as a flourishing nation.

 8      3   11   THE FITZGERALDS AND THE KENNEDYS, by
                 Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.)
                 From the Boston slums of Irish immigrants to the
                 White House: three generations of a family.

 9     12   4    LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S.
                 Siegel. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) A surgeon stresses
                 the importance of the patient's mind and emotions
                 in treating serious illness.

10      9   9    INTIMATE PARTNERS, by Maggie Scarf.
                 (Random House, $18.95.) Changing patterns in love
                 and marriage.

11            1  THE CLOSING OF THE AMERICAN MIND, by
                 Allan Bloom. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) A critique
                 of liberal arts education and American
                 undergraduates during the past 25 years.

12     10   52   FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/
                 Doubleday, $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations
                 from the television star and father of five.

13     11   12   ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph
                 Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $18.95.) A case
                 involving the murder of a Pennsylvania high school
                 teacher and the disappearance of her two children.

14     13   60   YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss.
                 (Random House, $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden
                 Years Clinic in pictures and rhyme; the first Dr.
                 Seuss book for adults.

15     16  178   A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein.
                 (Harper & Row, $13.50.) Light verse, with drawings
                 by the author.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   30   MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO
                 LOVE THEM, by Susan Forward and Joan Torres.
                 (Bantam, $16.95.) How to cope with overbearing
                 men.

 2      2   27   THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE,
                 by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be
                 prepared at moderate cost.

 3      4   86   WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                 DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
                 standard reference work in a 1983 revision.

 4            5  BETTY CROCKER'S COOKBOOK. (Golden
                 Press/Western Publishing, $19.95.) New, revised
                 ring-bound edition.

 5            1  SUPERIMMUNITY, by Paul Pearsall. (McGraw-
                 Hill, $17.95.) Ways to control your emotions in order
                 to improve your health.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

TRUST ME, by John Updike. (Knopf, $17.95.) Twenty-two stories by a master of
private vernacular experience, the best of them full of the humor and compassion
demanded by even the saddest tales about us frail humans in a mysterious world.

NIXON: The Education of a Politician 1913-1962, by Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon &
Schuster, $22.95.) This detached, objective and thick (752 pages) biography by a
professional historian shows Mr. Nixon as both more accomplished and complicated
than either his friends or his enemies usually suppose.

FIERCE ATTACHMENTS: A Memoir, by Vivian Gornick. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$15.95.) The major characters in this disturbing, unflinchingly honest book
about love and conflict are the author, a Berkeley-educated urban intellectual,
and her mother, a sort of 19th-century villager from the Bronx.

ON GLORY ROADS: A Pilgrim's Book About Pilgrimage, by Eleanor Munro. (Thames &
Hudson, $17.95.) Some time-hallowed pilgrimages of Hinduism, Buddhism, Judaism
and Christianity as experienced by a thoughtful writer who adheres to none of
them but has a penetrating sense for the cosmic language of all.

MUMMY, by Daniel Curley. (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) A stylish comic novel,
honestly, about a man smuggling his mother's corpse in a suit of armor on top of
a stolen automobile through a surreal and sinister Mexico; other strange things
happen as well.

THIS FAR AND NO MORE: A True Story, by Andrew H. Malcolm. (Times Books, $17.95.)
Interviews and the victim's journal inform this unsettling account, by The
Times's Chicago bureau chief, of a woman's day-to-day decay from an incurable
and fatal disease that wastes the body utterly while leaving the mind unscathed.


THAT NIGHT, by Alice McDermott. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $14.95.) A brief,
elegiac, lyrical, morally complex novel centered on a teen-age love affair some
time ago on Long Island.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACKS;
WAR IN AN ALTERNATE UNIVERSE

BYLINE: By DAVID BRADLEY; David Bradley, the author of the novel ''The
Chaneysville Incident,'' teaches creative writing at Temple University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 25, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2187 words



IN THE FIELD OF FIRE
Edited by Jeanne Van Buren Dann and Jack Dann. 415 pp. New York: Tor/St.
Martin's Press. Paper, $8.95.

VIETNAM.

The word crept into the American lexicon sometime around 1962. In the
quarter-century since we have learned to spell it and pronounce it and use it in
sentences, to prefix it and suffix it and so transform it into adjectives and
adverbs and curses. We have done just about everything to it you can do to a
word - except define it.

Usually when the public has a hard time handling a term the wordsmiths pummel it
into submission. If the writers of nonfiction can't torture meaning out of it
then the fiction writers will give it characters and dialogue and make it
explain itself. The best and the brightest tried to do that with Vietnam: Norman
Mailer in ''Why Are We in Vietnam?,'' Tim O'Brien in ''Going After Cacciato,''
Charles Durden in ''No Bugles, No Drums,'' Robert Stone in ''Dog Soldiers,''
Robert Grossbach in ''Easy and Hard Ways Out,'' Ward Just in ''In the City of
Fear,'' Tran Van Dinh in ''Blue Dragon White Tiger,'' John Balaban in ''Coming
Down Again,'' Kenn Miller in ''Tiger the Lurp Dog.''

They did not fail - certainly not in an artistic sense - but they did seem to
somehow miss. They told us what Vietnam was, but could not really make sense of
it - so much so that it seemed there simply was no sense in Vietnam that fiction
could discover. But now an anthology of 22 stories called ''In the Field of
Fire'' raises the possibility that Vietnam is, indeed, definable by fiction.

The contributors to this collection are not well-known navigators of the
literary mainstream but pilots of an oft-maligned estuary - science fiction. The
editors are Jeanne Van Buren Dann, a nurse and fledgling science-fiction writer,
and Jack Dann, author or editor of 21 previous books, most in the
science-fiction genre. The ''headline'' authors are old masters of the genre
like Joe Haldeman, Brian Aldiss, Harlan Ellison and Ben Bova, editor of Omni
magazine. There are newer writers too, some of whom, like Susan Casper, who sold
her first story in 1983, have been publishing for only a few years. Perhaps not
surprisingly it is these younger writers, in whose lives Vietnam must loom like
a monolith, whose pieces seem most powerful here.

One of the strongest is Richard Paul Russo's ''In the Season of the Rains.'' Mr.
Russo is well known to readers of the ''little'' magazines. However, as the
title, taken from the opening lines of Roger Zelazny's ''Lord of Light,''
suggests, ''In the Season of the Rains'' is based on one of science fiction's
pulpiest plots; the aliens are landing secretly to spirit off a few earthlings.
A standard variation, which Mr. Russo uses, has the business observed by one man
who, being a science-fiction fan, rather than run screaming to the authorities
tries to get taken along in order to escape his everyday reality. The twist here
is that ''everyday reality'' is the war which, in Mr. Russo's vision, is a mad
montage of atrocities, a reality in which men routinely commit unreal acts -
rape, murder, wanton destruction. The main character's desire is to escape not
death but complicity. The tale is told from a decade's distance by another G.I.
who witnessed both the atrocities and the coming of the aliens and chose not to
escape. Now, 10 years later, mired in the everyday reality that a protagonist in
the old standard plot would be trying to escape, he wonders if he should have
gone along with his comrade when he had the chance.

It is a rare thing for an anthology to include two stories by one writer. Lucius
Shepard, who has been publishing for only three years, is represented here by
two pieces because no sane editor could reject either. ''Delta Sly Honey'' is a
variation on a ''Twilight Zone'' theme; a G.I. on the corpse detail finds his
game of calling over the radio to an imaginary patrol turning to reality when
the patrol starts calling back. Mr. Shepard turns that stock situation into a
brilliant exploration of class and caste. But brilliant as it is, ''Delta Sly
Honey'' fades when compared to the second story, ''Shades.''

''Shades'' is set in Vietnam several years after the war. The Vietnamese have
invented a machine that conjures up the ghost of an American G.I. named Stoner,
who blew himself up by accident in a village called Cam Le - ironically
preventing an atrocity in the process. To witness their triumph, the Vietnamese
invite the Western press, including a freelancer named Puleo, who was part of
Stoner's platoon and witnessed Stoner's death. In Puleo's presence Stoner's
apparition takes on clarity and substance, and the ''reunion'' becomes a
metaphor for the process by which a society might accept and finally lay its own
ghosts. In this wonderfully rich story, Mr. Shepard sounds the theme for the
whole collection. ''Vietnam,'' muses Puleo. ''I thought about the way I'd used
to sneer the word. . . . Now it was spoken proudly, printed in Twentieth
Century-Fox monolithic capitals, brazen with hype. Perhaps between those two
extremes was a mode of ex-Continued on page 49 pression that captured the
ordinary reality of the place, the poverty and peacefulness of this village; but
if so, it wasn't accessible to me.''

It is accessible to Gardner Dozois, whose ''A Dream at Noonday'' is a daring,
plotless, impressionistic piece that juxtaposes a Vietnam scene rendered in
precisely engineered sentences with the aching details of a soldier's memories.
As a piece of writing ''A Dream at Noonday'' shows what ''experimental'' writing
can do when it works. But this is not an exercise in technique. Mr. Dozois's
technical skill allows him to show the tragedy and innocence of war, to suggest
what was lost in the fields of fire.

Bruce McAllister is no newcomer. He has been publishing for more than 20 years.
He has not, however, been prolific. The gestation of ''Dream Baby'' may suggest
why. Four years of research and interviews with Vietnam veterans went into the
writing of the story of an Army nurse who, in the horrible stress situation of a
M.A.S.H. unit and under the influence of heroin addiction, develops the ability
to see the deaths of men before they happen, an ability that is perverted by a
cold-blooded C.I.A. operative, more interested in taking lives than saving them.
''Dream Baby'' is not an experimental piece. It is simply good fiction, deriving
power from traditional fictional sources: the heroism of the nurse's character,
the tension of the situation. It is also powerfully metaphoric and, despite the
fact that the plot would hardly qualify it for family viewing time, ''Dream
Baby'' emerges as one of the more hopeful works in the collection. THE same
could not be said for Dave Smeds'

''Goats,'' a searing, haunting, frightening tale set during the war, but far
from the battle zone, on a deserted island of the Hawaiian chain that has been
used for target practice since World War II. As the story begins a group of
G.I.'s is dropped off to serve as observers for the marksmanship trials of naval
gunners and pilots tuning up for a tour in Vietnam. But, as the narrator, a
corpsman who has done Vietnam tours of his own, puts it, ''It's true we had work
to do. But the work didn't last forever . . . [then] vacation time.
Disneyland.'' The after-hours entertainment is the semiofficial duty of reducing
the number of goats who inhabit the island. The G.I.'s attack the goats with all
the planning and materiel of a wartime expedition, achieving an orgy of
bloodletting that makes Vietnam seem like a church picnic - or would, had Mr.
Smeds not skillfully established symbolic connections between ''Disneyland'' and
the war. The soldiers believe that the goats can be killed with impunity. But by
story's end that belief is challenged. In the final image the narrator awakens
to a new moral reality: ''I slowly slung my rifle back on my shoulder, my hand
slick against the stock. I turned to continue on, but I couldn't get my feet to
move. What was I doing here anyway? I was chasing a drunk, armed lance corporal
over an island full of bombs. . . . I tucked the flashlight under an armpit to
light the barren path back to the base camp. . . .''

But the younger writers are not alone in their ability to challenge the form of
the short story while driving toward the meaning of Vietnam. Kate Wilhelm does
both in ''The Village,'' a story reminiscent of Shirley Jackson's tale ''The
Lottery,'' in which she seamlessly joins descriptions of day-to-day life in a
small American town with those of a rifle company's approach to an enemy hamlet.
That alone is a powerful juxtaposition. Ms. Wilhelm, however, takes the risk of
pushing further and, in return, wins the right to make perhaps the most powerful
statement in the anthology: ''The soldiers were coming in. . . . She began to
laugh suddenly; tears streaming, she ran downstairs again to fling open the door
and shout. 'They're ours,' she screamed toward the townspeople, laughing and
crying all at once. 'You fools, they're ours!' Two of the khaki-clad GIs
approached her, still pointing their guns at her. One of them said something,
but she couldn't understand his words. 'What are you doing here?' she cried.
'You're American soldiers! What are you doing?' The larger of the two grabbed
her arm and twisted it behind her. She screamed and he pushed her toward the
street. He spoke again, but the words were foreign to her.''

Not all the stories in ''In the Field of Fire'' are so successful. Brian
Aldiss's ''My Country 'Tis Not Only of Thee'' postulates a Vietnam-type
situation in future England, divided by civil strife. The tale has interesting
historical echoes of the actual English Civil War, but who needs another
Vietnam? Kim Stanley Robinson's story ''The Memorial,'' ostensibly a meditation
inspired by standing before the Vietnam Memorial in Washington and not being
able to say anything, seems more the result of sitting around in front of the
memorial and discovering you have nothing to say. Karen Joy Fowler claims to be
searching for reconciliation with those who fought the war, but in ''Letters
From Home'' she succeeds only in unmasking the pretensions of a lot of people
who did not fight it. However, the story does restate the theme announced by Mr.
Shepard. ''I remember the words. Vietnam was the language we spoke - secret
bombings, the lottery, Vietnamization, self-immolation, Ho-Ho-Ho Chi Minh, peace
with honor, peace at any price, peace, peace, peace. Somewhere, I imagine, on
the other side of the world, these words meant something. Somewhere they had
physical counterparts.'' The most disappointing pieces in ''In the Field of
Fire'' are the Danns' contributions. Their introduction reads like the offspring
of a mating between a newspaper story and a piece of mediocre literary
criticism, managing to give the false impression that Vietnam is not over
because of delayed stress syndrome (which they, properly but pedantically, term
post-traumatic stress disorder, or P.T.S.D.) and worse, that the stories in the
collection were written by people who were exorcising personal demons, rather
than by artists exorcising demons that haunt us all. The introductions to
individual stories - traditionally, in science-fiction anthologies, excellent
pieces of writing - are equally disappointing. This is sad since this is a book
that will be read by many for whom science fiction is a sometime thing. BUT
whatever the shortcomings, ''In the Field of Fire'' is an important addition and
a significant contribution to the literature of the 1980's. The best of its
stories are stylistically innovative, symbolically daring examples of
craftsmanship of the highest level. And, as a whole, the book does help define
the word no one in America seems to understand.

What ''In the Field of Fire'' says is that Vietnam was science fiction. The
elements of the situation were staple science-fiction premises. The landscape
was alien - not for nothing that in Vietnam War parlance anyplace else was
called ''the world.'' The people were alien-seeming - and certainly we, with our
cold beer and napalm and helicopters, must have seemed to the Vietnamese to be
an invading horde of bug-eyed monsters. The society had a history and a set of
cultural assumptions that seemed as incomprehensible as those of an inhuman
race. The place seemed like an alternate universe, where all the sanity,
rationality, logic just seemed to not work. It is a standard science-fiction
theme - the doomed struggle to overcome the territory while refusing to
understand the laws that govern it. The defeat through culture-shock of the
all-powerful invaders is a standard science-fiction conclusion.

And so is the implication that a better conclusion is possible: that we may
finally define Vietnam if we let go of our old assumptions and desires and
accept a major transformation of ourselves. It is the meaning of the best of
these stories that such an ending is possible. It is the justification of all of
them that they show the kind of imaginative leaps that might make it real.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

NEW JERSEY GUIDE

BYLINE: By Frank Emblen

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 12, Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1216 words




DR. SPOCK IN PLAINFIELD

Dr. Benjamin Spock, whose ''Baby and Child Care,'' first published in 1945, is
still the best-selling guide to child-rearing, will speak Thursday at Muhlenberg
Medical Center in Plainfield.

The two-hour ''Afternoon With Dr. Spock,'' beginning at 1 P.M., is sponsored by
the Muhlenberg Family Link, a prenatal-pediatric health and education program.
Tickets are $3 a person ($5 a couple). Free babysitting will be provided by the
American Nanny Academy of Roselle Park.

Dr. Spock took to the streets to protest the Vietnam War and last January, at
the age of 83, was arrested for trespassing at Cape Canaveral, Fla., while
protesting the test launching of a Trident 2 missile.

Recent editions of his book relflect Dr. Spock's involvment with politics. To
allay childhood fears about the arms race, the pediatrician urges parents to
support the nuclear freeze movement and candidates who endorse a freeze.

The 443-bed medical center, a teaching hospital, is at Park Avenue and Randolph
Road in Plainfield.

Information: (201) 668-2040.

BLUES IN PIERMONT

John Hammond, a blues singer who has recorded 20 albums and toured the world,
will give two shows Friday at the Turning Point, a club in Piermont, N.Y.

The shows will begin at 5:30 and 8 P.M. The club is three miles south of Nyack.
Tickets are $10.

Information: (914) 359-1089.

BOTANIST REMEMBERED

For much of the 19th century, unfamiliar plants collected on every major
Government-sponsored exploration of the West and South were sent to Dr. John
Torrey for analysis and classification.

The Torrey Botanical Club will honor its namesake, who lived from 1796 to 1873,
with a re-dedication Saturday of the Torrey Monument in Long Hill Cemetery,
Stirling. A bronze plaque detailing his accomplishments will be unveiled.

Club headquarters are in the New York Botanical Garden, which houses Dr.
Torrey's large plant collections.

Dr. Torrey (his degree was in medicine) was a founder of what is now the New
York Academy of Science. During the Civil War, he took over -at the then-young
Smithsonian Institution - what became the National Herbarium. He was also the
mentor of Asa Gray, with whom he published the first ''Flora of North America.''

Dr. Torrey was assistant surgeon and professor of chemistry and mineralogy at
the United States Military Academy at West Point and, later, a professor of
chemistry at what are now Columbia and Princeton Universities.

The program begins at 11 A.M. at the first Presbyterian Church in Stirling;
transporation will be provided for a noon trip to the cemetery. Participants
will be returned to the church at 1 P.M., where Dr. Lawrence J. Crockett,
professor of biology at the City College of New York and chairman of the
redediction, will speak about Dr. Torrey's ''life and times.''

The day ends with a trip at 2 P.M. to Hilltop, former home of the botanist's
son, Dr. Herbert Gray Torrey. There is no charge and refreshments will be
served.

The church, on Central Avenue in Stirling, is reachable from the North Maple
Avenue-Basking Ridge exit (Exit 26) of Interstate 287.

Information: (201) 647-4019 or (212) 690-8492.

HISPANIC ARTS

''La Caza de la Extranjera,'' a play by Alfonso Paso, will be part of an ongoing
celebration of Hispanic arts at Passaic County Community College in Paterson.

The play will be presented in Spanish at 7 P.M. Thursday, Friday and Saturday.
Tickets are $2 in advance, $3 at the door.

A poetry reading at 1:30 P.M. on May 13 will feature Alfonso Molina, Dr. Ruben
Sandoval, Juan Carlos Zapata and Pedro Zuniga. It will take place in Room E-321
and an open reading will follow. There is no admission and refreshments will be
served.

''Music of the Andes'' will be featured in the Young People's Concert at 10 A.M.
on May 15. It is also free, but reservations are required.

Works by three Hispanic artists -Ruben Sandoval, Jose A. Villalongo Sr. and
Issac Monteiro - will be on display in the college gallery through May 23.

Information: (201) 684-6555.

PRIZE-WINNING POET

John Hollander, who won the Bollingen Prize in Poetry in 1983, will discuss his
new collection, ''In Time and Place,'' at Seton Hall University in South Orange
Tuesday at 8 P.M.

Mr. Hollander, who was born in New York City, is a professor of English at Yale,
and in 1958 won the Yale Series of Young Poets award for ''A Cracklings of
Thorns.'' Tickets are $8.  Information: (201) 761-9388 or 678-1680.

BEDS AND BREAKFASTS

Fifteen Delaware Valley bed-and-breakfast Inns in Bucks and Hunterdon Counties
are offering tours this afternoon.

Visitors may tour any or all of the inns between 2 and 6 P.M. Tickets for the
entire tour, including maps and directions, are available for $6 at any of the
participating inns, which will be marked by large red ribbons.

The New Jersey inns are in Flemington, Frenchtown and Milford.

Information: (201) 782-8234 or (215) 862-5880.

CULINARY EVENTS

The Cookingstudio at Kings Supermarket in Short Hills has a couple of special
events on tap this month.

Today's class, from noon to 3:30 P.M., will be a tribute to James Beard, the
dean of American cookery. Jacques Pepin, former personal chef to three French
Presidents, cookbook author and peripatetic teacher, will teach morning and
evening classes May 12-14.

Today's tribute will be in the form of a benefit, with the tax-deductible
proceeds of $50 a person going toward preserving the James Beard town house in
Manhattan as a culinary-arts center.

Demonstrations in the Beard tradition and techniques will be given by two guest
chefs - Steven Santoro, head chef of Bronzini Restaurant at Loew's Glenpointe
Hotel in Teaneck, and Jed Gidaly, executive chef at the hotel - and four members
of the Cookingstudio's regular staff.

Mr. Pepin will prepare meals for students to sample while sharing tips and
techniques with them. The cost of the three-class series is $250 a person.

Information: Kings Supermarket, 2 Dedrick Place, West Caldwell, or call (201)
575-3320.

AUTHORS AT MONTCLAIR

Two original voices in contemporary fiction will speak at Montclair State
College's Institute of Humanities this week as part of the celebration of
Humanities Week.

Max Apple, whose latest book is ''The Propheteers,'' will read Tuesday from that
satirical fantasy in which two American visionaries, Howard Johnson and Walt
Disney, battle over the land that is to become Disney World.

The New York Times critic Anatole Broyard has written that Mr. Apple's wit is
''tender and soft-edged.''

Keri Hulme, Thursday's speaker, has said she is a member of the Maoris (New
Zealand's indigenous population), although she is only one-eighth Maori.

In her 30's, she has referred to herself as a cultural ambassador for New
Zealand and writes about Maori experiences, their sense of loss and acts of
courage in contemporary New Zealand.

Ms. Hulme's highly acclaimed novel ''The Bone People,'' published by The Women's
Collective Press in 1984, won Britain's prestigious Booker Award in 1985, as
well as the New Zealand Prize for Literature and the Pegasus Prize (sponsored by
Mobil).

Both programs begin at 8 P.M. in Kops Memorial Lounge, Russ Hall. They are free
and open to the public.  Information: (201) 893-4419.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 7, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

A report on Sunday in the New Jersey Guide column of the New Jersey Weekly gave
an incorrect date for a lecture by Dr. Benjamin Spock at the Muhlenberg Medical
Center in Plainfield. The lecture - now sold out - is on Saturday, not today.

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Best Sellers: May 3, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 48, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1368 words

                                                                          Weeks
This                                                                 Last    On
Week Fiction                                                         Week  List
 1   FINE THINGS, by Danielle Steel.  (Delacorte,                       1     7
     $18.95.) The vicissitudes of a son of the 60's on his
     way to the 80's.

 2   WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.                          2    13
     (Morrow, $18.95.) The nightmarish experiences
     that befall a woman and her family after her
     appointment as Ambassador to Rumania.

 3   TEXASVILLE, by Larry McMurtry.  (Simon &                           6     4
     Schuster, $18.95.) From the 50's to the 80's in
     Thalia, Tex. -- a sequel to "The Last Picture Show."

 4   BOLT, by Dick Francis.  (Putnam, $17.95.) The                      4     8
     jockey-hero of "Break In" has to contend with a
     romantic crisis and an arms-selling intrigue.

 5   THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.                           3    14
     (Viking, $18.95.) A fairy tale, complete with an aged
     king, two princes, an evil wizard and a mouse.

 6   THE LADIES OF MISSALONGHI, by Colleen                              7     4
     McCullough.  (Harper & Row, $12.95.) An
     Australian town at the turn of the century.

 7   THE THANATOS SYNDROME, by Walker Percy.                            9     4
     (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) The continuing
     battle between good and evil, seen through a
     psychiatrist's adventures in 1996.

 8   DESTINY, by Sally Beauman.  (Bantam, $19.95.)                      5     6
     The 30-year romance of a couple with diverse
     backgrounds and ambitions.

 9   RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy.  (Putnam,                         8    40
     $19.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians.

10   NO DEALS, MR. BOND, by John Gardner.                              11     2
     (Putnam, $13.95.) James Bond returns to solve a
     case of ritual killings of amazing similarity.

11   THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy.                               12    31
     (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family
     relationships in South Carolina and New York City.

12   GUARDIANS OF THE WEST, by David Eddings.                                 1
     (Del Rey/Ballantine, $16.95.) Kings, sorcerers,
     gods and men in a 7,000-year war.

13   THE ENIGMA OF ARRIVAL, by V. S. Naipaul.                          15     2
     (Knopf, $17.95.) An Indian writer from Trinidad
     settles down in England's West Country.

14   FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts.                        10    27
     (Naval Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over
     Vietnam.

15   IT, by Stephen King.  (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood                 13    34
     horrors haunt six men and a woman.

16 * WINTER HAWK, by Craig Thomas.  (Morrow,                                  1
     $18.95.) Thwarting a Russian plot to launch a "Star
     Wars" weapon on the eve of the signing of a
     disarmament treaty.
                                                                          Weeks
This                                                      Last               On
Week Nonfiction                                           Week             List
 1   A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein.               1               18
     (Macmillan, $16.95.) A chronicle of one season
     spent with the Indiana University basketball team.

 2   COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber.  (Beech Tree/           2               10
     Morrow, $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the
     visits of "intelligent nonhumans" to his home.

 3   A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA.  (Collins                 7               22
     Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
     recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.

 4   THIS'N THAT, by Bette Davis with Michael                5                3
     Herskowitz.  (Putnam, $17.95.) The actress's
     memories and opinions.

 5   HOLD ON, MR. PRESIDENT! by Sam Donaldson.               6                4
     (Random House, $17.95.) A White House television
     correspondent comments on his assignment and
     the ways of the news media.

 6   BOONE, by T. Boone Pickens Jr.  (Houghton               8                7
     Mifflin, $18.95.) The autobiography of an oilman
     and corporation-takeover entrepreneur.

 7   THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes.  (Knopf,             4               12
     $24.95.) Australia from penal colony to its gradual
     emergence as a flourishing nation.

 8   THE FITZGERALDS AND THE KENNEDYS, by                    3               11
     Doris Kearns Goodwin.  (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.)
     From the Boston slums of Irish immigrants to the
     White House: three generations of a family.

 9   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S.                12                4
     Siegel.  (Harper & Row, $15.95.) A surgeon stresses
     the importance of the patient's mind and emotions
     in treating serious illness.

10   INTIMATE PARTNERS, by Maggie Scarf.                     9                9
     (Random House, $18.95.) Changing Patterns in love
     and marriage.

11   THE CLOSING OF THE AMERICAN MIND, by                                     1
     Allan Bloom.  (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) A critique
     of liberal arts education and American
     undergraduates during the past 25 years.

12   FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby.  (Dolphin/                  10               52
     Doubleday, $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations
     from the television star and father of five.

13   ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph                      11               12
     Wambaugh.  (Perigord/Morrow, $18.95.) A case
     involving the murder of a Pennsylvania high school
     teacher and the disappearance of her two children.

14   YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss.                    13               60
     (Random House, $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden
     Years Clinic in pictures and rhyme; the first Dr.
     Seuss book for adults.

15   A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein.             16              178
     (Harper & Row, $13.50.) Light verse, with drawings
     by the author.
                                                                          Weeks
This Advice, How-to and                                   Last               On
Week Miscellaneous                                        Week             List
 1   MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO                      1               30
     LOVE THEM, by Susan Forward and Joan Torres.
     (Bantam, $16.95.) How to cope with overbearing
     men.

 2   THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE,                     2               27
     by Jeff Smith.  (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be
     prepared at moderate cost.

 3   WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE                          4               86
     DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
     standard reference work in a 1983 revision.

 4   BETTY CROCKER'S COOKBOOK.  (Golden                                       5
     Press/Western Publishing, $19.95.) New, revised
     ring-bound edition.

 5   SUPERIMMUNITY, by Paul Pearsall.  (McGraw-                               1
     Hill, $17.95.) Ways to control your emotions in
     order
     to improve your health.




* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores.

And Bear in Mind (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

TRUST ME, by John Updike.  (Knopf, $17.95.) Twenty-two stories by a master of
private vernacular experience, the best of them full of the humor and compassion
demanded by even the saddest tales about us frail humans in a mysterious world.

NIXON: The Education of a Politician 1913-1962, by Stephen E. Ambrose.  (Simon &
Schuster, $22.95.) This detached, objective and thick (752 pages) biography by a
professional historian shows Mr. Nixon as both more accomplished and complicated
than either his friends or his enemies usually suppose.

FIERCE ATTACHMENTS: A Memoir, by Vivian Gornick.  (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$15.95.) The major characters in this disturbing, unflinchingly honest book
about love and conflict are the author, a Berkeley-educated urban intellectual,
and her mother, a sort of 19th-century villager from the Bronx.

ON GLORY ROADS: A Pilgrim's Book About Pilgrimage, by Eleanor Munro.  (Thames &
Hudson, $17.95.) Some time-hallowed pilgrimages of Hinduism, Buddhism, Judaism
and Christianity as experienced by a thoughtful writer who adheres to none of
them but has a penetrating sense for the cosmic language of all.

MUMMY, by Daniel Curley.  (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) A stylish comic novel,
honestly, about a man smuggling his mother's corpse in a suit of armor on top of
a stolen automobile through a surreal and sinister Mexico; other strange things
happen as well.

THIS FAR AND NO MORE: A True Story, by Andrew H. Malcolm.  (Times Books,
$17.95.) Interviews and the victim's journal inform this unsettling account, by
The Times's Chicago bureau chief, of a woman's day-to-day decay from an
incurable and fatal disease that wastes the body utterly while leaving the mind
unscathed.

THAT NIGHT, by Alice McDermott.  (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $14.95.) A brief,
elegiac, lyrical, morally complex novel centered on a teen-age love affair some
time ago on Long Island.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A BIT OF THE WEST IN EASTERN CONNECTICUT

BYLINE: By ROBERT A. HAMILTON

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 3, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 980 words


''HERE lies Les Moore,'' reads the headstone on Boot Hill. ''Shot down by a .44.
No Les, no more.''

The wry bit of Old West humor is the crowning touch to Cattletown, the 24-acre
reproduction of a Wild West town that opens this weekend in the rural eastern
town of Sterling.

From the gallows at one end of Cattletown's main street, to the Mercantile
Building at the other, its founder, Warren Stevens, has tried for complete
authenticity.

There is a barbershop that advertises shaves for a nickel and haircuts for a
dime; a saloon with 16-foot ceilings, antelope horns on the wall, and a 10-foot
mirror behind the bar. Goats, sheep and horses roam the streets. All the
buildings are of rough-cut pine, and cowboys with two-day stubble on their face
and long johns showing under their clothes carry Colt six-shooters on their hips
or tucked into their belts.

There will even be a genuine Pony Express operating out of Cattletown, which is
in the Oneco section of Sterling. Letters dropped off at the post office, a
United States Postal Service transfer station, will be stamped, ''The first mile
delivered by Pony Express, Cattletown, Oneco, Ct.'' and delivered by a pony
rider a mile away to the permanent postal station.

''There were times when I wanted to go home to California,'' said Mr. Stevens,
who left a career as a Hollywood stuntman to come to the East and start
Cattletown.

Mr. Stevens, his brother Harold, and a friend, Michael Baron, both of whom are
also stuntmen, started building the blocklong Wild West town last October, and
worked on it through the winter, some mornings having to scrape inch-thick
coatings of ice off lumber and tools before getting to work.

''There were times I was sure I'd never get it done, when I thought I should
just pack up and leave,'' Mr. Stevens said. ''Then all of a sudden it was
done.''

Now, Mr. Stevens said, it all seems worth it. Even before the grand opening this
weekend, people have been trying to get a sneak preview.

Mr. Stevens said he had received calls from several area hotels seeking
directions to Cattletown, because they have filled up with people who want to
visit. An estimated 3,000 people are expected to tour Cattletown this weekend
before the doors close at dusk, Mr. Stevens said, adding that he expects that
before long Cattletown will become a popular tourist attraction.

First Selectman Robert P. Jordan of Sterling said he believed the reproduction
Wild West town would probably be good for the town.

''They think it's going to be pretty popular, and I wouldn't be surprised if it
is,'' Mr. Jordan said. In fact, he said, if Cattletown is as popular as its
backers believe, Sterling might seek state aid to improve Newport Road. Also on
that narrow country road is another popular attraction, Falls Creek Farm, where
some of the largest horse shows in the Northeast take place.

''California, Arizona are saturated with Wild West stuff, so it would be a lot
harder for something like this to succeed out there,'' said Kip Wing, a
spokesman for Cattletown and a stuntman himself.

''But you come East and people have no idea what it's about because there's
nothing like this on the East Coast,'' Mr. Wing said. ''Out here, everyone's in
complete awe of the Western mystique.''

Many of the buildings in Cattletown are mere facades, but Mr. Stevens has also
reproduced some Wild West-style buildings inside and out.

For instance, his jailhouse has the iron bars, wanted posters, and firearms of
the type that Western sheriffs once used.

The saloon has a 24-foot bar, antique bottles, a Hereford hide on one wall, and
assorted saddles, bridles, and other leather goods scattered about the room. Mr.
Stevens said he also had applied for a beer and wine license for additional
authenticity.

Mr. Stevens has trained many of the stunt men who will put on shows featuring
falls, gunfights and horse tricks at Cattletown. Other actors are his friends
from California and Arizona.

Cattletown will be open weekends for tours at a cost of $5 a person and $2.50
for children.

The backdrop of Cattletown will also be used to film commercials and feature
films. Already Mr. Stevens has filmed three commercials for a Mystic appliance
company owned by Kenneth N. Barber.

''Those guys are fantastic,'' Mr. Barber said. ''Their ads are so different from
anything else anyone can produce around here, I'm sure they're going to attract
a lot of attention.''

Mr. Barber said the $2,500 it cost him for the three spots was reasonable for
East Coast standards, and a fraction of what it would have cost him to have
similar advertisements filmed somewhere on the West Coast.

Mr. Wing also said a producer had asked about shooting a full-length film at
Cattletown this fall, and Mr. Stevens was reviewing several possible scripts
that might be done in-house.

Mr. Stevens said he was also negotiating the purchase of an adjacent 87 acres,
which he might use to set up several other film backdrops, such as a
1970's-style New York street, a Vietnam set and other settings.

Mr. Stevens also plans to open a stunt academy, which, for a fee of $2,500 a
person, would teach students to perform stunts within six weeks.

But Mr. Wing said he expected only about half of the 100 students a year that
the academy would enroll would complete the training and go on to get work in
films, commercials or at Cattletown.

''People don't realize how tough the work is,'' Mr. Wing said. ''They don't
realize the 30 seconds or five minutes they see on the screen, it took years of
training to get the stunt man there.''

''People also don't see someone getting dragged by a car at 40 or 50 miles and
hour through dirt and brush and rocks,'' he said. ''They don't realize what it's
like to get up in the morning, still stiff and sore from yesterday's job, and
say, 'Well, I think I'll go out and get beat up all day.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of stuntmen during a performance at Cattletown; Photo of
employees of Cattletown (NYT/Gale Zucker)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LOST ON THE OPEN ROAD

BYLINE: By JAY MCINERNEY; Jay McInerney is the author of the novels ''Bright
Lights, Big City'' and ''Ransom.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1625 words



FAST LANES
By Jayne Anne Phillips. 148 pp. New York: Seymour Lawrence/E. P. Dutton. $15.95.

THE fiction of Jayne Anne Phillips oscillates between two subjects: the world of
the open road, runaways and drifters, and the deeply rooted regional American
family. These two worlds are not necessarily exclusive. The wanderer sometimes
returns home after a broken love affair or to nurse a dying parent.

Ms. Phillips's ''Black Tickets'' (1979) was a collection of stories
characterized by the voices of lost children, misfits and damaged waifs. ''Men
whose childhoods were slow and smooth want my straitjacket stories,'' one
narrator says, and readers of ''Black Tickets'' found themselves in the position
of these smoothly raised men, eavesdropping on hypnotic monologues full of sex
and violence and battered innocence - like that of the wise orphan of
''Lechery,'' who sells dirty postcards and sexual thrills to adolescent
schoolboys, or Rita in ''El Paso,'' a topless dancer-cum-painter and the
daughter of a witch. But there were also stories, like ''1934,'' about family
and place - a meticulously evoked West Virginia landscape. This territory would
be more fully developed in the author's 1984 novel ''Machine Dreams.''

''Fast Lanes,'' Ms. Phillips's new collection of stories, shows a range of moods
and modes, working the highways and youth ghettos of American cities, as well as
the rich and familiar soil of West Virginia past and present. The book begins
with stories of youthful drift and confusion and gradually moves, with
increasing authority, into the past and what we might call home.

''How Mickey Made It'' is relentlessly up-to-the-minute, the monologue of a
20-year-old aspiring punk rocker and delinquent who just wants to get his own
humongous slice of the American pie. The eponymous heroine of ''Rayme'' is a
mentally ill young woman who drifts through the student ghetto of a university
town. ''A group of us floated among several large ramshackle houses, houses
arranged above and below each other on steep streets: a gritty version of
terraced dwellings in some exotic Asia.'' While the actual location is
deliberately vague, that metaphor seems subtly suggestive of a particular time,
the mini-era during which Vietnam shadowed the experience of American youth.

The time is one in which someone like Rayme, who puts pieces of linoleum in the
commune's soup, can almost fit in. Since everyone else is taking mescaline, she
is not so conspicuous: ''All of us were consulting a series of maps bearing no
relation to any physical geography, and Rayme was like a telephone to another
world.'' The story is elegiac in its evocation of those times and of a
particular, inertial moment in youth: ''Our destinations appeared to be
interchangeable pauses in some long, lyric transit. This time that was nearly
over, these years, seemed as close to family as most of us would ever get.''

Pauses do not necessarily make good narratives, however. ''This story could be
about any of those people,'' the narrator says, referring to various roommates,
''but it is about Rayme and comes to no conclusions.'' The narrators of the best
stories in ''Black Tickets'' were deftly portrayed and moved through gritty,
textured landscapes. But in the title story of ''Fast Lanes'' and in ''Rayme,''
character and action almost disappear in a generalized evocation of the
mescaline generation, in a blur of communal houses and highway signs. Rayme's
madness finally feels too emblematic.

''Fast Lanes'' is a long story about a trip across country - about two dharma
bums in a makeshift alliance. The narrator has been living in Colorado,
scrupulously avoiding any attachment to either the landscape or its inhabitants.
When she needs to get back home to West Virginia, she finds herself sharing a
pickup with Thurman, an acquaintance she once slept with. ''We pulled out of
town at dawn,'' she says. ''I had the feeling, the floater's only fix: I was
free, it didn't matter if I never saw these streets again; even as we passed
them they receded and entered a realm of placeless streets. Even the people were
gone, the good ones and the bad ones; I owned whatever real had occurred, I took
it all. I was vanished, invisible, another apartment left empty behind me, my
possessions given away, thrown away, packed away in taped boxes fit into an
available vehicle.''

Wishing to gather no moss, the narrator remains something of a blur, a woman
running from unspecified hurts, beset by vague furies. Her heart races, she can
barely stand the weight of sheets on top of her at night, and ultimately she
tries to scare herself into some new accommodation with the world by temporarily
going off with three male strangers and a pile of cocaine into the New Orleans
night. But this dark night of the soul is only obliquely referred to and seems
not to result in much of an epiphany. She is still running at the story's end,
when Thurman is about to drop her off at home.

The metaphor that gives the story and the book its title is a cliche by now and
inevitably evokes a tune by the Eagles. The narrator likes to drive in the fast
lane, literally and figuratively. As Thurman tells her, ''I've been there, I
know what you're doing. You spend half your time in a full-throttle heat and the
other half holding on when you realize how fast you're going.'' This
straightforward thematizing is far from the oblique, dreamy logic of the best
stories in ''Black Tickets,'' and it makes ''Fast Lanes'' seem like an earlier
or transitional one.

On the other hand, ''Bluegill,'' a monologue addressed by a young woman to the
fetus growing inside her, has the poetic density and richness of language that
characterize Ms. Phillips's best fiction. Her finest stories read like prose
poems, and the monologue seems the form with which she is most comfortable. Her
best prose is metaphor-laden and sensual, with a minimum of connective tissue.

''Machine Dreams,'' while advancing the history of a family and to some extent a
town and a nation, was largely constructed of first-person monologues. The
novel's major narrative events - the disappearance of Billy Hampson in combat,
his parents' wedding -tended to happen in the interstices. As in ''Bluegill,''
the language was rich, slow and sensual: we were shown how things look and feel
and smell, and the cumulative detail made it almost impossible not to believe in
the reality of the Hampson family. Moss gathered, shadows grew, characters
became people, and the things they did came to seem inevitable.

In the two final stories in ''Fast Lanes,'' Ms. Phillips returns to this fertile
terrain. ''Blue Moon'' might be an outtake from ''Machine Dreams'' (although the
fictional histories don't perfectly fit). It deals with the high school years of
Danner and Billy Hampson and focuses on the romance between Billy and Kato
Shinner, an intense and doomed love that Ms. Phillips convinces us is no less
important than an adult affair. The story proposes that it is, in fact, more
important.

Kato, the daughter of the local pool hall owner, is a wild loner who
dramatically slices her arm open after she hears that Billy may be going away to
school the following year. As her father later remarks to Danner, Billy's
sister, ''Everyone's so shocked . . . like kids don't know enough to be that
serious. Hell, that's when it happens.'' Indeed, Danner's mother has never quite
got over her romance with her high school boyfriend, a football star who died of
a heart attack after a game, thus sealing his hold on her life forever. Billy,
too, will be permanently enthralled by Kato, whether he ever sees her again or
not. ''Everything was different now, larger, enveloped by a shadow.'' (The Billy
of ''Machine Dreams'' never goes to military school; he goes off to Vietnam
where he disappears.) ''Blue Moon'' is a beautiful story, one in which the
characters grow and change in the rich context of family and community. In
''Blue Moon'' and ''Bess,'' events have a dreamlike inevitability.

Moving deeper into the past of the Hampson family - the events take place early
in the century - ''Bess'' synthesizes many of Ms. Phillips's concerns and
contains some of her finest writing. Bess grows up on a remote West Virginia
farm with 11 brothers and sisters, sleeping in the same room with her brother
Warwick, who will remain, long after his death in a coal mine, the great love of
her life. When Bess is courted, Warwick tries to interfere; and when she elopes,
it is with a man who resembles him. Her husband is a gambler who abandons her in
St. Louis; the slow and steady Aunt Bess of ''Machine Dreams'' is revealed here
as one of Ms. Phillips's runaways. Warwick goes out West to retrieve Bess and
pretends that the offspring of her brief union, Mitchell, is his own child.
(Mitch Hampson in ''Machine Dreams'' believes his mother, Bess, is his aunt.)
''Bess'' is narrated in the first person by an old woman for whom the events of
70 years ago are more vivid than anything in the present, and it is indicative
of Ms. Phillips's powers that she is nowhere more convincing than in imagining
and evoking this vanished era. By comparison, the stories with contemporary
settings are arid and overly self-conscious.

A heterogeneous collection, stronger in parts than as a whole, ''Fast Lanes''
moves backward in time and gains authority as it does so. The reader seems to be
watching a gifted writer develop a sense of voice and subject over the course of
these stories. Although Ms. Phillips made her debut as something of a feminized
Kerouac, a bard of bad girls and the open road, she appears to be evolving into
a regional writer and family chronicler, a cousin of Reynolds Price and Eudora
Welty.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: PIELMEIER'S 'SLEIGHT OF HAND,' A THRILLER

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 663 words


ACT II of ''Sleight of Hand,'' the new John Pielmeier play at the Cort, is set
in ''an empty Broadway theater.'' No one can accuse Act I of failing to do its
part to make that description come literally true. Mr. Pielmeier's would-be
thriller opens with 50 minutes of rambling, numbing exposition -much of it
accompanied, if not enlivened, by the sort of canned magic tricks so memorably
mocked by the comic illusionists Penn and Teller. Then comes what the Playbill
conservatively describes as a ''20-minute intermission,'' followed by a
denouement that runs slightly longer than the intermission but proves not nearly
so action packed.

The playwright, whose previous Broadway potboilers have traded in theology
(''Agnes of God'') and Vietnam (''The Boys of Winter''), does aim refreshingly
lower here. ''Sleight of Hand'' wants only to be a witty, shriek-inducing
entertainment in the honorable tradition of ''Deathtrap,'' ''Sleuth'' and ''Wait
Until Dark.'' Given that Mr. Pielmeier's other work has been marked by a brute
instinct for melodrama and a sadistic relish for the mutilation of human flesh,
one might expect him to have at last arrived at his most natural calling. But
''Sleight of Hand'' is so frail that the ''e'' in the first word of its title is
as superfluous as the exclamation point tacked on to last season's ''Corpse!''

True to his models, the author supplies a love triangle with an ambiguous
hypotenuse, a gun loaded with blanks and rivulets of stage blood. What he has
left out is a remotely credible, let alone coherent, plot. ''Sleight of Hand''
stops fooling us within its first few minutes - when one man easily convinces
another that he is a New York City police detective in spite of following
investigative procedures that might be considered unconstitutional in the Soviet
Union. Eventually Mr. Pielmeier digs himself into such a deep narrative pit that
the characters can do little more than run around like 5-year-olds trying to
scare one another by shouting ''boo.'' In what should be the climactic final
scene, the actors align themselves in a row facing the audience and explicate
the story's tedious twists as if they were conducting a seminar on the tax code.

The magic tricks and stunts -which tend to be repeated at least once, lest
anyone doze during their initial presentation - are mostly (and capably)
performed by Harry Groener, an amiable song-and-dance man who is ludicrously
ill-equipped to play the role of a vicious, alcoholic magician. Jeffrey DeMunn
is all too typecast as his nemesis, a mysterious intruder who may or may not be
a theater director: This is exactly the same ranting portrayal of a backstage
tyrant that Mr. DeMunn previously contributed to last fall's ''Hands of Its
Enemy'' and the 1984 revival of ''The Country Girl.'' The other member of the
company is an understandably lost Priscilla Shanks, as a love interest
characterized with somewhat less verve than Mr. Groener's pet rabbit.

The best to be said of the production, under the direction of Walton Jones, is
that Loren Sherman's expert scenery can be more amusingly animated than its
inhabitants. Among the evening's oddities is a ''title song'' that introduces
and concludes Act II with lyrics such as ''Now you see it, now you don't/Is this
a case of sleight of hand?'' The singer is Carly Simon, who recorded the ditty
on tape and, shrewd illusionist that she is, promptly disappeared.

NOW YOU SEE IT - SLEIGHT OF HAND, by John Pielmeier; directed by Walton Jones;
settings by Loren Sherman; lighting by Richard Nelson; costumes by William Ivey
Long; magic consultant, Charles Reynolds; sound by Jan Nebozenko; special
effects by Jauchem and Meeh; fight staging by B. H. Barry; associate producers,
Alison Clarkson and Douglas B. Leeds. Presented by Suzanne J. Schwartz, in
association with Jennifer Manocherian. At the Cort Theater, 138 West 48th
Street.
Paul...Harry Groener
Sharon...Priscilla Shanks
Dancer...Jeffrey DeMunn

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 5, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECORD IS LEADOFF WITNESS IN IRAN SESSION TODAY

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1288 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 4


With Richard V. Secord as the leadoff witness when Congressional hearings on the
Iran-contra affair begin on Tuesday, the public can expect the first detailed
inside account of both the secret arms sales to Iran and the covert operation to
supply the Nicaraguan rebels, investigators say.

The retired Air Force major general was such an important figure in both
programs that Senator David L. Boren, an Oklahoma Democrat who is a member of
the committee, has said, ''If I could choose just one person to come in here and
tell us everything, I would choose Secord.''

General Secord served, in essence, as chief of staff for Lieut. Col. Oliver L.
North's secret operations in Iran and Central America.

The Congressional investigators are particularly interested in what the
54-year-old former general has to say, because he has not talked publicly before
about his role. He had asserted his Fifth Amendment right to remain silent
before both the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, which investigated the
Iran-contra affair in December, and the Tower Commission, which reported in
February.

Expert at Secret Operations

But from thousands of documents and testimony by other participants,
Congressional investigators now believe General Secord was a shrewd, dynamic
practitioner of clandestine operations whom Colonel North turned to for help,
first in setting up the resupply program for the contras in Nicaragua and then
in arranging the Administration's arms deals with Iran.

In his testimony, which may last a week, General Secord is expected to assert
that his chartering of aircraft and buying and shipping of weapons were not
illegal, several investigators said.

''A man of many talents, ol' Secord is,'' Colonel North wrote appreciatively
after General Secord personally flew a shipment of anti-tank missiles from the
United States to Iran, by way of Israel, in early 1986, and then before
returning to Washington arranged a shipment of arms to the contras.

''Dick Secord was the smartest man in the whole show,'' said a retired Air Force
brigadier general, Harry C. Aderholt.

Among the key questions that investigators hope General Secord will answer is
what happened to millions of dollars in Iran-contra money that have not been
traced. Most of the money went through secret Swiss bank accounts he controlled.
They also believe he can shed light on who was responsible for diverting some of
the profits from the Iran arms sales to the contra resupply operation.

Perhaps most important, some investigators say, will be the information he
provides on how the contra supply network was set up and who in the
Administration authorized it at a time when Congress had barred all United
States Government support for the rebels.

Experience in Laos War

General Secord's background made him almost uniquely qualified to run both the
Iran arms sales and the contra supply program. A West Point graduate who flew
285 missions as a fighter pilot in Vietnam in the early 1960's, he became a
specialist in clandestine warfare and international arms sales.

A turning point in his career came in 1966 when he was attached to a secret
Central Intelligence Agency unit at Udorn Air Base in northeastern Thailand. For
two years he helped coordinate flights by Air America, a C.I.A.-owned airline,
to supply the Meo tribesman armed and trained by the intelligence agency to
fight the North Vietnamese in Laos.

It was during this time that he met Thomas Clines, a career C.I.A. officer who
later helped him put together the contra supply network, drawing on agents Mr.
Clines knew while stationed in Miami after the abortive Bay of Pigs invasion of
Cuba, colleagues say.

In 1972 General Secord wrote a master's thesis for the Naval War College titled,
''Unconventional Warfare/Covert Operations as an Instrument of U.S. Foreign
Policy.'' In such operations, ''bureaucratic obstacles should be dismissed out
of hand,'' he suggested. So should opposition from ''the press, Congress,
academia and others.'' A high-level agency, ''probably the National Security
Council,'' should be put in charge, he wrote, in a prescient forecast of how the
Iran-contra affair would later be run.

Supervised Arms to Shah

Another turning point came in 1975 when General Secord was named head of the Air
Force Military Assistance Advisory Group in Iran, in charge of equipping and
training the Shah's air force. The general developed contacts with high-ranking
Iranians and arms dealers, including Albert Hakim, his partner in the
Administration's arms sales to Iran.

After three years in Iran, General Secord was promoted to major general and made
head of the Pentagon's foreign military sales program and then Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense for the Middle East. After Mr. Reagan came to office in
1981, General Secord worked closely with Colonel North at the National Security
Council to win approval of the sale of Awacs radar planes to Saudi Arabia.

General Secord was so successful that some fellow officers thought he might
become Air Force Chief of Staff.

But then his name was linked to Edwin P. Wilson, a former C.I.A. agent accused
of supplying Libya with plastic explosives, and to a company, Eatsco, that
pleaded guilty to overcharging the Pentagon by $8 million for shipping American
arms to Egypt.

General Secord was never charged with a crime, but his reputation was hurt and
he took early retirement from the Air Force in 1983. Thirteen days before
retiring, he joined Stanford Technology Trading Group International, a company
owned by Mr. Hakim, the arms dealer.

Evidence From an Airplane

When a cargo plane of the contra supply operation was shot down in Nicaragua
last October, telephone logs were found in it showing calls from a rebel safe
house to General Secord's office at Stanford Technology and his home in
Virginia.

Little is known of how General Secord first became involved in providing
supplies to the contras. But the Tower Commission report suggests that it was
General Secord's efforts for the contras that led Colonel North to write him in
November 1985 when the White House had trouble arranging the shipment of Hawk
anti-aircraft missiles from Israel to Iran as part of the arms-for-hostages
deal.

''Your discrete assistance is again required in support of our national
interest,'' Colonel North wrote. ''As in the past, you should exercise great
caution that this activity does not become public knowledge.''

General Secord chartered a plane from Southern Air Transport, an airline once
owned by the C.I.A., and flew the missiles to Iran.

The plane was to have been used to make the first drop of ammunition inside
Nicaragua, Colonel North reported, showing how the two operations were linked
through General Secord early on.

'The Last Laugh'

Money for the arms to be sold to Iran was deposited to the Swiss account of Lake
Resources, a company in Geneva operated by General Secord and Mr. Hakim, Colonel
North wrote.

In September 1986, after General Secord helped find a new and apparently more
reliable Iranian middleman, described as the relative of a high Iranian
official, Colonel North asked General Secord to find a way to fly the Iranian to
the United States for a meeting. The C.I.A. could not find a plane.

''Why Dick can do something in 5 min. that the CIA cannot do in two days is
beyond me - but he does,'' Colonel North wrote.

Why General Secord has agreed to testify now, without immunity, after refusing
previous requests, is unclear. But his lawyer, Tom Green, said in an interview
in December that General Secord ''will have the last laugh.''

''He knows what he knows,'' Mr. Green said, ''and when the time is ready, he'll
tell it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 5, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STAKEOUT OF HART SEEN AS FAIR GAME

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words


Reports of sexual liaisons of Gary Hart, or any other Presidential candidate,
are fair game for scrutiny by news organizations, according to many leading news
executives.

The journalists say that while reporting of such an intimate nature might have
violated some unwritten journalistic rules only 15 years ago, it is warranted -
even essential - in today's climate of political campaigns based on carefully
constructed images that may obscure the real person.

The propriety of The Miami Herald's decision to stake out Mr. Hart's Washington
town house over the weekend and the subsequent publication on Sunday of an
article charging that Mr. Hart had spent the night there with a young woman was
the talk of the annual convention of the American Newspaper Publishers
Association in New York yesterday.

'Cardboard Candidate'

''This sort of reporting serves as a check and balance against the television
cardboard candidate, against total superficiality,'' said Burl Osborne, editor
and publisher of The Dallas Morning News.

And publication of intimate information on aspects of a candidate's private life
is particularly justified when that information seems to indicate that the image
projected by the candidate is not an accurate one, according to many of the news
executives, who cited Mr. Hart's efforts to cast himself as a family man and to
dismiss rumors of sexual relationships outside his marriage.

''The whole question of candidates' projecting an image that is contrary to who
they are is a very legitimate concern of the press, and requires very vigorous
probing,'' said Katherine W. Fanning, president of the American Society of
Newspaper Editors and editor of The Christian Science Monitor.

A spot check of the executives at the convention indicated strong support for
The Herald, always with the assumption that the newspaper was correct in its
account of how Mr. Hart spent the weekend.

If the article was not correct, they say, Mr. Hart has been done a terrible
wrong. But, in principle, many say the newspaper was correct to pursue Mr.
Hart's private life.

Judged on Performance

But there were some news executives who expressed regret that The Herald article
had appeared, and said that candidates should be judged by their public
performance and stands on the issues.

They also argued that few public officials could withstand such intense scrutiny
without some revelation of human failing that would be embarrassing, and that
fear of exposure would keep excellent people from public life.

''That's a story that it would have been better to let lie,'' said John O.
Emmerich Jr., editor and publisher of The Greenwood (Miss.) Commonwealth.

Mr. Hart has denied spending the night with the woman, who has been identified
as a Florida actress he met some months ago. Members of his staff have denounced
the article as ''character assassination'' and false. The Hart staff said he was
expected to address the issue when he speaks to the publisher's association
today.

But even among news executives who say their papers gave The Herald article
prominent display Monday morning, there was also a sense of uneasiness that a
barrier had been breached that will open a new frontier of intimate coverage.

Many journalists said that The Herald's article reflected a change both in the
way journalism is conducted and in what the society demands of politicians and
public figures.

Many compared the pursuit of Mr. Hart to recent coverage of Jim Bakker, the
television evangelist who was forced to resign from the PTL ministry in the wake
of accusations that he had had sexual relations with a young woman and then
agreed to buy her silence.

Unspoken Understanding

While scandal has always been grist for the journalistic mill, there was for
many decades an unspoken gentleman's understanding that such things as marital
infidelity and alcohol abuse were unsuitable subjects of news coverage for
respectable news organizations.

Many journalists say that the new adversarial aggressiveness of journalists in
the Vietnam War and, later, with the Watergate affair began to change this
courtly climate. They say that the public also began to demand to know more
about public figures, which was an attitude born of disappointment in their
leaders.

But, many say, coverage of private, sexual aspects of politicans became
legitimized by coverage of Senator Edward M. Kennedy's role in the death of one
of his female aides who drowned when a car the Senator was driving went off a
bridge on Chappaquiddick Island at Martha's Vineyard.

Sex-related revelations about top political figures have also been made public
in recent years, like Representative Wilbur D. Mills's relationship with a
Washington exotic dancer that came to light after they were in an automobile
accident in Washington, and, after his death, about President Kennedy's sexual
relationship with Judith Campbell Exner, who was also the girlfriend of a top
figure in organized crime.

Broken New Ground

But many journalists say The Herald's article does represent a change even from
this more open climate. They say that the private involvements of Senator
Kennedy and Representative Mills would probably not have been revealed had it
not been for the accidents and that sexual aspects of President Kennedy's life
came long after his death.

The Herald has broken new ground, they say, because the article was published as
part of the newspaper's regular coverage of a Presidential campaign.

Some question where the line will now be drawn regarding coverage of a
politician or a public figure.

While most say all Presidential candidates must be prepared to bear such
scrutiny, there is less certainty of how this intimate standard would apply to
state and even local officials, or to local ministers, business executives or
journalistic leaders.

''Is that the role of a public watchdog or someone trying to raise cain or boost
circulation?'' asked Douglas A. Ramsey, senior vice president of the Foundation
for American Communications, which has conducted several seminars on
journalistic ethics. ''I don't know.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gary Hart's town house in Washington (NYT/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 5, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Stresses Oil

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 27, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 59 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 4


Vietnam, which shipped its first oil exports only last month, plans to have its
oil industry fuel development of the national economy, the Communist Party
leader, Nguyen Van Linh, said today. The Hanoi radio reported that he had told
oil workers that production of crude this year should be seven times the 40,500
tons of the second half of 1986.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 6, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Do Unto Nicaragua

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 147 words


To the Editor:

''What's the Alternative in Nicaragua?'' (editorial, April 12) gave in answer
the choices ''pay, shoot or talk.''

I suppose it is worthy of compliment that you selected the most logical one - to
talk. But I wonder if that is because the Iran-contra affair has temporarily
eliminated pay as a choice and those 10 years of horror in Vietnam prevent us
from shooting.

You left out a fourth choice, the only one that is legal, proper and, in the
long run, acceptable - to do nothing.

The difference between your stand and the Administration's is narrow. You share
the gall to believe we have a right to interfere in the affairs of an
independent, sovereign state.

Against you and the Administration stand the Contadora, the World Court, the
United Nations, world opinion and the best interests of the American people.

DON SLOAN
New York, April 19, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 6, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ALIENS LEAVE THE SHADOWS AS YEAR OF AMNESTY DAWNS

BYLINE: By THOMAS J. LUECK

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1274 words


Thousands of illegal aliens stepped out of the shadows yesterday, lining up at
Government centers around the country to apply for legal status under the new
immigration law.

In New York, Chicago, Los Angeles and other major cities, small groups of aliens
began lining up before dawn at new legalization centers, which opened for
business at 8 A.M. and will continue taking applications for amnesty until May
4, 1988.

''I want to be the first,'' said Isabel Isamit, a 74-year-old native of
Santiago, Chile, who has been living in Chicago since 1969 and arrived at one of
that city's 15 legalization centers at 3 A.M. yesterday.

At a legalization center in Long Island City, Queens, Reshad Lata and his wife
produced income tax returns, gas bills and an apartment lease to show that they
had lived in Brooklyn since 1981.

Chance for a Reunion

For the Latas, the amnesty program means a chance to reunite their entire
family. One of the Lata children, who is 5 years old, was born in New York City,
and has American citizenship. But another child, now 7, was left behind when
they moved to Brooklyn from Yugoslavia in 1981 and has been living with Mr.
Lata's parents.

''He doesn't know us,'' said Mr. Lata, a security guard, whose status as an
illegal alien had prevented him from bringing the older child to New York. If
his application for amnesty is approved, however, he said he hopes to reunite
his family within 18 months.

Government officials had been scrambling under tight deadlines to staff, equip
and open the legalization centers on time. And when they opened yesterday, most
of the centers operated in an atmosphere of uncrowded calm.

''The Government is more than prepared for this program,'' said Alan C. Nelson,
the Commissioner of the Immigration Service, who attended the opening on West
24th Street of one of the New York City legalization centers. ''Given six months
to get ready, we have accomplished an amazing task.''

Only 173 Apply in New York

Still, the number of people applying for amnesty on the first day of the program
fell far short of the crush that some had expected. In New York, for example,
where the new centers are equipped to process 1,150 applications a day, only 173
applicants turned up. Officials attributed the light turnout nationally to a
reluctance among many illegal aliens to identify themselves to the Immigration
Service, even if they are qualified for amnesty and resident status.

Although uncrowded, many of the the legalization centers took on an atmosphere
of shared optimism.

''I will never be afraid again,'' said Shakia Hydri, a Chicago bartender, came
to the United States from Pakistan in 1977, and who presented immigration
officials in Chicago with his documents yesterday. ''We are in a free country -
with all its benefits.''

The amnesty program is also a family matter for Maquel Morales, a native of the
Dominican Republic who moved to New York in 1978. A cook at a Manhattan
restaurant, Mr. Morales said he and his wife have been in court five times since
1980 to appeal a deportation order, even though two of their children were born
in the United States and are citizens.

Looking for a Photographer

As he was awaiting an interview with Immigration Service officials, Mr. Morales
spoke for a moment of the Dominican Republic. ''My kids are Americans,'' he
said. ''How could I take them back?''

And in New Jersey, where dozens of aliens showed up at a legalization center in
Paterson, Chac Boi Kwan, a 32-year-old native of Vietnam, was less well prepared
than most. After arriving at 8 A.M., he realized he had forgotten to bring a
photograph of himself, as required, and had to scramble to find a photographer.

''Despite this, I feel pretty good,'' said Mr. Kwan, who works as an actuary. He
finally found a photography shop that opened hours after he arrived at the
Paterson Center.

Amnesty ''will make life easier for me,'' he added. He said legal status will
help him in his career and allow him to visit his mother, who lives in Hong
Kong, without fears of violating the immigration laws.

Short Lines in West

In San Francisco, where the turnout of amnesty applicants was light and orderly,
100 demonstrators, many of them associated with immigrant rights groups, marched
in front of the Immigration Service offices to protest the new law, which they
said unfairly discriminates against aliens who arrived in the United States
since 1982. In that city's Mission District, a largely Hispanic neighborhood,
the waiting area in a newly opened processing center was half empty.

Chicago's legalization centers began emptying out at mid-day.

In Los Angeles, where officials say there are more illegal aliens than in any
other city, the lines at 15 new legalization centers were short or nonexistent.

''There is going to be a need for trust building,'' said Muzaffar Chisti,
director of the Immigration Project of the International Ladies Garment Workers
Union in New York. He added that illegal aliens ''distrust the system, and they
are not going to take a chance the first day.''

Number Expected to Grow

The amnesty program, signed into law by President Reagan last November, provides
legal status to aliens who are able to demonstrate that they have been living in
the United States since Jan. 1, 1982.

Some New York officials said they were not surprised by the light first-day
turnout because neither the illegal aliens nor a host of nonprofit groups that
are guiding them through the application process have had sufficient time to
gear up.

''We expect the number of people being processed to increase very soon,'' said
Charles C. Sava, director of the Immigration Service's New York District.

Indeed, the level of activity yesterday was more hectic at churches, union
offices and other nonprofit centers around the country that have established
programs to counsel aliens on their rights, help them collect documents, and
guide them through the amnesty process.

Scores of Telephone Calls

At the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, which has been assisting its
members and their families throughout the nation, Mr. Chisti said more than 100
phone calls were coming in each hour from aliens seeking information about the
new immigration law. ''We're going crazy over here,'' he said.

And at an office set up last month by the Congress of Racial Equality in
Brooklyn, volunteer workers said more than 150 aliens walked in yesterday to
seek advice and assistance, far more than any previous day.

''At this point, we are the ones feeling the crush,'' said George Holmes, a CORE
official. ''As word of the program spreads, and as the aliens get their
documents together, the INS will have a crush of its own.''

But some officials who have been counseling aliens said their fears of the
Immigration service are difficult to break down, and the amnesty program is
unlikely to attract anywhere close to the 3.9 people the Government estimates
have been living illegally in the United States since January 1982 and may
qualify for legal status.

''It's the kind of thing where one mistake might take years to correct,'' said
Mary To, a director of a counseling center run by the International Institute of
Los Angeles. She added that illegal aliens ''are in no rush'' to step forward.

Among those who applied yesterday, many had looking forward to the amnesty
program for months. Most were interviewed briefly by Immigration Service
officials, and presented the officials with stacks of rent reciepts, medical
bills, pay check records, and other documents necessary to prove that they
qualify for legal status.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Isabel Isamit (NYT); photo of aliens checking their amnesty
applications (NYT/Steve Kagan); photo of a lawyer explaining forms to Chinese
applicants (NYT/John Sotomayor)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 6, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CHANGING MORALITY: PRESS AND POLITICS

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1365 words


Behind the controversy over Gary Hart's relationship with a Florida model and
sometime actress lie radical changes in the way the American public views its
leaders and the way the American press views its job.

A quarter-century ago, voters presumed their Presidents and their senators to be
honorable men (only very occasionally women) who should be accorded the benefit
of the doubt and the privilege of privacy. Newspapers and television networks by
and large shared that outlook and rarely intruded into the private lives of
politicians.

In early 1963, for example, a fledgling reporter for this newspaper was assigned
to patrol the lobby of the Carlyle Hotel while President Kennedy was visiting
New York City. The reporter's job was to observe the comings and goings of
politicians, but what he saw was the comings and going of a prominent actress,
so that was what he reported to his editor. ''No story there,'' said the editor,
and the matter was dropped.

The convention represented by that episode has now broken down. By staking out
the Capitol Hill town house of Mr. Hart, the former Senator from Colorado who
has been considered the front-runner for the 1988 Democratic Presidential
nomination, and by reporting that the model, Donna Rice, of Miami, seemed to
have spent the night with him, The Miami Herald not only grievously damaged Mr.
Hart's political prospects but also reopened a debate about journalistic ethics.


Paradox on Standards

A paradox appears to be at work here: At the very time when American sexual
mores have become more relaxed, when promiscuity has become more commonplace
than it was a few decades ago, and in some circles more acceptable, the press
seems determined to hold Presidential candidates to a sterner standard,
abandoning its old live-and-let-live philosophy in the belief that the public
cares more now.

Sexual controversy involving political leaders is, of course, nothing new. Such
historical figures as Frederick I of Prussia and the empire-builder Cecil Rhodes
are widely believed to have been homosexuals. In the Presidential campaign of
1884, Grover Cleveland was taunted by his opponents for having sired a son out
of wedlock. (''Ma, ma, where's my pa?'' chanted Cleveland's foes, to which his
backers replied, ''He's going to the White House, ha, ha, ha!'') In more recent
years, Presidents as highly regarded as Franklin D. Roosevelt and John F.
Kennedy are known to have had dalliances with women not their wives.

Few of these things were written about by contemporary journalists, at least
partly because reporters and editors believed there was no real correlation
between a politician's (or, for that matter, anyone's) sexual activities and
capacity for achievment.

Disappointments and Leaders

But a relentless succession of disappointments in their leaders suffered by the
American people, beginning with the Vietnam War and continuing through the
Iran-contra affair, has led them and their surrogates, the press, to believe
that they must look more closely at the kinds of people running for high office;
that they must examine not only the politicians' policies and accounts of their
own lives but also probe deeply into their behavior in all sorts of spheres.

In the midst of the Watergate crisis, which raised such questions perhaps more
vividly than ever before, a tincture of academic credibility was given to this
approach by the political scientist James David Barber. In his book ''The
Presidential Character,'' published in 1972, he argued as follows:

''The lives of Presidents past and of the one still with us show, I think, how a
start from character makes possible a realistic estimate of what will endure
into a man's White House years. Character is the force, the motive power, around
which the person gathers his view of the world, and from which his style
receives its impetus. The issues will change; the character of the President
will not.''

The new standards have not been applied with an altogether even hand. For
example, divorce, particularly divorce some time in the past, seems less
debilitating to a major politician than it used to be. It appears to have cost
President Reagan nothing, whereas it was considered a major liability in the
cases of Adlai E. Stevenson and Nelson A. Rockefeller.

When the Public Has Doubts

Where modern politicians are most likely to be tripped up is where they have
created a pattern of doubt in the public mind, according to Gary Orren, a
Harvard professor who specializes in voter attitudes and who has explored in
depth voters' views of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts. Mr.
Orren believes that evident sexual misconduct, especially the way it is handled
once revealed, ''has come to signify for the public and for the media, which get
their license from the public, such norms as judgment, steadiness, readiness to
take risks and dependability.''

In repeated opinion surveys, more than half of American adults admit to having
been unfaithful to their spouses, which may be an understatement, given the
reluctance of some people to confess to such conduct. So most observers doubt
that a single instance of infidelity would cause a public uproar like the
present one.

''In the cases of Senator Hart and Senator Kennedy,'' Mr. Orren added, ''years
of rumor and accusation have built up a picture of unreliability in this area,
so that when something like Chappaquiddick or the Donna Rice affair comes along,
people think they recognize a syndrome, not an isolated event, and they make
broad deductions from it.''

Mr. Hart made matters worse for himself by challenging the press, in an
interview published Sunday in The New York Times Magazine, to catch him in a
sexual misdemeanor. He did so precisely because he hoped to dispel a whispering
campaign about his past behavior.

Perceptions of Vulnerability

In addition, the Coloradan appears to be suffering from the weak start to his
campaign. His announcement was flawed, his past campaign debts have hit the
headlines and political professionals had begun even before The Herald's article
to describe his front-runner status as fragile and perhaps unsustainable. One
clear sign of his vulnerability was the eagerness of late-comers to enter the
Democratic race.

''Hart's past history, including his change of name and the confusion over his
birth date,'' said a Democratic Representative who has backed him in the past,
''inevitably makes him a kind of political question mark. It's the old political
story: When people smell weakness in a candidate, they go after him. Would this
have happened if Hart had been sweeping all before him?''

Ferocious competition among news organizations to be first with damaging
revelations about public officials, another legacy of Watergate, perhaps
exaggerated by the widespread awarding of prizes for such efforts, is another
element in the story. Where editors might once have held back, many now tend to
plunge ahead at least partly because they believe that if they do not, someone
else will and they will be held culpable for having been ''beaten.''

A final dimension is the profound change in the attitude and the standing of
women. Politicians' wives were once expected to be loyal, decorous and quiet,
and, if wronged, to carry bravely on. Feminism has changed that. Both
traditional and modern women resent the use of political wives as parts of the
campaign scenery and of the marketing plan, and they identify strongly with
those wives who have endured much only to be deceived and publicly humiliated.

Joan Kennedy, Edward Kennedy's former wife, engendered widespread sympathy in
the wake of Chappaquiddick, to the detriment of his Presidential chances, and
the same thing seems to be happening with Lee Hart, who was in Denver while Mr.
Hart was spending time with Ms. Rice at the Hart town house in Washington.

It is too early to judge conclusively whether Mr. Hart's candidacy will survive.
But it is already clear that this campaign, like the four that preceded it, will
be marked by revelations about the private lives of candidates that would
probably have stayed private only a few decades ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SRI LANKA'S TIES WITH INDIA WORSEN

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 757 words

DATELINE: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka, May 2


The ethnic problems that have burst into violence here in recent weeks have
strained relations between Sri Lanka and its powerful northern neighbor, India.

The two nations, faced with both internal and external problems related to the
conflict, have accused each other of encouraging violence.

Sri Lanka's President, J. R. Jayewardene, said this week that India was taking a
''Hitlerian, not Gandhian,'' approach to the conflict.

Military Measures Criticized

India's External Affairs Minister, Narayan Dutt Tiwari, chided Sri Lanka, which
has started a military offensive against Tamil rebels. ''You cannot achieve a
political settlement by bombing your own people,'' he said.

Local and foreign analysts in Colombo say that as the ethnic tensions have grown
more intractable, the divisions between the two nations have also become more
difficult to resolve.

The Tamil minority that is agitating for a separate state in the northern and
eastern portions of Sri Lanka also forms a powerful ethnic group in the south of
India that poses an internal problem for the central Government.

Political analysts agree that no lasting solution to the problem can be reached
without Indian participation.

India Called Part of the Problem

But in recent days, officials in Colombo, including Mr. Jayewardene, have said
India itself is part of the problem.

The ethnic conflict involves Tamil separatists in the northern peninsula of
Jaffna, some of whom have taken refuge in the southern Indian state of Tamil
Nadu.

The Tamils make up only 18 percent of Sri Lanka's population - and these are
divided between Tamils of the north, the center of militant separatism, and
Tamils of the south-central hill country, who are not separatists -but 50
million Tamils live in Tamil Nadu, more than Sri Lanka's total population of 16
million.

Sri Lanka has complained that guerrillas are being given refuge in Tamil Nadu.
If the Indian Government were to join in halting supplies to the rebels, Mr.
Jayewardene said last week, ''this war would be over in days.''

But political analysts in Colombo said the Government in New Delhi had little
political leverage in Tamil Nadu, which is controlled by opposition politicians
and where the Tamil issue is a highly emotional one.

They also said New Delhi might have lost any influence over the Sri Lankan
separatist groups who must be brought to the negotiating table.

India's Stake in Unrest Cited

Both Sri Lankan and Western analysts also suggested that India may have a stake
in continuing unrest in Sri Lanka, whose independent foreign policy is seen as a
threat.

India is seen as suspicious of Sri Lanka's free-market economic policies and of
the possibility that it could be used by the United States for a military role
in the Indian Ocean.

The Indian ambassador, Jyotindra Nath Dixit, in an interview this week, compared
his country's relations with Sri Lanka to those of other big nations with small,
troublesome southern neighbors.

Choosing his words carefully, he suggested parallels with the United States and
Nicaragua, China and Vietnam, and the Soviet Union and Afghanistan.

Plan to Use Force Denied

Mr. Dixit quickly denied any implication that India contemplated using armed
force in Sri Lanka. But a highly placed Sri Lankan official said the
Ambassador's remarks were not to be taken lightly. ''Mr. Dixit always says
exactly what he means,'' the official said.

He dismissed the idea that India might use armed force against Sri Lanka, but he
said his country was feeling strong and unwelcome pressure from India in
resolving its problems.

He accused the Indians of having aided Tamil guerrillas in an effort to
destabilize Sri Lanka but, he said, ''the monster has grown to the point where
Indian authorities no longer control it.''

India does not want the separatists to succeed in Sri Lanka and set a precedent
for its own Tamils or other minorities, he said. But it also hopes to use the
continuing unrest as leverage over Sri lanka.''Therefore, it does not want
either side to win,'' he said.

Indian Backing Seen as Necessary

A Western diplomat said Sri Lanka, which has stated a hard-line position toward
the Tamil guerrillas, was dependent on India for help in reaching a compromise.

But the diplomat said the fear in Colombo was that ''once the Indians come in,
they're not going to go away.''

When Sri Lanka called on India for military aid in controlling a Marxist group
in 1971, he said, ''they were shocked to see how fast the help came.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABORTION BOMBINGS SUSPECT: A PORTRAIT OF PIETY AND RAGE

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2946 words


By the time the bomb squad burst into the Manhattan headquarters of Planned
Parenthood last Dec. 14, the carpet was on fire and the air clouded by smoke. In
the waiting room for abortion patients, the officers discovered the remains of
an exploded incendiary device and a full-scale bomb, capable of being ignited at
any moment by the heat. When an officer deftly snipped the wires, the threat was
over, and the investigation was about to begin.

With 15 sticks of dynamite, the bomb was powerful enough to have collapsed the
front of the building at 380 Second Avenue and to have shattered windows
one-quarter mile away. With a blasting cap, timer and battery, the bomb showed
its architect to be someone of sophistication. And one last component, nestled
amid the sticks of dynamite, caught the officers's eyes: a medal of St.
Benedict.

A Cardinal's Appeal

The dynamite and the medal ultimately led to Dennis John Malvasi. In late
February 1987, with 300 Federal agents and city detectives drawing closer, Mr.
Malvasi surrendered to face charges of bombing four abortion clinics in the
city. But the law alone had not convinced Mr. Malvasi to give up. It had been a
televised appeal by John Cardinal O'Connor.

So concluded an urgent manhunt, and so emerged the story of Mr. Malvasi - victim
and victimizer, criminal and patriot, religious zealot and master dissembler.
Mr. Malvasi's path coursed through orphanage and battlefield, theater and
shrine, prison and ocean liner. Along the way, he developed disguises and mail
drops and aliases -''Dennis Staddon'' the mail-room clerk, ''Dennis Staniloff''
the car owner, ''Robert Becht'' the paramedic and ''Albert Alfano'' the actor
and licensed pyrotechnician.

Now Mr. Malvasi is No. 13742-054 in the Metropolitan Correctional Center, held
without bail on an 11-count indictment that could bring him 90 years in prison.
He has pleaded not guilty, but is said by friends to be considering a plea
bargain.

The four abortion-clinic bombings of which he stands accused are the only such
attacks in New York City history. They are among the most severe of the 59 cases
recorded nationally since 1982, Federal agents say, because they were not the
work of an amateur with gasoline and matches, as is the usual scenario, but of a
professional capable of locating and assembling high explosives.

Mr. Malvasi's case, then, opens a window on the most extreme elements of the
anti-abortion movement, where the mixture of piety and rage endangers life in
the name of saving it. It also offers a glimpse into the fraternity of Vietnam
combat veterans -the majority who settled into homes and families, the handful
who still live on the margins of society.

Should Mr. Malvasi come to trial in Federal District Court in Manhattan as
scheduled on June 29, his defense is expected to hinge on whether his wartime
experience warped him to the point of insanity. What is already apparent is that
when Mr. Malvasi speaks of abortion, he frames it in military terms.

''History will show that abortion in New York State was nothing more than the
dissipation of the black and Puerto Rican populace,'' he said in an interview
for this article. ''That's where most of the kills were.'' In Vietnam parlance,
''dissipate'' is the verb for kill, and ''kill'' the noun for fatality.

Or as Mr. Malvasi once put it to a friend who shared both his combat experience
and his fervent faith: ''And when I came back from Vietnam, they called me a
baby-killer.''

Dennis John Malvasi was born Jan. 18, 1950, the seventh child of a woman who
first gave birth at the age of 15 and eventually had 12 children by at least 3
different men. His mother, Jenny Malvasi, placed most of her children in the St.
Joseph Home, a Catholic orphanage in Peekskill, N.Y.

There Dennis lived for 12 of his first 14 years, until Mrs. Malvasi brought him
to her home in the East New York section of Brooklyn. The neighborhood, abruptly
shifting from white to black and working class to slum, was a cauldron of race
hate.

''To come to East New York from a home run by Christians was a shock,'' Mr.
Malvasi said. ''I constantly caught beatings from black people for no reason.
The whites used to beat me up, too, because they thought I was Puerto Rican. The
whole neighborhood was brutal.''

Then he saw escape in the form of a Marine from the neighborhood, hard and proud
in his dress blues. Mr. Malvasi went to a Marine recruiting station in Times
Square to enlist. Advised that because he was 17 he needed a parent's consent,
he paid a passerby $20 to sign as his mother.

'I Felt Really Alive'

The 27th Marines, Mr. Malvasi's regiment, was deposited into the vicious
aftermath of the Tet Offensive. In the regiment's first full month of combat,
the 27th conducted 505 patrols, 214 ambushes and 8 large sweep-and-clear
operations around Da Nang.

Mr. Malvasi himself was a bull's-eye the bullets never found. As a field radio
operator he always took heavy fire, because he provided the single link to air
support or evacuation aid and because his position was betrayed by the antenna
protruding from his bunker. He both feared and savored the role.

One part of Mr. Malvasi was afraid, almost certain, that ''I'd never see America
again.'' Another part, however, enjoyed a perverse pleasure:

''I felt really alive, really wanted. The baddest people I knew were in front
and they came shooting at me. I felt kind of honored.''

An Escape: Actor Is Born

Shortly after his discharge in May 1970, Mr. Malvasi answered an advertisement
for acting workshops and appeared at a storefront on the Lower East Side. There
he met Linda Mussmann, his Pygmalion. She was an Indiana farm girl with long,
hippie hair and enough naivete to open a theater on Avenue A in the midst of the
East Village heroin epidemic. He was a street punk with an untapped dramatic
brilliance.

The eighth grade dropout auditioned with a scene from ''Waiting for Godot,'' and
cured himself of his Brooklyn accent by mimicing the director's prairie-flat
tones. He went on to act in full productions of Shaw, Ibsen, Pinter and Ionesco.

''There was an honesty about him that was extraordinary, and an ability to take
big chances,'' Ms. Mussmann said. ''There was a vulnerability and an openness.
The guy was a genius.''

The stage appealed to Mr. Malvasi for some unorthodox reasons. ''It kept me in
balance,'' he said. ''I was hanging around with some very dangerous people in
Brooklyn and then I was with these actors, and neither knew about the other. I
could walk on the wild side and then go into the theater like I was civilized.''

Then the membrane separating Mr. Malvasi's two worlds began to dissolve.

Charged in Stabbing

In September 1972, Mr. Malvasi was arrested after both stabbing and being
stabbed by a man in a traffic altercation. He pleaded guilty to second-degree
assault, a felony, and was sentenced to five years probation.

The following year, Mr. Malvasi was jumped by three men on his way home from a
rehearsal and severely stabbed. When he returned to the streets, it was with a
gun. He made no secret of it to anyone except his probation officer.

In November 1975, two months after being released early from probation, Mr.
Malvasi was arrested again, for carrying a loaded .25-caliber pistol. Convicted
on a reduced charge of attempted criminal possession of a weapon, his second
felony, Mr. Malvasi entered the Great Meadow Correctional Facility in Comstock
for two years. ''A gladiator school,'' he now calls it.

While in jail, Mr. Malvasi wrote several letters that his friends say were rare
for the open anguish they revealed. One was a plea to Governor Hugh L. Carey for
clemency, contrasting his own incarceration to the amnesty offered to Vietnam
War draft evaders.

Several others were sent to Linda Mussmann. Although Mr. Malvasi wrote about the
present, she said, he dated the letters in 1968 and 1969, the years he had spent
in Vietnam.

''Prison was excruciating to him, almost impossible to survive,'' Ms. Mussmann
said. ''He thought of it as a kind of war. And he was lucky enough - or unlucky
enough - to survive.''

A Brotherhood Of Veterans

To the members of the fledgling Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company, the
newcomer named Dennis Malvasi was just another guy getting his life back
together. In what these men saw as an insensitive nation, they would heal one
another. ''So many of us had grim stories, one more didn't surprise us,'' said
Bill Cooner, who acted with Mr. Malvasi. ''We were a brotherhood.''

At Vetco, as the theater company is known, Mr. Malvasi won people over with the
same hard work and enthusiasm Ms. Mussmann had known. He acted in ''Botticelli''
and ''Bury the Dead,'' among other plays, and he served as a full-time technical
supervisor for about nine months. ''An eager beaver,'' recalled Tom Bird,
Vetco's artistic director.

Offstage, Mr. Malvasi earned a reputation for intense loyalty to his fellow
veterans. He got Mr. Cooner a job in the same mailroom where he worked. After 15
years apart, he recognized his Marine comrade, Josh Cruz, in a subway station
and introduced the aspiring actor to Vetco. Then he arranged a reunion of their
mutual friends to see Mr. Cruz starring in the acclaimed Vetco drama,
''Tracers.''

A Variety of Names

At the same time, most of Mr. Malvasi's friends noticed some quirks. Solicitous
of others, he shielded his own private life. When it came to discussing Vietnam,
his attitude ranged from indifference to sarcasm. ''War is war,'' was a
typically stoic comment.

Then there were the names. After his first show at Vetco, Mr. Malvasi changed
his stage name to ''Albert Alfano'' and later ''John Staddon.'' He worked in a
mailroom as ''Dennis Staddon.'' His driver's license was for ''Dennis
Staniloff.'' For lack of a better explanation, friends attributed it to an
actor's eccentricity.

A few did know that Mr. Malvasi was, in Mr. Cooner's phrase, ''extra-legal'' -
not in big ways, more as a challenge to the system. Once Mr. Malvasi had to pay
off a series of parking tickets to renew his driver's license. He drew a money
order for the licensing fee, but deliberately wrote a bad check for the tickets.


Caught Buying Guns

''I said, 'They're going to come after you for grand larceny,''' Ray Robertson
of Vetco recalled. ''And he said, 'Yeah, but they won't take away my license.'''

Mr. Malvasi's ''extra-legal'' activities turned far more serious in May 1984.
Between acting stints on a cruise ship based in Tampa, Mr. Malvasi drove to Fort
Lauderdale, where a friend from his second tour in Vietnam had settled. He
wanted to see the man's newborn child, and, while he was in the vicinity, to buy
some guns.

With a driver's license for ''Dennis John Staddon,'' Mr. Malvasi ordered 20
.25-caliber Raven pistols from Family Firearms in nearby Margate. The clerk
alerted the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms. When Mr. Malvasi
and the friend returned to pick up the guns, an undercover agent was behind the
counter.

On March 13, 1985, a grand jury in Federal District Court in Miami indicted Mr.
Malvasi on six weapons felonies and issued a warrant for his arrest. For the
first time, he was a fugitive.

''Stuff like that doesn't bother me,'' Mr. Malvasi said. ''Actually, I don't
feel good unless I have someone hunting me down. I like knowing that people are
concerned about by whereabouts. It makes me feel alive. It makes me feel
wanted.''

New Interest: Catholic Cult

In his furtive new life, Mr. Malvasi received telephone calls by beeper,
collected his mail at several bars and ''lived out of a sea bag.'' One of the
friends who put him up from time to time was Edmund H. Janiszewski, a Vietnam
combat veteran with a full disability for mental stress that he says was caused
by wartime exposure to toxic herbicides.

While most friends did not know of Mr. Malvasi's strong and conservative
Catholicism, Mr. Janiszewski shared it. He also introduced Mr. Malvasi to Our
Lady of the Roses, a renegade movement led by Veronica Lueken, a Long Island
housewife who claims that the Virgin Mary and Jesus Christ appear to and speak
through her.

The Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn has investigated her claims, declared them
groundless, and denounced the movement. Nonetheless Mrs. Lueken has an estimated
60,000 followers in NorthAmerica. They apparently respond to her contentions
that, for instance, Satan attended the Second Vatican Council and Pope Paul VI
was kidnapped, drugged and replaced by an impostor for the last six years of his
reign.

Spiritual Messages

And abortion, Mrs. Leuken has frequently said, is ''the foulest of sacrileges.''
In May 1986, she told a crowd that Jesus was saying to her: ''We cannot tolerate
the murders of the unborn. This is a sacrilege of the most foul manner in the
eyes of the Eternal Father, and shall be punishable by death.''

Federal agents found that for several years the movement's faithful have
picketed the Eastern Women's Center at 38 East 30th Street in Manhattan, one of
the abortion clinics Mr. Malvasi is accused of having bombed. They also learned
that the movement sells medals of St. Benedict, similar to the one found with
the dynamite at Planned Parenthood.

A man who identified himself only as ''George,'' and said he answering inquiries
on Mrs. Leuken's instructions, was asked if her call for the death of
abortionists might easily be taken literally. ''All these messages are meant
spiritually,'' ''George'' said. ''But we're aware that people might not capture
the point of the message.''

Mr. Janiszewski said Mr. Malvasi's outrage about abortion arose from at least
one additional source. During his months as a fugitive, Mr. Malvasi studied for
his paramedic's license, and one night he brought a textbook to Mr.
Janiszewski's apartment.

''I remember him opening the book to the part on assisting in childbirth,'' Mr.
Janiszewski said. ''He said, 'Here's the truth. Look. This is a life.' And then
he said how all of us combat vets were called baby-killers.''

4 Bombings And a Manhunt

On Dec. 10, 1985, a tube packed with explosive powder burst into flame in the
unoccupied men's bathroom of the Manhattan Women's Medical Center, 115 East 23d
Street. It was the first attack on an abortion clinic in New York City history.

At 1:35 A.M. on Oct. 29, 1986, a bomb with a half-stick of dynamite exploded at
the Eastern Women's Center, blowing out the windows and blasting a hole in the
wall. Just two weeks later, on Nov. 11, an anonymous caller directed the police
to an unexploded bomb with three sticks of dynamite hidden inside a sofa at the
Queens Women's Medical Office, 8306 Queens Boulevard.

Then, on Dec. 14, police officers defused the bomb in Planned Parenthood's
offices at 380 Second Avenue, at East 22d Street. And in it, of course, they
found the dynamite and the religious medal.

Three hundred Federal agents and city detectives were now on the case, working
around the clock for weeks. ''We were concerned because the bomber was changing
his 'signature' with each bombing,'' said Robert Creighton, special agent of the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms. ''More powerful and more complex.
Designed so he could get away, and designed to do damage.''

Dynamite Is Traced

Relying on several witnesses to the bombings, Federal agents created a composite
sketch of a suspect. Then they compared it to the 6,000 photographs of every
licensed pyrotechnician in New York and Pennsylvania. There they located
''Albert Alfano.'' And ''Albert Alfano'' pointed to Dennis Malvasi.

The agents traced the unexploded dynamite to Harveys Lake, Pa., near
Wilkes-Barre. They arrested Carl Cenera, Donald Pryor, Jr. and Frank Wright -
Mr. Malvasi's former brother-in-law - for supplying the felon with dynamite and
not recording the sale. In recent court hearings, all three pleaded guilty and
described how Mr. Malvasi visited Mr. Wright in September 1986, looking for
dynamite.

In a local bar, Mr. Malvasi approached Mr. Cenera, who is licensed to sell
explosives. Mr. Cenera declined. Then Mr. Pryor, a Green Beret who left Vietnam
with a Silver Star for valor and a full disability for ''post-traumatic stress
syndrome,'' entered. After becoming fast friends over war stories, according to
court proceedings, Mr. Malvasi said he needed dynamite to deal with ''some Viet
Cong'' in New York. Mr. Pryor arranged the sale of 45 sticks the following
night.

Evading Traps

As for Mr. Malvasi, he narrowly evaded Federal agents several times. He sniffed
out the ruse when one agent, posing as a Hollywood producer, invited him to
audition for a movie about Vietnam. Another time, Mr. Malvasi's boss at Radio
City Music Hall, where he was a staff paramedic, telephoned him to come in for
an unscheduled rehearsal for a show with only two days to run. The fugitive,
suspicious, called back. He identified himself as an inspector with the Bureau
of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and asked if his agents were still there. At
the word ''yes,'' he hung up.

A few weeks later, on Feb. 23, Cardinal O'Connor made his televised plea. The
next day, Mr. Malvasi surrendered. He still had the accoutrements of life on the
lam, an eyepatch and sunglasses for disguise, a toothbrush and razor for
convenience.

But why had he stopped running? ''Cardinal O'Connor is a prince of the church,''
Mr. Malvasi said from prison recently. ''If the Cardinal says something and you
don't listen, then when you stand before the magistrate in the celestial court,
you got problems. And I got enough problems without God being mad at me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of bombing suspect, as an actor and as a fugitive

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE TENDERLOIN TIMES: A VOICE IN SAN FRANCISCO

BYLINE: By KATHERINE BISHOP, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 921 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, May 6


The Tenderloin Times is very likely the only newspaper in this city to be
distributed from a grocery shopping cart by a Laotian refugee.

A monthly with a circulation of 15,000, the 10-year-old newspaper has become the
voice of the down and out, the newly arrived immigrants from Southeast Asia and
the low-income elderly who share with pimps, drug pushers and prostitutes the
streets that make up the 23-square-block area known as the Tenderloin District.

The newspaper is read with equal enthusiasm by homeless men in line for a free
meal at St. Anthony's Dining Room, refugee Vietnamese shopkeepers and street
hustlers hanging out around an arcade showing X-rated films.

It is also read in the halls of city government when it prints news about the
lack of heat in some residential hotels for the homeless, the numbers of
homeless dying on the streets and the lack of education about AIDS among poor
people and minority groups.

'Most Intense Corner in the City'

The building that houses The Tenderloin Times's less-than-modest office is hard
by a clutter of sex shops, bars and pornographic theaters at the intersection of
Taylor and Eddy Streets, which Robert L. Waters, a journalist from Detroit who
is one of the newpaper's two editors, simply calls ''the most intense corner in
the city.''

But a look beyond the intersection discloses that a recent decline in the
pornographic movie theater industry, the arrival of Southeast Asians looking for
affordable housing and spaces for small family businesses, and the city's
attempt to house the homeless have all worked enormous change in the character
of the neighborhood.

In many ways, the family of Michael Tarbox, whose family came from Ireland a few
generations ago, represents the changes in the Tenderloin. Mr. Tarbox is married
to Kim Yok Chea, a Cambodian who arrived here five years ago from a refugee camp
in Thailand.

Mr. Tarbox says that 35 members of his wife's family live in the Tenderloin and
many of them work at their family business, the Battambang Market, the city's
first Cambodian grocery store.

'A Healthy Effect'

Vu Duc Vuong, who came from Vietnam in 1975 and has directed the Center for
Southeast Asian Refugee Resettlement since 1984, says The Tenderloin Times has
served as ''the bridge'' among the diverse groups living in close proximity but
not necessarily considering themselves neighbors.

''No one else could do it,'' Mr. Vuong said. ''The Times has had a healthy
effect on the community.''

Some of the newspaper's articles to date have meant that the mental health
emergency drop-in center now doubles as a space for Buddhist religious
ceremonies; that Norma, a former homeless woman, has a room, and that the
Tenderloin has a park, which is now used more than any other in the city.

''We're part of the community, we're connected,'' Mr. Waters said. ''We see
change on a personal level and feel rewarded.''

As the editors see it, part of the paper's job is to inform both the community
itself and outsiders as to the ethnic and cultural diversity of the refugees,
who otherwise tend to be viewed as one great Southeast Asian monolith.

People Who Did Not Mix

Sara Colm, a former Vista volunteer who serves as co-editor of The Tenderloin
Times, cited as an example the Lao and Cambodian hill tribes people who did not
mix with one another until arriving here as refugees. ''It's as strange for a
Mien to live next to a Khamer as to an American,'' she said.

Although the 1980 census found only about 1,000 Vietnamese and 1,000 Chinese
living in the Tenderloin, those who work in the community in refugee relocation
and housing agree that Southeast Asian refugees now make up nearly half of the
Tenderloin's estimated 25,000 population. The workers say about 4,000 are
Cambodian, 2,000 are Laotian and 6,000 are Vietnamese, most of whom are ethnic
Chinese. More than half are children.

The newspaper publishes its articles in four languages in the same issue:
English, Vietnamese, Cambodian and Lao. Its three Southeast Asian reporters
write their articles in English for Ms. Colm to edit and then translate them
back into their native languages.

Chanthanom Ounkeo, the Lao reporter, who came here from a refugee camp in
Thailand, knows nearly every Lao family in the city through her work with the
Head Start program for preschool children. She said that the neighborhood had
become less dangerous over the past several years but that street crime was
still a problem.

'I Know All the Pimps'

''I walk the streets and I know all the pimps and they know me,'' she said with
a laugh. ''But I'm still careful because I am small.''

Ms. Colm said the sheer density of the neighborhood was often an issue in the
cultural clash. ''There is severe overcrowding in some buildings,'' she said,
with ''subpopulations co-existing within one building.'' A Buddhist priest may
be conducting a marriage in a tiny apartment with the bride changing clothes
behind a drape in the hallway and the neighbors down the hall become agitated
because they have no idea understanding of is going on, Ms. Colm said.

The city's use of a concentration of residential hotels in the area to house the
homeless has had ''a tremendous impact on the neighborhood,'' Mr. Waters said.

The newspaper publishes articles on the problems of the homeless so its refugee
readers will better understand the plight of the homeless and their presence in
an area of the city that the refugees are transforming into a family
neighborhood.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mason Street in San Francisco (NYT/Terrence McCarthy); Photo
of Robert L. Wagner, one of two editors of The Tenderloin Times)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'LITTLE MURDERS,' JULES FEIFFER'S 60'S SATIRE

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1104 words


JULES FEIFFER'S ''Little Murders'' is the darkest and perhaps the funniest
comedy ever written about what it was like to be alive and half-crazed in the
urban American jungle of the late 1960's. The play postulates a New York whose
daily plagues range from noise and air pollution, power blackouts and obscene
phone calls to violent struggles between random snipers and proto-fascist cops.
Unfortunately for the prophetic Mr. Feiffer, this work had its Broadway premiere
in 1967, a year too early. ''Little Murders'' expired after a single week, only
to be ''rediscovered'' two years later by theatergoers (and Hollywood) in a hit
Off Broadway revival. While the second staging was superior to the first, the
improvement wasn't that marked. What really made the difference between 1967 and
1969 was 1968's new round of nationally televised murders, little and otherwise:
assassinations, ghetto conflagrations, the Chicago police in blazing riot.

Now almost two decades have gone by, and has the madness stopped? To see
''Little Murders'' in the new and first-class revival at the Second Stage is to
feel that the world may have turned for the better, if only slightly. Mr.
Feiffer's characters, an archetypal sitcom family gone absurdist, are more
helpless and paranoid than they might be today. The faith to which they cling so
blindly - ''a great belief in institutions'' - is no longer representative in a
country steadily shaken by Presidential misadventures in Vietnam, Watergate and
Iran. The unorthodoxies they find so shocking and threatening - atheism,
homosexuality, pacifism, nihilism - have become mainstream fare for contemporary
Middle America.

But if ''Little Murders'' can be as period-bound as its author's
headline-inspired cartoons of the same era, most of it still provokes laughter
and thought. In this play, as in his subsequent ''Carnal Knowledge'' and
''Grown-Ups,'' Mr. Feiffer tried to uncover the enduring connections between the
warfare conducted in the American living room or bedroom and the bloodshed
practiced by American society, whether at home or abroad. He also took solid
punches at topics as varied as Jewish guilt, Pop Art, existentialism and, most
impressively, the anesthetization of experience in a media-sated environment
where any horrible event can be fractionalized and sanitized in a photograph's
''millions of little black dots.''

As yet more cartoonist than dramatist, Mr. Feiffer presents his most inspired
riffs as set pieces, often monologues. A middle-aged judge (Mike Nussbaum)
describes his immigrant family's rise from Hester Street to Biscayne Boulevard
with an Old Testament vengeance that explains both the collapse of his
generation's New Deal liberalism and the revolt of the Vietnam War generation he
helped father. A photographer (Graham Beckel) tells of how the ''seductiveness
of inanimate things'' led him to stop taking pictures of people and start
producing award-winning shots of excrement. A flock-flattering,
cash-flow-conscious clergyman of the hippie persuasion (Mr. Nussbaum again)
conducts a wedding ceremony in which he substitutes the word ''communicate'' for
''love'' and reassures the newlyweds that ''dishonor'' to one's spouse is ''in a
sense a form of honor.''

The family at center stage, the Newquists, is a grotesque matrix of unchecked,
if sublimated, aggressions. Mom (Frances Sternhagen) cloaks her most hostile
feelings within the cliches of matronly domesticity: A dinnertime ''Come and get
it!'' sounds like a summons to the trenches. Dad (MacIntyre Dixon) is so
insecure about his masculinity that he refuses to answer to his first name
(Carol) and regards any man's refusal to order a stiff drink as prima facie
evidence of effiminacy. He fails to notice that his own son (Fisher Stevens)
shows a flair for transvestism or that his daughter, Patsy (Christine Lahti),
wears the household's pants.

Patsy remains the difficult crux of the play; like other Feiffer heroines, this
independent woman raises feminist issues without always resolving them to
knee-jerk satisfaction. She's a monstrous version of the spoiled middle-class
princess - the kind of strong and strong-arming woman who, in the author's view,
drives weaker men to figurative and perhaps literal war. ''If you don't fight,
you don't feel!'' says Miss Lahti, whose spectacularly uninhibited, very funny
performance suggests what might have happened if Marjorie Morningstar or Philip
Roth's Brenda Patimkin had never been socialized at a country club. Let Patsy
get anywhere near her father or brother, and the Newquists act out Freud's worst
fears of destructive familial lusts with a lack of self-awareness riotous to
behold.

John Tillinger's direction, as one would expect from an expert in the
contemporaneous (and even grimmer) comedies of Joe Orton, is keenly sensitive to
the playwright's intentions. Aside from sloppily punctuating the staging at the
curtain of each act, Mr. Tillinger falters only in his pro forma choices of
period rock songs to bridge the scenes and in his needlessly exaggerated
characterization of Mr. Stevens's son. The performances of the lethally prim
Miss Sternhagen and the pathologically passive Mr. Beckel rival Miss Lahti's.
Though Mr. Nussbaum is perfect as the judge, he proves repetitive as the craven
minister and, later, as a frazzled detective who blames the city's 345 unsolved
murders on an ominous conspiracy uniting the powerful and the lowly, the left
and the right, whites and blacks.

In 1987 one can, at least, take some solace in the fact that the characters'
nightmarish antidotes to that ''conspiracy'' - mass arrests, electronic
surveillance, compulsory haircuts -have lost some currency in the intervening
years. That we laugh at ''Little Murders'' anyway is bleak proof that too many
other crimes in Mr. Feiffer's prescient vision of the late 1960's remain on the
books, visible to everyone but as yet no easier to solve.

CITY LOWLIGHTS - LITTLE MURDERS, by Jules Feiffer; directed by John Tillinger;
set design, Andrew Jackness; lighting design, Natasha Katz; costume design,
Candice Donnelly; sound design, Gary Harris; hair design, Antonio Soddu;
production stage manager, Neal Ann Stephens; stage manager, David Lawrence
Folender. Presented by the Second Stage, Robyn Goodman and Carole Rothman,
artistic directors. At 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street.
Marjorie Newquist...Frances Sternhagen
Kenny Newquist...Fisher Stevens
Carol Newquist...MacIntyre Dixon
Patsy Newquist...Christine Lahti
Alfred Chamberlain...Graham Beckel
The Judge, Henry Dupas and Miles Practice Mike Nussbaum

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 7, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEWS;
IN 'MARGUERITE DURAS,' PORTRAIT OF THE AUTHOR

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 549 words


WNET's current package of French subjects and themes, given the urgently bubbly
title of ''Vive la France!,'' is turning to some terribly serious profiles over
the next few weeks. On tap: Marguerite Duras, Jean Genet, Simone de Beauvoir and
Jean-Paul Sartre.

Tonight's hourlong portrait, on Channel 13 at 11 o'clock, is called ''Marguerite
Duras'' and was made in England in 1985 for London Weekend Television. The
producer is Hilary Chadwick, the director Daniel Wiles and the ''editor and
presenter'' Melvyn Bragg. The tone and style of the piece, though, is thoroughly
French as Ms. Duras herself, writer and film maker, is interviewed on camera.
The author, 70 years old at the time of the interview, comments on her childhood
and adolescence in Vietnam and connects certain real incidents to passages from
her novel ''The Lover.'' Giving the proceedings an added reality-illusion fillip
is the occasional presence of an actress, Elizabeth Rider, who portrays a
younger Ms. Duras reading from her works.

Breaking through the rather elaborate structure of the documentary, the viewer
will indeed learn an awful lot about Ms. Duras. She was born in 1914, her family
technically part of Indochina's white ruling elite but far from rich. Widowed
early on, her mother was ''haunted by poverty'' and then driven near madness
when cheated on a land purchase by ''corrupt French officials.'' Young
Marguerite had two brothers, the older one a bully, the other a weakling with
''a kind of shadow over him, perhaps a little retarded.'' It was a family of
stone, she recalls, ''never any need for talk - silent, distant.''

At the age of 15 1/2, she would begin an affair with a young Chinese man, an
affair that would be condemned strongly by her mother and the rest of society.
The situation would provide a major motif in much of her work later on. In
''Hiroshima Mon Amour,'' for instance, made into a brilliant film by Alain
Resnais, the central character of the Frenchwoman tells her Japanese lover of
her Nazi lover during the war. The character recalls how her head was shaved and
she was confined to a cellar prison, watching the rest of the community pass by
overhead, silent and distant.

Ms. Duras moved to France in 1932. Later, the Nazi occupation of France would
teach her ''the nature of oppression.'' It left her with the unshakeable
conviction that man is essentially evil. This is the conviction at the core of
her work, including her more controversial films. Scenes are included here from
two of her more unusual efforts. ''India Song'' made in 1975, used superimposed
dialogue recorded before actual filming began. The actors were thus freed from
the script, which Ms. Duras feels has the effect of making the words more
important. In any event, the very same soundtrack was used the following year to
make a completely different film, ''Her Venetian Name in Calcutta Desert,'' with
a new set of images.

Still picking at the psychological scabs of her early years, Ms. Duras can
sometimes sound very pretentious and very French (''my little brother was
immortal, and we hadn't noticed''). But beneath her handful of preoccupations,
or rather obsessions, there is a serious and fascinating artist at work. This
often odd little film establishes that much quite convincingly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Marguerite Duras (Helene Bamberger)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
The Divine Right

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 732 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


If there were any wisps of doubt about the Reagan Administration's involvement
in arming the Nicaraguan contras, the first few days of Congressional hearings
have blown them away. Ambassadors, C.I.A. agents and lawyers, Director William
Casey and numerous White House staff members played vital parts in the covert
operation.

Richard Secord was utterly convincing when he said that to his knowledge he was
carrying out President Reagan's policy. As a Wall Street Journal editorial put
it, ''No one believes Marlin Fitzwater [the White House spokesman] when he
claims that the President didn't know about public and private efforts to keep
the contras going after Congress suspended funding.''

All that may seem no more than proving the obvious. But it has a dramatic
consequence. It requires the supporters of Mr. Reagan's policy to argue that he
was entitled to carry it out despite the law.

In other words, the Iran-contra hearings have quickly brought us to a radical
constitutional claim. It is that the President has plenary power in foreign
policy, not subject to limitation by law.

That may sound like an extreme view of Presidential power under the
Constitution. It would give Presidents, on the greatest issues of war and peace,
something like the divine right of kings. But Ronald Reagan's supporters have
not shied away from making the claim.

The editorial page of The Wall Street Journal is no doubt the most widely
circulated expression of what can be called intellectual conservatism: the
movement that led to the Reagan Presidency. And The Journal has gone all out in
arguing the proposition that Ronald Reagan has the right to do what he wants in
Nicaragua, no matter what laws there are.

This week The Journal descibed the Boland amendments - first limiting and then
forbidding official U.S. arms supplies to the contras - as ''patently
unconstitutional.'' That must mean that the Constitution does not allow Congress
to put limits on the money it appropriates in the foreign policy area.

In historical terms it is hard to imagine a more amazing claim. For the power of
the purse is the fundamental power of the legislative branch.

The Constitution itself built on English history in that regard: the long
struggle for parliamentary supremacy over the monarchy. The issue in that
struggle was Parliament's right to decide how much the Government should spend
and for what purposes.

As recently as the Vietnam War the basic premise of Congress's right to act
through the power of the purse was underlined. When opponents of the war argued
that Congress had never formally declared war, Presidents Johnson and Nixon and
their aides countered that Congress had supported the war with funds - and could
always limit those funds or their use. And Congress did impose many limitations.

Last fall a Wall Street Journal editorial argued in effect that the President's
military power could override all those niceties. It said that Mr. Reagan should
have dealt with the Nicaraguan situation more candidly, by saying: ''I send the
money to the contras in pursuit of my powers as commander-in-chief.''

That argument was rejected by the Supreme Court 35 years ago. When President
Truman seized the country's steel mills to prevent a strike during the Korean
War, the Court said he could not rely on some inherent ''war power'' to do what
Congress had not authorized him to do.

The whole argument is staggering to someone brought up in a day when
conservatives feared autocratic power in the Presidency. Conservatives thought
then that law was the great protecter of American freedom.

The old-fashioned view was movingly expressed in Robert Bolt's play about Sir
Thomas More, ''A Man for All Seasons.'' More's son-in-law, Roper, protests when
More lets an enemy go because he has violated no law. To get at the Devil, Roper
says, he would ''cut down every law in England.''

''Oh?'' says More. ''And when the last law was down, and the Devil turned round
on you - where would you hide, Roper, the laws being flat? This country's
planted thick with laws from coast to coast - Man's laws, not God's - and if you
cut them down . . . d'you really think you could stand upright in the winds that
would blow then?''

That was the view, the necessary supremacy of law, that animated the Framers of
our Constitution. It is the view being tested in the Iran-contra hearings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Robert E. Tomasson

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1064 words




Friday

BAROQUE MARATHON

A four-hour concert without intermission might seem like an endurance test to
all except the most devoted concertgoers. But when Lukas Foss introduced
marathon performances 15 years ago after taking over as music director of the
Brooklyn Philharmonic, audiences greeted them with delight. The concept, more
familiar to Europeans than to Americans, is to immerse the audience in the music
of one period. Rather than the traditional concert timetable that allows for
little variation - you arrive at a set time and do not visit the refreshment
stand before intermission - the marathon performances allow for greater
variations. The marathon sessions are returning tonight, tomorrow and Sunday to
the Opera House of the Brooklyn Academy of Music in a presentation of Baroque
music in all its diversity. There will be instrumental, vocal, solo and
orchestral works from 17th- and 18th-century Germany, France and Italy,
including music by Bach, Handel, Monteverdi, Rameau, Purcell, Biber, Scarlatti
and Telemann. Each program will begin with an hour and a half of solos and
pieces for small chamber and choral ensembles followed by two and a half hours
of music for orchestra, chorus and soloists. The concession stands will be open
throughout the concerts. The Baroque concerts are 7 to 11 tonight and tomorrow
and 1 to 5 P.M. on Sunday. Tickets, at $20, $16 and $10, may be charged through
Teletron, 947-5850, or at the box office. The Brooklyn Academy of Music is at 30
Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place. Information: (718) 636-4120.

CANADIAN PASTICHE

With their comments to the audience, to one another and to themselves, the
members of the Canadian Brass quintet - two trumpeters, a French hornist, a
trombonist and a tuba player - are perhaps as well known for their comedy and
their often irreverent approach to classical music as they are for their more
traditional renderings. They combine all those elements in concerts that have
tickled audiences around the world. The Canadian Brass will return for an 8
o'clock concert at Avery Fisher Hall tonight with a program of Purcell's Trumpet
Sonata, selections by Bach, Vivaldi and George Gershwin, and, as always, several
spontaneous diversions. Tickets are $20, $15 and $10 and may be purchased at the
box office (874-2424), or through Center Charge, 874-6770.

YEVTUSHENKO READING

Yevgeny Yevtushenko has described the function of poetry in his native Russia
before and after the Revolution as a sort of spiritual newspaper in which the
unspoken thoughts and feelings of the country have been expressed despite
traditionally strong censorship. In addition to expressing himself powerfully in
his poetry, Mr. Yevtushenko reads dramatically, in Russian and occasionally in
English. The poet will read from his works at 8 tonight at the Martin Luther
King Jr. High School, Amsterdam Avenue at 65th Street. His Russian will be
translated by Albert Todd, who has known the poet for 25 years. Admission is $9
at the door. Information: 219-2527.

Saturday

ASIAN CULTURAL SALUTE

The ninth annual Asian-Pacific American Heritage Festival, a melange of Asian
foods, crafts and cultural activities, will be held from noon to 7 P.M. Saturday
in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center. Americans whose roots are in China, Japan,
the Philippines, Vietnam, Cambodia, India, Tibet, Korea, Indonesia and the
Pacific islands will be represented through dances, music, martial arts and
other displays. In addition to traditional events, there will be some
performances that reflect American influence, such as an Asian rock band playing
music with both Eastern and Western antecedents. In case of rain, the festival
will be held on Sunday. There is no admission charge. Information: 744-6214.

BROOKLYN ART SHOW

One of New York's most scenic perches turns into one of the city's more
established art exhibitions as the Promenade Art Show returns for the 18th year
to the Brooklyn Heights Promenade, encompassing Remsen to Clark Streets
overlooking the harbor and lower Manhattan. About 150 artists and craftsmen will
be exhibiting their works - from traditional to avant-garde - in a wide range of
prices. The juried show, sponsored by BACA/the Brooklyn Arts Council, will run
from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. Saturday and Sunday. There is no admission charge. The
rain dates are May 16 and 17. Information: (718) 783-3077 or (718) 783-4469.

A KING'S LEGACY

In the 17th century, King Philip IV of Spain inaugurated the practice of
commissioning dramatists and composers to write operettas in celebration of
royal events. The pieces usually were performed at the palace of Zarzuela, a
royal country seat outside Madrid. The golden age of the Spanish operetta came a
century later, but the compositions retained the name of the site of their early
performances. ''La Zarzuela,'' an anthology of 34 songs from the most famous
Spanish operettas, will be presented Saturday at the Equitable Tower on Seventh
Avenue at 52d Street. The 8 P.M. concert will be performed by 16 singers and a
chamber orchestra. Tickets are $16 and may be reserved and charged by calling
889-2850.

Sunday

MUSICAL CORNUCOPIA

For 12 hours, from 2 P.M. Sunday to 2 A.M. Monday, 28 musical groups will be
performing mostly avant-garde music at Exit Art, at 578 Broadway, near Prince
Street. Entitled ''Bang on a Can'' and with city, state and Federal financing,
the festival will present music representing an eclectic mix of composers and
styles. It will also feature 12 premieres, including the first American
performance of Stravinsky's two-piano transcription of his work ''Agon.''
Admission is $10 at the door for any portion of the concert, and re-entry is
permitted. Information: 966-7745.

PARK AVENUE FESTIVAL

More than 150 antiques dealers will crowd Park Avenue South from 23d to 32d
Streets with displays of fine furniture, art, silver, glassware, china, jewelry,
books and prints, toys and all the doodads that make up an outdoor antiques
show. It is the eighth annual Park Avenue Festival, and it will operate from 11
A.M. to 6 P.M. on Sunday. In addition, there will be food stands and comedy in
the form of the Mothers of Mirth, a group of stand-up comics who will perform
from 2 to 4:30 P.M. The rain date is May 17. There is no admission charge.
Information: 684-4077.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: MARTIN KOVE IN 'STEELE JUSTICE'

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 465 words


''STEELE JUSTICE'' isn't designed as a comedy, but it does earn high marks for
inadvertent humor. This is thanks in part to the writer and director, Robert
Boris, whose ''Oxford Blues'' was no laughing matter but who this time has tried
to meld ''Rambo'' with ''Miami Vice,'' throwing in a touch of the Chippendale's
calendar. The last is evoked by the presence of Martin Kove, the big, burly,
smirking fellow in the title role.

Mr. Kove wears a Band-Aid across the bridge of his nose during much of the film,
and it is by far the most expressive thing on his face. ''Steele Justice,''
which opens today at the U.A. Twin and other theaters, does feature a nice
perfororncn frfm t Sinaloan milk snake in the cast, but there is substantially
worse work from everyone else.

The action begins in Vietnam, where Mr. Kove, as John Steele, appears as a small
boy's idea of a living, breathing Rambo doll, wearing elaborate war paint and
flexing his muscles at the enemy. Years later, the same evil Vietnamese officer
who taunted Steele in the opening sequence has turned up as a drug kingpin in
Los Angeles, and Steele is still without a shirt. Indeed, one episode depicting
a vicious attack on Steele's best friend and his family positions Steele in the
bathtub as the shootings occur, so that he can race into the street as
decoratively as possible, wearing only his blue jeans.

Steele's friend is then simultaneously referred to as ''murdered'' and
''fighting for his life in the hospital.'' In any case, he leaves behind a sweet
young daughter who wears pigtails but looks at least 15 years older than she is
supposed to be. At one point, this daughter sits down at the piano and appears
to play Beethoven without moving her hands.

Other comic highlights include the shooting of a dance team engaged in making a
horrible rock video and Steele's attempts to reverse the effects of a poison
dart. He rips off his shirt, sucks the wound, attacks it with a knife, then
cauterizes it with a hot frying pan, thus making both movie and medical history.


A Snake Stars

STEELE JUSTICE, directed and written by Robert Boris; director of photography,
John M. Stephens; edited by John O'Connor and Steve Rosenblum; music by Misha
Segal; production designer, Richard N. McGuire; produced by John Strong;
released by Atlantic Releasing Corporation.

At U.A. Twin, Broadway and 49th Street; 23d Street West Triplex, near Eighth
Avenue; Movie Center 5, 125th Street between Powell and Douglass Boulevard, and
other theaters. Running time: 95 minutes. This film is rated R. John
Steele...Martin Kove; Tracy...Sela Ward; Bennett...Ronny Cox; Reese...Bernie
Casey; Harry...Joseph Campanella; Gen. Bon Soong Kwan...Soon-Teck Oh; Cami...Jan
Gan Boyd; Kelso...David Froman; Kay...Sarah Douglas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'GARDENS OF STONE' PORTRAYS VIETNAM ERA

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 32, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1077 words


IN the initial sequence of ''Gardens of Stone,'' Francis Coppola's screen
version of Nicholas Proffitt's novel, the camera observes the procedures of a
military funeral at Arlington National Cemetery with dispassionate, reportorial
efficiency.

Against rolling green lawns covered by long, neat rows of white headstones and,
here and there, clumps of fine old trees heavy with foliage, a funeral cortege
moves toward a new grave site - the honor guard, the caisson bearing the
flag-draped coffin, the riderless horse, followed by mourners.

The day is cloudless and still. There is comfort in this natural beauty and in
the discipline of the rituals, even in the commands barked to the seemingly
faceless members of the honor guard. As if in a reverie, these isolated sounds
give way to those of helicopter rotors chopping the air, of voices heard on
walkie-talkies, of the desperation and chaos of battle.

Then, as arbitrarily, the sounds of ceremony reassert themselves. A bagpiper
plays. Words of consolation are spoken. Before the coffin is lowered into the
grave, the flag is removed, folded and presented to the widow, ''at the request
of the President.''

In these moments in which the peace of the present is layered with desolation
from the past, and in a few other sequences that come later, there is an
emotional resonance in ''Gardens of Stone'' that is otherwise remarkably absent.
Though a seriously conceived film about the American experience in Vietnam,
''Gardens of Stone'' has somehow wound up having the consistency and the kick of
melted vanilla ice cream.

The movie, set in 1968 and 1969, attempts to examine the meaning of the Vietnam
War entirely through the eyes of the members of the ''Old Guard,'' the
stateside-based elite Army unit whose duties include Presidential escorts and
military funerals at Arlington. The problem is that these men, though decent,
aren't very interesting as described by the film. Their world is small and arid.
There's no sense of contrast between what they do in what they call ''the
garden,'' and the hopeless war being fought overseas. When they talk, it's
mostly in the sentimental-obscene language of service-comedy palship.

Chief among these men in Sgt. Clell Hazard (James Caan), a decorated veteran of
World War II, Korea and two Vietnam tours, a man with 27 years of service who
now finds himself at war with the Army he thinks of as his family.

Hazard opposes the war, not on political grounds - he has no sympathy with the
peaceniks and marches on the Pentagon - but because it's a war ''without a
front, with nothing to win and no way to win it.'' The ultimate loser, he feels,
must be the Army itself.

At the start of ''Gardens of Stone,'' Hazard has been living in a kind of
furious stasis. Abandoned some years before by his wife and son, he attends to
his ceremonial job during the day and, in his off hours, depends on the company
of Sgt. Maj. Goody Nelson (James Earl Jones).

Things change with the arrival of Jackie Willow (D. B. Sweeney), a recruit who
happens to be the son of a man with whom Hazard served in World War II and
Korea. In Willow, Hazard sees not only the son his wife has taken from him, but
also the exemplification of the young, gung-ho soldier the Army is
systematically destroying in a cause that is as lost as it's unpopular. Willow
longs to see action and, at last, he does.

Clell is the film's only fully realized character and Mr. Caan, in his first
movie in five years, plays him with humor and intensity, like the veteran he now
is. There's exhaustion, disappointment and confusion written into his
still-strong features.

However, the performance is largely wasted in ''Gardens of Stone,'' about which
it would be praise to say that it has too many things on its mind. In fact, it's
simply unfocused and clumsily composed. There's occasional poignancy but, too
often, what are supposed to be dramatic confrontations are just exchanges of
plot information.

In adapting the Proffitt novel, Ronald Bass hasn't written a screenplay but a
collection of synopses for three or four films. In addition to the relationship
between Clell and Jackie Willow, the film is also about Clell's affair with an
antiwar newspaper reporter (Anjelica Huston), and Jackie's romance with the
daughter (Mary Stuart Masterson) of a colonel who doesn't approve of her
alliance with an enlisted man.

It's a mystery why Mr. Coppola, one of the most efficient writers in Hollywood,
came to direct such a screenplay, one that's alternately lame and utterly
confusing. Possibly he tried to improve things, but the movie builds to no
point. It unravels. There's not a shred of feeling between Clell and young
Jackie Willow, a character to which Mr. Sweeney brings no distinctive
personality. He's a foolish zero. Largely because of their screen presences,
there are found moments of emotion in some of the Caan-Huston encounters, which,
in terms of their characters, are unbelievable.

Mr. Jones, almost Buddha-shaped in this film, is likable as Clell's best friend,
but it's the sort of role that wouldn't have been out of place in ''The Phil
Silvers Show.'' Miss Masterson and her real-life parents, Carlin Glynn and Peter
Masterson (who play her parents in the film), contribute a bit of class.

The most important missing ingredient is Mr. Coppola. ''Gardens of Stone'' is,
finally, so commonplace that one longs for even the inappropriate grandeur of
''Rumble Fish'' and ''The Outsiders.''

The film opens today at the Tower East and other theaters.

INFERTILE FIELD - GARDENS OF STONE, directed by Francis Coppola; screenplay by
Ronald Bass, based on the novel by Nicholas Proffitt; director of photography,
Jordan Cronenweth; edited by Barry Malkin; music by Carmine Coppola; producion
designer, Dean Tavoularis; produced by Michael I. Levy and Mr. Coppola; released
by Tri Star Pictures. At Paramount, 61st Street and Broadway; Tower East, Third
Avenue and 71st Street; Movieland Eighth Street Triplex, at University Place.
Running time: 112 minutes. This film is rated R.
Clell Hazard...James Caan
Samantha Davis...Anjelica Huston
Goody Nelson...James Earl Jones
Jackie Willow...D. B. Sweeney
Homer Thomas...Dean Stockwell
Rachel Feld...Mary Stuart Masterson
Slasher Williams...Dick Anthony Williams
Betty Rae...Lonette McKee
Lieutenant Webber...Sam Bottoms
Pete Deveber...Elias Koteas
Colonel Feld...Peter Masterson
Mrs. Feld...Carlin Glynn

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of James Caan

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Veterans Charge U.S. Seeks to Harass Them

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 17, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 192 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 7


The Federal Government is trying to harass the Vietnam Veterans of America by
issuing a subpoena demanding virtually all the organization's communications
with Congress, clients and reporters, officials of the group said today.

''This is a clear attempt to shut down the organization,'' said Michael Leaveck,
a spokesman for the organization. ''They're out to not only harass us but to try
to tie us down so that we can't do the things we've been doing in calling
attention to some real abuses of power.''

Officials of both the Veterans Administration and Justice Department would not
comment on the subpoena or charges made by representatives of the 35,000-member
group.

The subpoena, served Wednesday, seeks documents to help defend the V.A. in a
lawsuit filed in the Federal District Court in San Francisco by the National
Association of Radiation Survivors, a group of veterans who say they developed
cancer and other serious illnesses because of exposure to early testing of
atomic weapons. They are challenging the constitutionality of a law that
prohibits veterans from paying lawyers more than $10 to handle their cases at
V.A. hearings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PAUL POPHAM, 45, A FOUNDER OF AIDS ORGANIZATION, DIES

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section D; Page 17, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 338 words


Paul Graham Popham, a decorated Vietnam veteran and a founder of the Gay Men's
Health Crisis, died of complications from AIDS yesterday at the Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. He was 45 years old.

Mr. Popham was president of the Gay Men's Health Crisis, an educational,
advisory and advocacy organization for AIDS patients, from 1981 to 1985. He also
helped found the AIDS Action Council, a lobbying organization in Washington, and
was chairman of the group.

Mr. Popham was born in Emmett, Idaho. He graduated from Portland (Ore.) State
College.

In 1966, as a first lieutenant in the Fifth Air Cavalry in Vietnam, he was
decorated with the Bronze Star for valor after his platoon had served as a lure
for North Vietnamese soldiers. In the firefight, a North Vietnamese unit was
destroyed, according to Mr. Popham's brother, David, of Boise, Idaho.

Paul Popham retired as a Special Forces major in the Army Reserve in 1969, after
having led a psychological warfare unit in the United States, his brother said.

Newspaper Article on AIDS

From 1969 until 1980, Mr. Popham worked for the Irving Trust Company, leaving as
a vice president, He joined McGraw-Hill Inc., where he was general manager of a
division.

David Popham and friends of Paul Popham said Mr. Popham never took an active
political role until he read a newspaper article in 1981 about the disease that
became known as AIDS.

''His history had been quite the opposite from a gay activist,'' the president
of the Gay Men's Health Crisis, Richard D. Dunne, said. ''It was only an issue
like AIDS that galvanized people like Paul.''

Mr. Popham was one of a half-dozen founders of the group and remained active in
that organization and in the lobbying group until his illness, diagnosed in
February 1985, became too severe, friends said.

Also surviving are his mother, Muriel Wood of Sun City, Calif., and two sisters,
Nancy Veenker and Marilyn Jones, both of Portland. His longtime companion was
Richard Dulong.

Services will be held in Portland.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Paul Graham Popham

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 9, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Veterans to March

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 51 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, May 8


More than 200,000 Vietnam veterans are expected to link arms and march through
Houston on May 23 in what organizers believe will be the biggest celebration yet
for those who served in the war. Gen. William Westmoreland, who commanded United
States forces in Vietnam in the 1960's, is to lead the parade.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 9, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

On Justice;
Sentencing Commission Needs Tenure

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 362 words


To the Editor:

In your editorial ''Fumbling Forward on Federal Crime'' (April 27), you make a
number of criticisms of the United States Sentencing Commission and then object
that ''the commissioners, so prone to fumbles, [will] remain as a permanent
body, with power to revise sentences every year. They have not earned that kind
of authority.'' In truth, the commission's early efforts have not been
auspicious, but this is a cheap shot. More important, your suggestion that the
commission be denied authority to revise its guidelines periodically is severely
misguided.

Nothing would be more dangerous than sentencing guidelines cast in stone because
they would combine rigidity with irrevocability. Almost all serious commentators
have recognized that sentencing guideline systems will need regular review both
to reflect changing community values and to provide a safety valve against
prison overcrowding. Particularly at the time that sentencing guidelines are
introduced, a ''feedback loop'' is essential to assure that misestimates about
the impact of guidelines can be quickly corrected.

The American Bar Association's Standards on Sentencing Alternatives and
Procedures (for which I served as Reporter) strongly support the need for
continuing normative review and revision of guidelines. Community attitudes
toward particular crimes can change rapidly. To understand this point, consider
whether we would today be satisfied with guide-lines based on the historical
average sentence imposed for insider trading (which historically was very low)
or for marijuana possession (which once was quite high). Similarly, the typical
sentences given for selective service violations during the Korean War might
strike most as too severe if imposed on Vietnam-era draft resisters.

Justice should be blind, but not stupid. Denying the Sentencing Commission the
ability to revise its guidelines from time to time and to monitor their impact
would be to make justice stupid by making it inflexible.

JOHN C. COFFEE JR.
Palo Alto, Calif., April 29, 1987
  The writer is Adolf A. Berle Professor of Law at Columbia, visiting professor
at Stanford Law School.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 9, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Sky Crane Gives an Old Friend a Lift

SECTION: Section 2; Page 33, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 77 words


A CH-54 cargo helicopter, on loan from the Connecticut National Guard, carrying
an outmoded Coast Guard HH-52 helicopter yesterday in a demonstration of lifting
capability. The Sky Crane is part of an exhibition this week-end called ''
Vietnam, the Helicopter War'' at the sea-air-space museum on board the carrier
Intrepid at the foot of West 46th Street. The Coast Guard helicopter is to
become a permanent part of the aircraft collection. (NYT/Keith Meyers)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Video Sentences in Hanoi

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 14, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 57 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 8


A Hanoi court sentenced one man to prison and gave two men suspended sentences
for showing pornographic videos for profit, a Vietnamese radio broadcast said.
The verdict last Monday from a Hanoi people's court was ''a warning knell'' to
all those with videotapes and recorders that they must follow state regulations,
the Hanoi radio said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
GUN MOVIES: BIG BORE AND SMALL CALIBER

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 956 words


IT'S TIME TO COME TO THE DEFENSE of the American moviegoing public, too often
and too glibly characterized as a collective cretin with the taste of a
12-year-old and the brain of a gnat. In fact, the American moviegoing public is
incredibly sophisticated. It's an organism so sensitive that, within a few
weeks, it can discern the difference between Sylvester Stallone in ''Rambo,''
stripped to the waist and carrying enough live ammo to refight the Vietnam War,
and Sylvester Stallone in ''Over the Top,'' in which the fully dressed star
plays an arm wrestler with heart.

An arm wrestler? Heart? If Sylvester Stallone fans want heart they'll stay home,
drink beer and watch ''The Cosby Show.''

In spite of the title and its associations with World War I and trench warfare,
and in spite of Mr. Stallone's successful recent appearances in ''Rocky'' and
''Rambo'' movies, the American public did not buy ''Over the Top.'' It opened in
February and died in April, a record only ''Howard the Duck'' could envy. Mr.
Stallone has gotten the message. Principal photography on ''Rambo III'' begins
in September.

Even more impressive is the way the public is differentiating among ''Lethal
Weapon,'' ''Extreme Prejudice'' and ''Malone,'' three violent action movies
whose virtues and vices can be appreciated by only the most discriminating. To
the rest of us, each is cut from the same bolt of polyester.

''Lethal Weapon'' is about two tough Los Angeles police detectives who, after
following a lot of false leads and racking up a high body count, bust a drug
ring. ''Extreme Prejudice'' is about a tough Texas Ranger who, after following a
lot of false leads and racking up a high body count, busts a drug ring.
''Malone'' is offbeat, being about a former law officer who busts a ring of
fascists planning to take over the Government.

However, the politics of ''Malone'' are merely decor. All three films are
equally about guns - handguns - their beauty in repose, how to use and abuse
them and what people look like when they're shot - fatally in the head or chest
or merely wounded with shots to the side or to a limb or a digit.

Yet ''Lethal Weapon'' is a smash hit and ''Extreme Prejudice'' is extremely
iffy, while ''Malone'' seems to have been judged a loser by its distributors
even before it arrived in town.

''Malone,'' starring Burt Reynolds, who's usually a popular guy with a gun, was
booked into one of the tinier (250-seat) auditoriums in the Criterion Center on
Times Square, which, you might think, would be heart of ''Malone'' country.
Apparently not. At the first show on opening day, one could have played
paddleball in the theater without appearing to be unruly. Mr. Reynolds plays the
title character, Malone, who, like Mel Gibson in ''Lethal Weapon,'' is a lethal
weapon in himself. In effect, Malone is a gun.

My problem with these films is that I have to work hard to appreciate their
subtle differences. ''Malone'' was filmed mostly in the scenic Northwest, so the
backgrounds don't look like those either in ''Extreme Prejudice,'' which is set
in Texas and Mexico, or in ''Lethal Weapon,'' set in Los Angeles. ''Malone''
also features Lauren Hutton as sex interest for Mr. Reynolds, though she's on
and off the screen in a jiffy.

''Extreme Prejudice'' is, I suspect (though I'm not entirely sure), movie making
of a slightly higher order. It was directed by Walter Hill (''The Warriors,''
''Streets of Fire''), with a melodramatic humorlessness that, being unsupported
by the screenplay, is frequently funnier than he seems to realize.

Nick Nolte plays the dedicated Ranger and Maria Conchita Alonso is the mistress
he neglects in favor of his life with his gun. ''Jack,'' says Miss Alonso at a
critical moment in their relationship, ''I have to know where you and me are
going, and how long it takes to get there.'' Such talk gets her nowhere. She
runs off to her former lover (Powers Boothe), who's also Jack's former best
friend, turned drug smuggler.

The showdown, a badly edited parody of the ''blood ballet'' that climaxed Sam
Peckinpah's classic ''Wild Bunch,'' reunites the two buddies and their guns
while Miss Alonso looks on - helplessly, of course.

''Lethal Weapon,'' directed with a good deal of intentional humor by Richard
Donner, opens by cross-cutting between the off-duty lives of its two hero cops.
Danny Glover plays the 50-year-old head of a Bill Cosby household, complete with
wisecracking kids, a pretty, understanding wife, who's a terrible cook
(joke-joke, nudge-nudge), and a pretty house that looks unlived in.

His white partner, Mr. Gibson, a suicidal widower, sits alone in a trailer,
getting drunk and fondling his service revolver. At one point he sticks the
barrel in his mouth - and the camera cuts to a close-up of his finger on the
trigger. Though this is the opening scene of the movie, and reason tells one
that he can't commit suicide yet, Mr. Gibson has such intensity as an actor that
it's a legitimately scary moment.

After that, ''Lethal Weapon'' isn't exactly downhill. It's cross-country,
through a landscape of simulated mayhem and brutality, featuring the same car
chases that one has seen in the other films. There's no sex whatsoever. The most
erotic gesture in ''Lethal Weapon,'' as in ''Extreme Prejudice'' and ''Malone,''
is the way that the rear end of every automobile sways from side to side, like
Marilyn Monroe's hips, after making a short, tire-screeching turn.

Being about nothing more than their stories, these movies have even demystified
guns. Symbolism can't survive in such arid circumstances. A gun is now loved and
envied because it's a gun, representative of absolutely nothing except its own
gunliness. We may be poorer for that.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION;
Nixon Files Yield A Wealth of Detail

BYLINE: By MARTHA A. MILES AND CAROLINE RAND HERRON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 262 words


There were memorandums on how to ''paint . . . black'' such opponents as Edward
M. Kennedy, George McGovern and Daniel Ellsberg. There was a proposal from
Richard M. Nixon to try to uncover ''some of the real crooks on the highest
court and in some of the other Federal courts.'' There were ideas - from William
H. Rehnquist, now Chief Justice, for example - on how to crack down on campus
radicals.

But the expurgated documents from the Nixon White House's ''Special Files'' that
were made public last week added nothing startling, researchers said, to the
record of the three years leading up to Mr. Nixon's resignation in 1974. The
''Special Files'' were the repository of his Administration's most sensitive
notes and memorandums on such matters as the Watergate coverup, efforts to
discredit political rivals and the secret study of the Vietnam War, known as the
Pentagon Papers, that was divulged by Mr. Ellsberg.

Mr. Nixon's attorneys filed more than 3,000 separate objections saying specific
documents were too personal or too invasive of his privacy to be released. The
15,000 pages they challenged were withheld for review, which probably will take
months, an archives spokeswoman said.

In an apparent coincidence, Mr. Nixon returned to the White House last week, at
President Reagan's request, to discuss the arms control negotiations. The White
House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, said the two Presidents did not discuss Mr.
Reagan's troubles with revelations about the Iran-Contra affair, as they did by
telephone in November as the crisis was breaking.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS OF THE TIMES;
Compassion From Connecticut

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 199 words


The stir over the cause of Representative Stewart McKinney's death ought not
distract from his achievements as a public servant. Mr. McKinney, who died last
week at age 56, was a man of compassion. His constituency for 17 years was
Connecticut's ''Gold Coast'' Fairfield County, and he was well to do himself.
But he was distinguished by his concern for the poor and powerless, from
Bridgeport to Saigon.

Mr. McKinney was a liberal Republican; few in his party voted more often than he
did against the Reagan Administration. As a member of the banking committee, he
had a major hand in shaping Federal housing and urban development programs, as
well as aid for New York City and Chrysler. On an issue with little appeal
outside Washington, he co-authored the capital's home rule law 14 years ago.
This year he took on unpaid parental leaves and aid to the homeless.

But the legislation that sets him apart is the Amerasian Immigration Act of
1982, allowing children of American servicemen in Asia to immigrate on the same
basis as the children of citizens.

''These are our children,'' he said, ''abandoned in a society which does not
recognize them as people because they are not pure.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By PATRICIA T. O'CONNER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 949 words



EDITOR TO AUTHOR: The Letters of Maxwell E. Perkins, edited by John Hall
Wheelock. (Scribners, $10.95.) At Charles Scribner's Sons, the editor Maxwell E.
Perkins shepherded into print the works of Wolfe, Fitzgerald, Hemingway and
others. In reviewing this selection from his letters, Alfred A. Knopf said in
The Book Review in 1950 that all the authors ''were devoted to Perkins and none
ever wandered from his or her allegiance. The letters over and over again tell
why. . . . [They] will be of enormous and enduring interest to writers, editors
and publishers everywhere.''

KATE VAIDEN, by Reynolds Price. (Ballantine, $4.95.) Kate Vaiden tells her life
story in retrospect as she sets out, at the age of 57, to find the baby son she
abandoned 40 years earlier. Most of the novel is set in the early-1940's North
Carolina of her youth, and it is ''a forgiving, immensely readable story . . .
almost light in feeling,'' Rosellen Brown said in these pages last year. ''The
voice of Mr. Price's heroine blows like fresh air across the page. . . . [He]
has found a narrator of great charm whose sad story, from which she sets herself
free, sounds (as Kate might say) new as morning.''

EIGHT MEN OUT: The Black Sox and the 1919 World Series, by Eliot Asinof.
(Owl/Holt, $8.95.) Eliot Asinof reconstructs the blackest event in baseball
history - the Chicago Black Sox scandal of 1919, when eight players were accused
of throwing the World Series. In 1963 one reviewer called the book
''comprehensive'' and ''superb'' and said the author ''thoroughly airs the
conditions that made the players' venality possible.''

GIRLS FOREVER BRAVE AND TRUE, by Caryl Rivers. (Pocket, $3.95.) A decade after
high school, two best friends reunite in the Washington of the 1960's, where one
becomes a Capitol Hill gossip columnist and the other is a prize-winning
journalist. In The Book Review in 1986, Kiki Olson said, ''In the seemingly
endless parade of best-selling heroines who are unrealistically beautiful,
wealthy and humorless about having it all -what a pleasure to run into funny,
warm, often confused Peg Morrison and Constance Masters.''

A PIECE OF MY HEART: The Stories of 26 American Women Who Served in Vietnam, by
Keith Walker. (Ballantine, $4.95.) This oral history records the experiences of
26 American women - Red Cross workers, U.S.O. entertainers, Army nurses - in
Vietnam. ''The stories of memories and conflicts tend to run together,'' Marcia
Froelke Coburn said here last year, ''but the emotional current never falters.''


BORDERLINE, by Janette Turner Hospital. (Bantam, $4.50.) The narrator of this
suspense novel is a piano tuner whose stepmother has disappeared after trying to
aid an injured South American alien at a United States-Canada border crossing.
The tale is ''complex and disturbing,'' Cheri Fein said here in 1985, ''a
compelling attempt to go beyond the safe borderlines within which much current
fiction resides.''

PORTRAIT OF AN ARTIST: A Biography of Georgia O'Keeffe, by Laurie Lisle.
(Washington Square/Pocket, $5.95.) This life of Georgia O'Keeffe has been
revised and updated with new material since her death in 1986. In these pages in
1980, Janet Hobhouse described O'Keeffe as ''the matron saint variously of
modernism, regionalism, abstract art and realism, of ecology, women's
liberation, old-fashioned virtue and free love. . . . Invited to do what she
could without her subject's cooperation, Laurie Lisle has amassed the clues to
convey a semblance of the life, curiously unconnected with anything we know of
the artist from her work.''

HARD LAUGHTER, by Anne Lamott. (North Point, $8.95.) Anne Lamott's first novel
is about a Northern California family's struggle to cope when the father is
stricken with a brain tumor. The book's appeal, Anne Tyler said here in 1980, is
''that it has much to say about how a good family works - any good family - in
times both hard and easy. . . . It's a moving and strangely joyful book, a kind
of celebration.''

ON PERSEPHONE'S ISLAND: A Sicilian Journal, by Mary Taylor Simeti. (North Point,
$11.95.) Mary Taylor Simeti, who visited Sicily in the 1960's and ended up
marrying a Sicilian agronomist, offers a month-by-month journal of her 21st year
(1982-83) as an American living there. ''She has constructed an intricate mosaic
of Sicily past and present, historical and personal,'' Ann Cornelisen said here
in 1986, and by year's end ''has told us so much that is fascinating.''

BHOWANI JUNCTION, by John Masters. (Carroll & Graf, $4.50.) John Masters' tale
of India in the late 1940's, on the verge of emancipation and partition, is set
in a railway outpost and centers on a woman who is half-English and the three
men who love her - a railway official who is also half-English, a British
officer and an Indian political leader. In 1954 our reviewer, John Barkham,
praised the book's ''magic of atmosphere, subtlety of character, vigor of
narrative and overtones of meaning.''

KEROUAC: A Biography, by Ann Charters. (St. Martin's, $10.95.) This life of Jack
Kerouac (1922-69) by Ann Charters, who was a friend of the Beat Generation
writer, evokes a lively period in American letters and ''is a pleasure,'' John
Deck said here in 1973. ''It is about men and ideas that changed everything.''

PICTURE PALACE, by Paul Theroux. (Washington Square/Pocket, $4.95.) At 70, Maude
Coffin Pratt, a famous photographer, relives her life and work as she prepares
for a retrospective. Paul Theroux's eighth novel is ''vibrant and compelling,''
Anne Tyler said here in 1978 - largely thanks to ''strong . . . slangy, tough,
blunt, single-minded'' Maude.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Reynolds Price

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Robin L. Reeves Becomes a Bride

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 48, Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 189 words


The marriage of Robin Louise Reeves to Gregory Jannig Zorthian took place
yesterday at St. Thomas' Church, Whitemarsh, in Fort Washington, Pa. The Rev.
Mary E. Laney performed the Episcopal ceremony.

Allison Hillary Reeves was maid of honor for her sister, and Stephen Arnak
Zorthian was his brother's best man.

The bride, a daughter of Prof. and Mrs. Thomas C. Reeves of Glenside, Pa., is a
candidate for an M.B.A. degree at Columbia University. She graduated cum laude
from Yale College and received a master's degree in classics from Somerville
College of Oxford University. Her father is an associate professor of
engineering technology at Temple University.

Mr. Zorthian, a son of Mr. and Mrs. Barry Zorthian of Washington and New York,
graduated from Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., Yale College and the Harvard
Graduate School of Business Administration. He is business manager of Fortune
magazine. His father, a former vice president of Time Inc. and the
minister-counselor for information at the United States Mission in Saigon, South
Vietnam, from 1964 to 1968, is a public-relations consultant in Washington.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AS THE TRIAL OF BARBIE BEGINS, FRANCE ALSO IS BEING JUDGED

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2038 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 10


The Rue Sainte-Catherine in Lyons is one of those European locations that exist
in infamy.

It was there on a winter day 44 years ago that 86 Jews gathered to discuss how
to escape German-occupied France for neutral Switzerland. Instead, they fell
into a Nazi trap.

The Gestapo raided the meeting. The raid was led, according to surviving
witnesses, by a 30-year-old German lieutenant named Klaus Barbie, who was well
known in Lyons for his efficient cruelty.

Trial Absorbs France

The witnesses say he supervised the arrest of all the Jews present. At least 78
were deported to Auschwitz, where all but three were killed.

The roundup on the Rue Sainte-Catherine, as that notorious incident came to be
called, is one of several crimes against humanity charged to Mr. Barbie, the
wartime head of the Gestapo in Lyons. His long-awaited trial is due to start on
Monday.

The trial, taking place more than 40 years after his alleged crimes, has
absorbed, fascinated and disturbed the French as have few other recent events.
It has drawn them into an often anguishing examination of their wartime record,
including the French role in the deportation of 65,000 Jews by the Nazis. Only
2,800 returned.

Nation on Trial Too

Many people here view the Barbie trial as a trial of France itself, whose mixed
record of resistance and collaboration during the German occupation has never
been subject to full public scrutiny.

Mr. Barbie was deported to France four years ago after living for 32 years as a
businessman in Bolivia under a false name. The United States has been criticized
for helping him get to Bolivia after he assisted American military
counterintelligence in Europe for several years after the war.

Mr. Barbie has long been viewed here as one of the most brutal and sadistic Nazi
overlords. He was relatively low-ranking in the Gestapo but had great power to
seek out and dispose of those believed to be enemies of the Third Reich in
France.

A Telling Plaque

A plaque at the Montluc prison in Lyons sums up in a few phrases the Nazi
occupation, which Mr. Barbie has come to symbolize: ''Almost 15,000 men, women
and children were imprisoned here,'' it says, ''hundreds of them tortured - more
than 900 shot or massacred in Lyons and in the entire region - thousands were
deported.''

Mr. Barbie, dubbed ''the butcher of Lyons,'' will be tried on a variety of
charges, including the raid on the Rue Sainte-Catherine and the deportation of
44 Jewish children from Izieu, 50 miles east of Lyons.

French newspapers and magazines have been publishing long accounts of Mr.
Barbie's life, while giving extravagant coverage to his defense lawyer, Jacques
Verges. Mr. Verges is expected to argue that Mr. Barbie was not present at any
of the events attributed to him.

''The old phantoms are coming back 45 years later,'' the headline on the cover
of Nouvel Observateur, a weekly magazine, said two weeks ago, referring to the
likelihood that the trial might focus on collaboration.

''The trial of the SS man Klaus Barbie,'' the magazine said in an article, ''has
plunged us once again into the dark waters of the occupation.''

The French have approached the trial with a mix of satisfaction and anxiety. On
one hand, many welcome the opportunity to bring Mr. Barbie, however belatedly,
to justice, believing it will deepen this country's horror over the Nazi
occupation. Seeking a Sense Of Understanding ''The objective of the trial is to
deepen our understanding of what happened in Lyons and to enable the younger
generation to know and to remember,'' said Henri Nogueres, a historian of the
Resistance and one of 35 lawyers representing a large group of civil plaintiffs
in the case.

At the same time, the sorrowful memories of the war have provoked anguish and a
fear that the trial may prove wrenching and embarrassing for France, bringing to
the surface wounds and quarrels that never entirely disappeared.

''It's going to be an unpleasant month for everybody,'' the director of an art
gallery here said. ''It's a time when everybody is going to have to answer for
themselves the question: What were you doing during the war?''

There seem to be two main worries. One springs from the aggressive defense
expected to be waged on behalf of Mr. Barbie. In many interviews and television
appearances, Mr. Verges has indicated he intends to tarnish the reputation of
France itself. Among other things, he has argued that there were traitors and
collaborators even among the Resistance groups.

Beyond that, there has been opposition to the trial from Jews, including
survivors of the concentration camps, who believe that the courtroom procedure
will trivialize Nazi genocide and remove what is called its ''specificity''
toward the Jews.

Simone Veil, a concentration-camp survivor and former president of the European
Parliament, has argued since Mr. Barbie was brought back to France that to put
him on trial is a serious error. Inevitably, she says, it will blur the
distinction between genocide against the Jews and other wartime atrocities. A
Trivializing Of the Holocaust?

''The only important thing for the trial to do is remind us that millions of
children, women and men were exterminated in a systematic and scientific
fashion, not because of what they did but because of who they were,'' Mrs. Veil
said.

She pointed out that a French appeals court last year overturned an earlier
ruling that would have limited the charges against Mr. Barbie to his actions
against the Jews in Lyons. The indictment now includes several charges of
deportation and torture of members of the Resistance.

Some, like Mrs. Veil, argue that mixing the charges could equalize in the public
mind genocide, in which the victims's only crime was to be Jewish, with crimes
arising out of the brutality of the war.

''For me it is an important issue,'' Mrs. Veil said. ''The danger is that the
Holocaust will be relativized, trivialized, and that would have the effect of
reducing the guilt of the Nazis.''

Yet another worry is that the enormous interest the trial has aroused will
preclude the sober, dispassionate judgments the occasion requires.

About 700 journalists, half of them foreign, are expected to converge on Lyons.
The trial will be held in a renovated great hall of the Palace of Justice, since
no courtroom could hold the expected crowd.

''The great risk, the paradox of this, is the transformation of the trial into
an extraordinary event by the mass media,'' said Alain Finkielkraut, a
well-known writer on Jewish affairs and intellectual history. He Was a Nazi, But
Not a Major Nazi ''Perhaps it's true that France has not reflected enough on its
past, on the collaboration,'' Mr. Finkielkraut went on. ''But I think that a
trial, especially one taking place in the glare of all this publicity, is a bad
way of examining the past. The trial is being treated as though it were a kind
of World Cup soccer match, and the sensationalizing of history is the
antechamber of forgetfulness.''

Specialists and researchers on Nazi affairs, including Serge Klarsfeld, the
French lawyer who campaigned here for Mr. Barbie's extradition, agree that Mr.
Barbie was a relatively minor member among the Nazi chieftains.

As a middle-level Gestapo figure, he lacks the historic importance of Adolph
Eichmann, who was captured, tried and executed by Israel for his role in helping
to carry out genocide against the Jews.

Mr. Barbie was recruited into the secret police in 1935. He was 29 years old
when he was sent in November 1942 to Lyons, where he headed the Gestapo office.

Mr. Barbie's zeal became legendary in Lyons. In 1952 and 1954, he was tried in
absentia for torture, the execution of hostages and deportation of civilians. He
was condemned to death in both trials. Those crimes, covered by a statute of
limitation in France, will not be included in the new trial.

Testimony at the two previous trials portrayed Mr. Barbie as a sadistic fanatic
who enjoyed flaunting the power of life and death over his victims.

Lise Lesevre, a Frenchwoman interrogated and tortured over 19 days by Mr. Barbie
in Montluc prison, said in a recently published book: ''His particular pleasure
was to turn over a victim with the tip of his boot and then crush his face under
his foot, particularly when he thought that he recognized a Jew.'' American
Role: Helping Hand for Barbie Mr. Barbie escaped punishment in the years
immediately after the war.

From 1947 to 1951 he was a paid informant in Germany of the American
counterintelligence corps, which was seeking information on the activities of
former Nazis in Germany and on Soviet efforts to build an intelligence network
in the American zone.

In 1951, a campaign began in France to seek Mr. Barbie's extradition to stand
trial for war crimes. The counterintelligence service, concerned about his
extensive knowledge of American intelligence operations, helped him and his
family escape to Bolivia, where he lived under the false name of Klaus Altmann.

Mr. Barbie was found in 1971 by Beate Klarsfeld, a German-born war-crimes
researcher. She went to Bolivia in 1972 and held a news conference to demand his
extradition to France. Mrs. Klarsfeld and her husband, Serge, waged a public
campaign against Mr. Barbie over the next decade until he was sent to France in
1982.

Much of the fascination that has accompanied the trial's preparation has been
intensified by the tactics expected from Mr. Verges, Mr. Barbie's lawyer. A
radical leftist, he has made a reputation in France by defending most of its
major terrorist suspects.

Mr. Verges has made it clear that he intends to call into question French
behavior, not only during the war but in subsequent periods, such as this
country's long battle against Algerian independence.

He is expected to argue that the accusations against Mr. Barbie are no worse
than those leveled against the French Army, which is said to have tortured
prisoners in Algeria. If French torturers have been amnestied by the Government,
he has said, Mr. Barbie should be too.

Mr. Verges has also argued that Jewish organizations, including the General
Union of French Jews, which was created by the Vichy Government under German
domination, were themselves guilty of collaboration, turning some Jews over to
the Nazis to protect others. 'Everybody Is Guilty, So Nobody Is Guilty'

''The tactic,'' Mrs. Veil has said, ''is to try to show that everything that
ever happened - the Nazi genocide, Hiroshima, Algeria, Vietnam, et cetera - is
all the same. Everybody is guilty, and therefore nobody is guilty.''

Veterans of the resistance are also troubled by another argument by Mr. Verges.
For many years, Mr. Barbie was best known here for a single alleged act, the
torture and murder of Jean Moulin.

Mr. Moulin, the most celebrated Resistance hero, was sent by General de Gaulle
to direct domestic operations against the Nazis.

It has been accepted in France that another Resistance member betrayed Mr.
Moulin to Mr. Barbie. The identity of the supposed traitor, never definitively
established, has embroiled former members of the Resistance in endless
accusations, recriminations, criminal trials and at least one long, complicated
lawsuit.

Mr. Verges, in many public statements, has claimed that Mr. Moulin killed
himself in prison after learning that his closest aides had betrayed him to the
Gestapo.

''And so,'' Le Monde commented recently, ''the Barbie affair is not only going
to reveal an occupied France that was a zealous auxiliary to its occupier, but
also a Resistance capable of turning over one of its own.

''No wonder the Barbie trial is causing fear.''

Nonetheless, many involved in preparing the trial dismiss such fears, arguing
that the threats by Mr. Verges to release embarrassing information is a bluff.

Mr. Klarsfeld argues that France's willingness to hold the trial, with more than
100 of Mr. Barbie's victims present as civil plaintiffs, is a sign that the
fears have been exaggerated.

''I myself am not afraid,'' Mr. Klarsfeld said. ''I bring everything back to the
arrival of one of those trains at Auschwitz. That was something far more
terrible than anything we are likely to encounter.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Charles Libman and Serge Klarsfeld (AP) (page A10)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOUR-STAR BLACK PIONEER

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 242 words


Gen. Daniel (Chappie) James Jr., whom President Reagan honored yesterday at the
dedication of an aerospace and science center at Tuskegee University, was the
first black four-star General of the Air Force.

General James was a former commander of the North American Air Defense Command
who was decorated for his exploits as a fighter pilot in Korea and Vietnam.

As a young man, he studied at Tuskegee and earned a degree in physical
education. While there, he enrolled in a Government program for black pilots. In
his spare time, he practiced stunt flying under the tutelage of his roommate,
Percy Sutton. Mr. Sutton later became Borough President of Manhattan.

General James began his military career in a segregated unit, and as a young
officer, he and several other black pilots were arrested for staging a sit-in at
an all-white officers club at Freeman Field in Seymour, Ind.

As he rose through the ranks he continued to speak out for racial equality. He
said he considered himself a symbol for younger black military personnel.

For five years beginning in 1970, he served in the Pentagon as a spokesman for
the Secretary of Defense. He became commander of the North American Air Defense
Command when he received his fourth star on Sept. 1, 1975. In that post he had
operational command of all United States and Canadian air defense forces.

General James died of a heart attack in Colorado Springs on Feb. 25, 1978. He
was 58 years old.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Daniel James Jr. (UPI)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Black Vietnam Hero Honored

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 76 words

DATELINE: LONG BEACH, Calif., May 10


A Marine sergeant killed in Vietnam when he threw himself on a grenade to save
members of his platoon was honored Saturday as the Navy commissioned its first
ship named after a black recipient of the Medal of Honor. About 1,300 people
gathered at the naval station here for the ceremony for the 453-foot guided
missile frigate Rodney M. Davis. Sergeant Davis was killed Sept. 6, 1967, while
serving with the First Marine Division in Quang Nam Province.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW RITUALS EASE GRIEF AS AIDS TOLL INCREASES

BYLINE: By GEORGIA DULLEA

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1089 words


By monitoring the sky above a certain courtyard on West 11th Street in Greenwich
Village, you can tell when another member of the People With AIDS Coalition has
died.

The courtyard adjoins the small brick house where the People With AIDS Coalition
meets and St. Peter's Episcopal Church where their funerals are sometimes held.
It is there that the survivors gather after a funeral, amid bunches of white
helium balloons. While the weaker ones watch, leaning on canes or in
wheelchairs, the stronger ones release the balloons into the sky in a metaphor
of affirmation.

One man described the ritual as ''our way of letting a friend's spirit soar.''

News of other AIDS deaths appears on the obituary pages. Many of those pictured
achieved fame in their fields while still young. In one recent week the fashion
industry said farewell to two of them - the designer Willi Smith and the
illustrator Antonio Lopez - with spectacular memorials celebrating their lives
and work.

How to Bring Comfort

As the list of deaths grows, so does the feeling among homosexual men that
traditional rituals, which bring comfort when lives end in traditional ways, are
no longer enough. New rituals are emerging to express what only those afflicted
with acquired immune deficiency syndrome or those who care for them can
understand.

''Going to funerals has become a way of life,'' said George Getzel, a Hunter
College social work professor who counsels AIDS patients as a volunteer.
''People in their 70's and 80's experience this but here people in their 20's
and 30's are visiting the sick at homes and in hospitals and burying the dead.
Some are themselves sick. It's become a regularized aspect of the lives of gay
men and others like myself who are involved.''

Some of the rituals are intensely private. In cases of cremation, for example,
friends may mingle the ashes of one partner with those of another who
predeceased him, before dispersing them in a place that had meaning for the
couple.

Maury Hopson, a hairdresser and an executor of Way Bandy's estate, recalled that
the makeup artist was fond of a pine forest by a beach in Key West, Fla. After
his death last August, Mr. Hopson said, ''I scattered Way's ashes there, along
with those of his lover, Michael Gardine, who died a year before.''

Similarly, when one partner dies, friends traditionally visit the other partner
to express sympathy and support. ''People bring flowers, cakes and candies and
sit around reminiscing, laughing and crying,'' said Salvatore Licata, a public
health AIDS educator, whose partner, David Summers, an actor and cabaret singer,
died last November.

These gatherings, as Mr. Licata and others describe them, resemble those of the
heterosexual world. For a partner who has been banned from the funeral by the
family, however, they may represent the only outlet for grief.

''I was hospitalized in Boston when Jon died,'' a 36-year-old photographer
recalled. ''His folks had his body shipped to Texas with orders that I was not
to follow. Walking in the empty apartment was hell, but that night my gay
neighbors came down to sit with me. A couple of straight women on our floor were
there, too. They brought wine and sent out for pizzas. Everybody had a story to
tell about Jon - they loved him. It saved my mind.''

More public rituals are often intended as a political statement after death.
Increasingly, the symbol of the annual Gay Pride Parade, the so-called rainbow
flag, is being displayed on coffins and on church doors.

An American flag draped the coffin of Diego Lopez, a social worker who created
the training program for Gay Men's Health Crisis volunteers that became the
model for AIDS services agencies in other cities.

A Vietnam veteran, Mr. Lopez left instructions for a military burial with the
flag to be given to his lover, Ed Nicholas, a marketing director at a
telecommunications company.

The burial was last October at Calverton Cemetery on Long Island. As 40 mourners
encircled the bier, a United States Veterans Administration offical began a
standard speech in which he mistakenly identified Mr. Lopez first as Mr.
Nicholas's father and then as his brother.

''Partner,'' Mr. Nicholas interrupted.

''Your, uh, partner served his country well,'' the man said, going on with the
speech.

At last the flag was presented to Mr. Nicholas, who in turn presented it to Mr.
Lopez's mother, Anna, saying, ''This should be yours.''

As the others drifted back to their cars, Mr. Nicholas lingered beside the
coffin. The Veterans Administration man approached him with a broad smile and
said: ''So you guys were in business together?''

There are festive rituals, as well, designed by dying men as expressions of
gratitude to the friends and volunteer workers who cared for them during their
long ordeals.

An entertainment writer who truly believed life was a cabaret left $1,000 so
friends could have a party at his old haunt, the Ballroom. A caterer planned the
menu for the elegant luncheon after his funeral at the Cathedral of St. John the
Divine. Another man arranged to have a chartered yacht, stocked with chilled
champagne, circle Manhattan with his friends on board.

Others have set aside money in their wills to be given to the Gay Men's Health
Crisis and other AIDS organizations. Yet officials in such groups say they have
seen cases where families used manipulation and coercion to get men to change
their wills.

''The money goes to the alumni association,'' said Michael Hirsch, executive
director of People With AIDS. ''There's a lot of hanky-panky in the 11th hour
with wills.''

'Part of the Process'

Mr. Hirsch, who has AIDS-related complex, is among those who have planned their
funerals or memorials. ''It's part of the process,'' he said. ''I have a friend
who wants his memorial to be held at night, with low lights and drinks served.
He wants people to dress up and look good. He doesn't want them to talk about
him for more than 10 minutes.''

Lee Prema Pleva, who teaches a yoga class for People With AIDS, recalled the
schoolteacher who handed her a plastic folder two weeks before he died. In it,
she found detailed plans for his memorial including the speakers, singers, sheet
music and phone numbers of far-flung friends to be notified.

''Sam was incredibly meticulous and thoughtful,'' Ms. Pleva said, ''He didn't
want to burden his family and friends at a time when they'd have enough to deal
with. But he was also completing the journey. In visualizing his memorial, he
was there.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of members of People With Aids Coalition at funerals and
memorials (NYT/Fred R. Conrad; Jane Rosett)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
After the Fall

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 770 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


An official scheme to subvert the Constitution: That is what the Iran-contra
hearings are bringing into view. High officers of the Government plotted to
carry out a secret foreign policy through ''private'' agents and funds solicited
from foreign powers. The aim was to avoid our constitutional system of political
and legal controls.

But as the Congressional committees began to explore that scheme last week, the
country's attention was elsewhere. The press and the public were focused on the
riveting issue of Gary Hart's sexual behavior.

It was riveting, no doubt about it: a fascinating human story. But what a
passing phenomenon compared to an attempted constitutional coup d'etat, an
effort to escape the rules of accountability laid down by the Framers 200 years
ago.

One thing that lingers in reflection on the Hart story, now that it is all over,
is that sense of disproportion. Yes, Mr. Hart was a candidate for President, his
judgment mattered and it was bad. But for all the talk about judgment, the real
interest in the story was sex.

There was a salutary lesson from the story: The old double standard of sexual
behavior is no longer acceptable. Gary Hart was rightly criticized for what he
did to his wife, and for treating women as objects.

Reflection has intensified my doubts about the press's role. Too many editors
and reporters salivated in their zeal to learn all and tell all. There was an
unpleasant air of self-satisfaction in the press's talk of performing its
constitutional duty as the sharks circled the wounded figure in the water.

The Miami Herald looks even worse at the end of the saga than it did at the
beginning. A Herald photographer who was among those staking out Senator Hart's
house now says a picture he developed supports one of the Senator's points: that
the actress in question left his home much earlier than the paper said. The
Herald honorably disclosed the fact, though it added lamely that the point was
not ''a central question in the Hart controversy.''

We also learned a little more about the anonymous tip that started the
surveillance of Senator Hart. It came, The Herald said, from a woman who said
she was a ''liberal Democrat'' and did not want ''another President who lies.''

It is so easy for the press to go wrong in such situations. Read David Broder's
new book, ''Behind the Front Page,'' and remember how the press was quick to
judge Senator Edmund Muskie for ''crying'' during the New Hampshire primary in
1972. He was portrayed as weak, but reporters did not know that he had been
victimized by a series of dirty tricks laid on by the Nixon campaign.

The low point of the Hart story was when Paul Taylor of The Washington Post
asked the Senator at a press conference, ''Have you ever committed adultery?''
When I asked Mr. Taylor about it some days later, he said, ''I don't know if I
feel comfortable.'' He said he could not conceive of asking other candidates
that question, because in most circumstances it would be ''inappropriate.''

But will the press, so filled with its own rightness in this case, really draw
back at the next? When an anonymous tipster says that some other candidate has
strayed, will a paper forget it? Fear of competitors is the real factor here,
and a Gresham's Law functions. And each vulgarity makes the next easier.

Not just public officials but all of us have a stake in preserving some privacy
in our society. Respect for privacy is a difference, one that we have valued,
between liberal societies and totalitarian states where citizens are watched by
neighborhood committees or police. Justice Brandeis spoke of privacy as ''the
right most valued by civilized men.''

How did the press get into this mood of insisting that when it comes to
officials, there can be no private side of life? I believe it stems from
historic regrets at having been too close to politicians in the past - at having
failed to report their peccadilloes.

The Wilbur Mills affair was a key event. Many Washington reporters had known
that the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee was disabled by
alcoholism, but they wrote nothing until he drove into the Tidal Basin. And then
came Vietnam and Watergate, with their profound warning to the press against
taking the word of politicians for gospel.

But when the press fulfilled its great function in Vietnam and Watergate, it was
dealing with issues of the deepest concern. Instead of congratulating itself now
on the Gary Hart story, the press might ask itself where it was when Oliver
North and John Poindexter and Ronald Reagan were trying to subvert the
Constitution.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT EDUCATION;
CLASS OF '87: A SUMMING UP

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words


WITHIN the next four weeks, almost one million young men and women will graduate
from college and cease being students. About 400,000 will get master's,
professional and Ph.D. degrees to become doctors, lawyers, business executives,
college teachers or researchers.

If they in any way resemble the portrait of them that has been drawn by many
politicians and pundits, the world will not be the better for their arrival.
They have been called self-centered, hedonistic, poorly educated, apathetic.
They have been denounced as troublemakers when they protested against apartheid
in South Africa or against racist incidents on campus. People as prominent as
William J. Bennett, the Secretary of Education, have depicted students as
spoiled, pleasure-seekers more interested in fancy cars, stereos and vacations
than in studying or paying for their education.

Given such a dim public image, the mass exodus of these students from the
campuses might be seen as further pollution of the civic landscape.

Before new alarms are sounded, the men and women who are about to become alumni
deserve a final summing up of what they were really like as students.

Chances are that they were like the rest of us, a mirror-image of their
environment, as good as the most admirable adults and as flawed and even
repulsive as the worst of us. A look at the volunteer services many students
performed suggests that at least some showed an idealism that is not exactly
rampant in the adult world.

Student-bashing is a time-honored game. In the eyes of their elders,
particularly of aging alumni, they just don't make them the way they used to.
Weren't they defiling campuses with ugly anti-apartheid shanties instead of
livening things up with virile panty raids? What has college come to when
''girls'' are class officers, editors of student newspapers and even get
themselves arrested in political protests.

That, too, is an incomplete picture of this year's graduates. Some were guilty
of racism, only a little more than a decade after white and black students
linked arms in protest against it. They, too, reflect changes in the adult world
around them. They did not grow up with the vision of black and white adult
leaders of business, religion, academia and politics linking arms in defiance of
snarling police dogs.

Compared with the anti-war protests of the 1960's and early 1970's, the majority
of the new graduates did indeed seem apathetic. But those who got their heads
bloodied in opposition to the war in Vietnam stood alongside adult dissenters,
including many prominent Americans and several Presidential candidates. Many
militant undergraduates, knew, moreover, that they might be drafted to fight in
an unpopular war. Would today's students be more militant about Nicaragua if
they faced a draft? Human behavior, students' included, is shaped by the human
condition.

Greed? Selfishness? Could this college generation be expected to believe that
the meek and the unselfish are inheriting the earth? Is it surprising that they
are influenced by their parents' pressure to get rich? Or that some of them are
attracted to activities that have paid off in wealth beyond imagination and
desert? Is it strange that some graduates, weighed down with student loans, feel
the pull of investment banking rather than of public service? Or, having watched
politicians elected by reviling the government, turned cynical about civic
virtues?

Finally, at the end of four or more years of being students, how fair are the
charges that they are an ignorant generation that has opted for easy courses?

There is no easy answer. The range of quality among colleges and students is
incredibly wide. It includes the best and the worst in people and institutions.
Considering that nearly half of all high school graduates enter college, how
could it be otherwise? Considerable numbers of the freshmen admitted to college
four years ago were poorly qualified for higher education, when judged by
traditional standards. Many of the more than 3,000 colleges, when measured by
these standards, fall short of the ideals of higher education. Yet the best
colleges and students seem to stand up well in any comparison with the past.
Many students I have met in this latest four-year stretch of academic history
are better read than most of the students of my generation. I believe they are
more able than I to identify the people and events on some of the silly lists
that are now being produced as tests of educated men and women.

And while many have read little, write poorly and know more about sitcoms than
about the Divine Comedy, many ''educated'' adults are similarly deficient. New
graduates aggravate problems of the nation that have been created by graduates
of earlier decades.

Many critics complain about the lack of a cohesive college curriculum, calling
the current selection an academic smorgasbord. They have a point. Too many of
this year's graduates lack a common core of knowledge.

Earlier generations, perhaps 40 years ago, attended colleges that aimed at
turning out ''well rounded'' graduates. This often meant not so much
intellectual breadth as filing away a young person's sharp and interesting
edges, to leave an agreeable blandness.

Perhaps it is because adult society subconsciously sees its own foibles and
shortcomings in the latest generation of students that it deals so harshly with
them, blaming them for the country's troubles.

In fact, and perhaps fortunately, it is hard to predict how the coming weeks'
graduates will turn out in real life. Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., the historian,
once described the pedestrian priorities of a student editor of The Crimson,
Harvard's undergraduate newspaper, this way: ''His editorial range was wholly
conventional, displaying the earnest senior's concern for the football team, the
Harvard cheering section, boardwalks in the Yard in winter and more fire
extinguishers in the dormitories.''

That apathetic editor was Franklin Delano Roosevelt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN BANGKOK, NASA IS A DISCO

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 408 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


The National Aeronautics and Space Administration may have its troubles at home,
but over here on the other side of the world NASA is the hottest name in town.
NASA is a discotheque. No, a ''spaceadrome'' - a $3.85 million hangar-size
contraption of concrete and steel resting on moon-landing legs on the outskirts
of Bangkok.

It takes a lot to attract the attention of Bangkok's residents, who live in a
world of pleasure palaces that leave no sense untempted. But NASA has in two
months managed to become the place that everybody has to visit -5,000 or more
people on weekends. Everybody includes diplomats, film stars, business leaders,
politicians and a few titled people. The very, very V.I.P. merit a booth of
black glass so they can see and not be seen. It isn't just the 25-foot
''spacecraft'' that descends toward the dance floor twice a night that draws the
crowds, nor the seven levels of bars in mock control towers and observation
decks. It appears to be the sheer elegance of the place, all midnight blue and
stainless steel, that is revolutionizing night life - and that is the work of O.
J. Productions of New York City.

In Bangkok, where most entertainment centers from roller rinks to shopping malls
have been built by the Japanese, often using Japanese equipment, NASA is almost
entirely an American creation, right down to the light and sound systems, and
the inspiration.

Somchai Sungsittiwong, NASA's owner, was a gem dealer tired of the jewelry
business and looking for a new investment when he visited a few discos in New
York and London. Mr. Somchai, who is 30 years old, learned a little sociology
along the way, quickly recognizing what he was missing at home. A sophisticated
city, he decided, needs classy late-night entertainment for people who wouldn't
be seen in Bangkok's raucous bars, many of them the legacy of the Vietnam War
years when this was the rest-and-recreation center of Southeast Asia.

''In New York, everyone can go to a disco,'' said Sommart Sungsittiwong, 24, Mr.
Somchai's brother, who is the manager of NASA. ''In Bangkok they were only for
youngsters. My brother wanted to change all that. He wanted to build the first
disco in Thailand for adults.''

No plastic objets d'art in Day-Glo colors (the hallmarks of most Thai dance
halls) in this place. No teen-agers, either, Mr. Sommart said.

''Most of our customers are middle-aged,'' he said. How old is that? ''Over
20,'' he replied.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of NASA (NYT/Seksan Throngerm)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 13, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'OLLIE IS GETTING A BUM RAP'

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 539 words


At one point, Mr. McFarlane described the character and background of Lieut.
Col. Oliver L. North:

RICHARD LEON. Why was it that you didn't rein him in, Mr. McFarlane? Why was it
that you didn't take him under control more?

A. Well, I think, Mr. Leon, that the belief that Colonel North was acting within
the restrictions of foremost concern to the Congress on not raising money, which
I believed, and in the knowledge that when he had an idea which came close to
the line of legality, propriety, he had always brought it to me and I'd been
able to say ''Yes'' or ''No'' - that I had confidence that that would continue
to be the relationship.

I'm afraid that in the past two days, that Ollie is really getting a bum rap,
which appears to be endorsed from me, and I don't intend that. I think Colonel
North is a man of immense devotion to the preservation of human life.

Now that sounds like platitude but it isn't at all. He's a person of very deep
and profound conviction, belief in God, who relies on his conscience, as all of
us do, but one that is formed in scholarly pursuit of Scriptures and passionate
in its extreme energy.

He is quite cynical about government. Ollie is a man that is a veteran of an
experience in Vietnam, of which I was very conscious, and I think not uncommon
to the experience of many people; that is, a situation that anyone who exposes
himself to the loss of life, his own, has to deal, and that is ''Is it worth
it?''

And for him it was an easy determination that, yes, it was because there were
enough daily shows of evidence by Vietnamese people, young and old, children,
others, of their satisfaction that he was there.

And yet that personal justification was in very sharp tension with the reality
that we were losing. Now in the wake of his service there, having to cope with
the vivid reminders of how worthy it was and how tragic a loss of life of
Vietnamese - tens of thousands occurred from it - I believe that he committed
himself to assuring that he would never be party to such a thing again if he
could prevent it.

And I think for him when it became a matter of association with the contra
movement, that it was again a circumstance where we had made a commitment to
people that he could see that we were just about to break, and that the
bottom-line consequence of that would be the death of a lot of people, contras,
and that he couldn't be party to that.

Now there are simple kinds of platitudinous judgments that I could give for you
that would give me the basis for thinking that - the mention here and there that
losing a war in Vietnam was a matter that was done extremely legally, and that
he didn't see the justification for how we could again be party to the same
thing.

In my own case, I shared some of those feelings. But it seemed to me that if at
the end of the day your country has the opportunity, in the United States, to do
one or two things, that you should choose those things which you can do, which
you can get support for, and go ahead and lend U.S. influence to them.

And however much I and others might regret not being able to help deserving
people, that it is more of a service to them never to get started with it than
to falsely lead them on.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 13, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GOETZ'S LAWYER SEEKS ORDER TO TAKE JURY TO SUBWAY CAR

BYLINE: By KIRK JOHNSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 453 words


The lawyer for Bernhard H. Goetz said yesterday that he wants the jury in Mr.
Goetz's trial to be taken to a subway car to see firsthand the conditions in
which Mr. Goetz found himself when he pulled an unlicensed revolver and shot
four teen-agers in December 1984.

The lawyer, Barry I. Slotnick, in a hearing held after the jury had been excused
for the day in the trial in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, also said he
wanted investigators for the defense team to be allowed to examine the car
itself. He asked the judge to order the car secured by the New York City Transit
Authority.

The judge, Justice Stephen G. Crane, after hearing a brief argument on the
motion, told Mr. Slotnick to pursue the matter with the Transit Authority
himself and come back with further information before a decision would be made
about any trips outside the court.

According to a spokesman for the authority, most of the R-22 model cars like the
one in which the shooting occurred have been taken out of service. The
spokesman, Jared Lebow, said the specific car itself, No. 7657, has been
stripped down to carry rails for use in track repair work.

'Commandeer a Subway Car'

''It doesn't look anything like a subway car anymore,'' Mr. Lebow said. ''It
doesn't have seats or anything.'' Mr. Slotnick argued that allowing the jurors
to see an actual subway car would be clearer than the two-dimensional diagram
introduced by the prosecutor, Gregory L. Waples. Mr. Waples did not object to
the defense motion, but said he believed the court had no authority to
''commandeer a subway car.''

In testimony before the jury, two gun dealers, one from Connecticut and one from
Florida, testified about selling pistols to Mr. Goetz in 1970 and in September
1984. The witnesses, called by the prosecution, said that the sales were legal
according to the laws in those states and that in each case Mr. Goetz had used
local state driver's licenses when he bought the guns. Neither gun, according to
Mr. Waples, was used in the subway shootings. Mr. Goetz has said he disassembled
the gun he used that day, a .38-caliber revolver, and buried it in the woods of
Vermont.

One of the gun dealers, Keneth Ditchfield, owner of Ken's Firearms in Orlando,
Fla., also distributed petitions outside the courtroom after his testimony in
support of Mr. Goetz's right to carry a gun. Mr. Ditchfield said outside of
court that 450 of his customers had signed a petition in support of Mr. Goetz,
while three of his customers had signed one condemning Mr. Goetz's actions.

Mr. Ditchfield said he had ridden the New York City subway system once, after
returning from a tour of duty in the Vietnam War, and found it ''a very scary
experience.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 13, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BUSH'S JOB PROVES BLESSING AND CURSE

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1381 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 12


Eyeing the red carpet, the police escort, the long motorcade, the marching band
and the curiosity seekers at a recent appearance by Vice President Bush in
Mountain Grove, Mo., his campaign manager, Lee Atwater, said, ''This is why
we're going to win.''

Aides to Mr. Bush and other political strategists believe that getting such a
reception is one of the benefits of being the incumbent, a role that the Vice
President is filling in this campaign, the first since 1968 in which a sitting
President is not running.

But Mr. Bush is learning, as others have before him, that incumbency is a
two-headed creature, both friend and foe.

On the plus side, aides and other strategists say that incumbency is a blessing
that provides Mr. Bush with logistic and communications support, predictable and
comfortable travel and even an impressive entourage to accompany him.

Two Important Benefits

It also helps in other important ways, including the ability to raise funds and
in providing name recognition, they say. Mr. Bush's name, for example, is more
familiar among potential voters than that of any of the other hopefuls.

''He's got enormous institutional advantages as an incumbent that is borne out
in everything from having a terrific looking plane that lands in local media
markets to having an expensive staff,'' said John Buckley, the spokesman for one
of Mr. Bush's Republican rivals, Representative Jack F. Kemp of upstate New
York.

But Mr. Bush points out that incumbency can also be a burden, one that is
magnified by institutional limitations imposed on a Vice President seeking to
move up. In his view, those limitations explain why some voters believe that he
lacks a clear political ideology and that he is seeking to hide behind President
Reagan's views.

Reflecting on the pros and cons of incumbency, Mr. Bush said recently aboard Air
Force Two, ''I've thought about it long and hard, and on balance, I think it's a
plus.''

Nelson W. Polsby, a visiting professor at Harvard University who is a co-author
of book on Presidential elections, said: ''The plus side is that the Vice
President frequently becomes President. Why it tends to be a liability is that
all the authority a sitting Vice President has is at the pleasure of the
President he serves. Therefore, he can't influence policy in a way to enhance
his future.''

Mr. Polsby and other political analysts say it is difficult to measure the
significance of incumbency, especially in the case of Vice Presidents. In terms
of Presidents seeking re-election, the verdict in recent years has been mixed:
In 1980, President Carter lost to Ronald Reagan; in 1976, President Ford lost to
Mr. Carter; both Mr. Reagan and Richard M. Nixon won re-election as incumbents.

Last Success Story: 1836

But no sitting Vice President has been elected President since Martin Van Buren
in 1836, a point that Mr. Bush minimizes by reminding supporters that Vice
Presidents have succeeded in getting the nomination and some, such as Mr. Nixon,
have come close to be elected on the first try.

''Incumbency can probably be shown as a net benefit for most Presidents, but not
for Vice Presidents,'' said Kevin P. Phillips a Republican political strategist.
''Presidents tend to get re-elected unless they have major economic problems,
while Vice Presidents tend to get nominated but not elected.

''As the Iran-contra scandal indicates, the only time Vice Presidents who are
incumbents get a real boom for the Presidency is when the President dies.''

Thomas E. Mann, executive director of the American Political Science
Association, said what complicated the pursuit for a Vice President was that
negative factors surrounding a President tended to plague the Vice President.
But positive developments, he said, are enjoyed by the party in general no
matter who is the nominee.

''You are better off being Bob Dole,'' Mr. Mann said, based on that thinking.
''They will both be equally effective in the general election, but Mr. Bush has
more to lose if there are serious problems in the Administration.''

Ups and Downs in Polls

Since the Iran-contra affair began, Mr. Bush has gone through repeated public
questioning about his role in the affair as his popularity has tumbled much like
that of the President. It has rebounded in the latest New York Times/CBS News
Poll, although political strategists believe that he could still be damaged if
there are new disclosures.

John P. Sears, who managed Mr. Reagan's campaign in 1976 and for a while in
1980, said another problem was the inherent conflict between Mr. Bush's desire
to remain loyal to the President and demands that he present his own political
identity.

Those questions plagued the candidacies of both Mr. Nixon and Hubert H. Humphrey
when they sought election while Vice President. Mr. Humphrey eventually broke
with President Johnson over the the Vietnam War; Mr. Nixon generally campaigned
in support of President Eisenhower's policies.

Issue of Loyalty

But another Republican strategist, aligned with Mr. Bush, said the issue of
loyalty was being overstated, since Republican voters appreciated the need for
Mr. Bush to state his own policies.

''The average voter understands very well that somebody as Vice President has a
duty to support the President's policies, especially one they respect and
admire,'' said the strategist, who asked that he not be identified. . ''But what
they don't respect is someone who appears to have no attachment to their own
policies. It doesn't strike people as an open and honest approach.''

While acknowledging the drawbacks, aides to the Vice President argue that
incumbency is the best route to getting the nomination. While Mr. Bush's loyalty
to the President has often been cited as a plus in winning the support of the
party faithful, other aspects are not widely discussed.

For example, on the recent trip to Missouri, in which Mr. Bush rededicated a
bandstand first dedicated in 1915 by Vice President Thomas Marshall, Air Force
Two delivered him to an airport in Springfield, an Army helicopter flew him 60
miles to Mountain Grove and a police escort accompanied him to the town square
for remarks. Later another police escort led him to downtown St. Louis for
remarks. Local news programs carried live reports on the speech.

Expenses Paid by Campaign

Aides to Mr. Bush say the Vice President's campaign committee pays the
transporation costs for trips that have political dimensions to them, even if he
also performs official functions. For example, the campaign committee paid the
transportation costs for Mr. Bush and his staff on the Missouri swing, which
included the ''nonpartisan'' speech in Mountain Grove, since there was a
''partisan fund-raising dinner later in St. Louis, said Richard N. Bond, deputy
campaign manager.

Mr. Bond said that while the campaign also paid for some expenses, such as
installing telephones for the staff on such trips, the Government paid for such
services as Secret Service protection.

Mr. Buckley said the Vice President's style of traveling was in stark contrast
with that of his candidate, Mr. Kemp, who recently campaigned in New Hampshire
on a charter plane used by the Bon Jovi rock group.

''There was a great deal of excitement among 15-year-olds at airports as they
would see us taxi up,'' Mr. Buckley said. ''On balance, I would take Jack Kemp's
ability in a fashion similar to a guerrilla unit having more flexibility and
tactical ability.''

But while Walter Riker, a spokesman for Mr. Dole, the Senate minority leader,
also praised what he called the benefits of a ''light, mobile'' campaign, he
conceded that there were important drawbacks.

For example, Mr. Dole, who often travels on rented charter planes with six to
eight seats, is reluctant to take reporters on some trips because of concerns
about privacy.

''It's like trying to conduct safe business in the Moscow Embassy,'' he said.

Mr. Atwater, the Vice President's campaign manager, said that in the final
analysis, Mr. Bush himself would determine how important incumbency became.

''I compare the incumbency with the concept of judo,'' he said. ''You can allow
your weight to work for you or your weight to work against you. The key is
allowing it to work for you.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vice President George Bush with wife, Barbara, at hatchery
(AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 13, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LIFE IN THE 30'S

BYLINE: By Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 3; Living Desk

LENGTH: 911 words


I AM upstairs watching television on an old black-and-white set with unreliable
horizontal hold. Downstairs the good television is in use; the kids are watching
''Dumbo'' on the VCR. I am watching the Congress of the United States engaged in
righteous indignation. My sons are watching an elephant fly. They believe what
they are seeing. I do not. On the way to the store I run into a friend, a
contemporary. ''I've been watching the hearings on the Iran-contra thing,'' I
say. ''Why?'' she asks evenly.

That is a good question. It was not like this in 1974. I had a spanking new
bachelor's degree, a sublet with a view of the river on the Upper West Side, and
a good antenna hookup to a 19-inch color television. It was hot in New York. It
was even hotter in Washington, especially in one particular Senate caucus room -
the same one I saw the other day, still an architectural monument to the
majestic leanings of a populist republic.

The Watergate hearings were the summer's soap opera-cum-civics lesson. John Dean
with his ferret-like face; his wife, a series of slightly blurred O's past his
shoulder: the O's of her round eyes, her tiny mouth, her circular face with the
hair pulled firmly back into a no-nonsense chignon. Alexander Butterfield with
the big plot twist while I was making a sandwich in the kitchen: ''Did you hear
that?'' my boyfriend yelled. ''He says they bugged the whole damn White House!''
John Ehrlichman, beetle-browed, his expression dark as his boss's 5 o'clock
shadow; who knew that he would go on to do ice cream commercials poking fun at
his own honesty?

We wouldn't have missed it for the world. Inside department stores and taverns
people gathered around the television. They thought they were seeing the fall of
the Republic. Some of them - lots of the ones my age, who had hated Nixon since
they had watched him perspire on television in his ill-fated joust against the
white knight of our childhood - were delighted. Ding, dong, the witch is dead.
Some of our parents were appalled when we had rowdy parties to celebrate the
first resignation of a President of the United States. Something fell, but it
wasn't the Republic. Richard Nixon has bounced back; I never have. I am the
typical spurned lover, doubly devastated because I was once a true believer.

I gave a speech at a college several weeks ago and afterward, a 19-year-old
political-science major, an aspiring foreign correspondent in his best
job-interview suit, came up and said thoughtfully, ''Given the nature of
politics, don't you think you people overreacted a little to Watergate?''
Effortlessly, he had hit upon the essential difference between us. He was a
pragmatist; I, that most pathetic of creatures, a disenchanted idealist. ''Given
the nature of politics'' - we had started from a different place.

The place where I started had enormous maple trees, large rhododendron bushes
and three Roman Catholic parishes within walking distance of one another. I was
8 years old, an Irish Catholic girl in an Irish Catholic neighborhood in quiet
ecstasy at the election of an Irish Catholic President. The older people kept
within themselves an essential patriotism, the obvious corollary to the dog tags
stored in the attic beside the letters they had written to their wives from
Europe and the Pacific. The younger ones, we children, thought the President had
some connection to us, would right wrongs, would slay dragons, would not eat
meat on Fridays. God, he was good-looking. God, he could speak.

The rest seems to have happened in another world. The President was murdered,
the war began, the boy who lived two blocks away and whose sister was in my
class came home dead from Vietnam. The first of many. If only the war were over,
things would be better. Then it was, and they were not. If only McGovern was
elected. If only Nixon were gone. Only the Who said anything that made sense.
''Meet the new boss,'' they sang, ''same as the old boss.''

The element of surprise evaporated, too. Like tourists watching cobras sway
above the basket, we were fascinated by the underside of the Nixon White House,
by the things the President's men admitted to.

Now, President's men are saying they did fearsome things, too. They are on all
channels. Ah, but there is always the VCR. Your friends ask, why watch? Aren't
we accustomed to it? Haven't we been here before? When rumor had it that the
Irish Catholic President was not as consonant as he should have been with the
Sixth Commandment, I was pretty thunderstruck: the pretty wife was not happy;
the handsome husband was not faithful. Then there were the stories about his
brother. And his other brother. Last week the most prominent person in the news
was one of those hyphenated actress-models, as they're called. The handsome
candidate went on a boat ride. The pretty wife stayed home. In the end, it all
came crashing down. We have been here before.

It's all reruns when you know the score. I do. The older people maintain an
essential patriotism. They have seen things that I have not. The 19-year-olds
are matter-of-fact about what to expect. They never had my illusions. And here I
am, stuck in the middle, feeling a little dumb remembering that I once thought a
change in the cast of characters meant a change in the script. It's a rotten way
to feel. Downstairs, at least the little elephant is flying. Upstairs, it's the
same old circus. Click goes the on-off button. I'm better off below.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 13, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
Responding To Gorbachev

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 810 words


DOES the drive of General Secretary Mikhail S. Gorbachev to ''reconstruct'' the
Soviet economy and society provide an opportunity for the United States to
strengthen its own economy and stabilize the international system, of which it
is the leader?

In the current World Policy Journal, Robert S. Tucker, professor of politics
emeritus at Princeton University, argues that this issue can best be approached
by examining the relationship between the ''perestroika'' - reconstruction or
reformation of Soviet economic, cultural and political life - and the
Gorbachev-sponsored ''new thinking'' in foreign affairs.

Soviet leaders commonly base their arguments for a new course on the ''sacred''
texts of Marx or Lenin, and Mr. Gorbachev bases his call for domestic economic
changes on Lenin's New Economic Policy - a temporary lessening of the power of
the state and brief return to greater autonomy in industry and agriculture.

But in international affairs, Mr. Gorbachev, finding no comparable Leninist
text, grounded his appeal for a new course on the existence of historically
unprecedented ''real tasks'' - ''saving mankind from nuclear self-annihilation
and from global environmental, demographic and other ills that are getting out
of hand.''

As the Government of a great power facing an internal crisis, Mr. Tucker
contends, the Gorbachev leadership has no need to conjure up the image of an
intractable foreign enemy in order to persuade the nation to expend its energy
on increasing military strength. On the contrary, in the present state of
economic strain, Mr. Gorbachev needs to reduce its commitment of resources to
the military. Estimates by the Central Intelligence Agency put Soviet military
spending at between 13 and 14 percent of the gross national product, more than
double the burden carried by the United States.

Security in the nuclear age, according to Mr. Gorbachev, ''can only be mutual,''
and this applies to arms control and arms reduction. Both, if carried out in a
way to enhance security, would ease the economic burdens of both the Soviet
Union and the United States.

Does the United States really want to reduce its military spending, in light of
industrial and labor pressures for contracts and jobs, or would lower military
outlays and a reduced budget deficit enhance American economic strength? The
success of the Japanese economy - with its military outlays only one-sixth those
of the United States relative to G.N.P. and with Japanese material and human
resources more sharply focused on industrial advances - suggests that too-heavy
military outlays are a drag, not a spur, to the economy.

An industrially and financially stronger America, with a more stable dollar and
balanced trade, could prove more effective leadership in the ''Pax Americana''
and draw the Soviet Union into the global system.

Mr. Tucker concludes that ''the world has a stake in the success of this new
Soviet leader's reform enterprise and his incipient efforts to develop new
approaches in international affairs.''

Is his position ''academic''? Two former Secretaries of State, Cyrus R. Vance
and Henry A. Kissinger, and a former Secretary of Commerce, Peter G. Peterson,
after a meeting in February with top Soviet leaders, including Mr. Gorbachev and
the dissident physicist, Andrei Sakharov, reached a similar conclusion. Mr.
Vance, reporting on the trip to the Council on Foreign Relations, said: ''I
believe we have a genuine opportunity that should be treated seriously. We
should not be starry-eyed; we should remain strong, across the board, but we
ought to reach out and see if there aren't things we can begin to do together.''

Not to respond to the Gorbachev openings, in the view of some, would be to risk
endangering United States economic and security interests. In an article titled
''On Ending the Cold War'' in the current Foreign Affairs, Walt W. Rostow,
professor of political economy at the University of Texas, who was President
Johnson's national security adviser during the Vietnam War, concludes: ''A soft
landing from the cold war is an American as well as a Soviet responsibility; for
a steady America, strong but not aggressive, paying its way in the world,
conscious of the reality of its own interests as well as the legitimate
interests of others, can help make the transition easier and more secure for the
Soviet leadership.

''An America that once again slides into distracted complacency or continues to
borrow rather than elevate productivity to sustain its amenities, could set in
motion another cold-war cycle with potentially tragic results.''

Before undue euphoria breaks out, it would be well to assertain the scope and
depth of the Gorbachev reforms - and the opposition they are facing at home.
And, if America does not get its own act together, the end of the cold war will
not save it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 14, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 130 words




Economics and Education

Defying normal economic rules, the cost of college is rising even as the student
pool drops. But many say education is an industry where the usual rules
shouldn't apply. Page B13.

Argentina May End Charges

Argentina's President wants laws that might drop charges against most military
officers accused of killing or abusing political detainees. Page A3.

Diseases Beset Vietnamese

Malnutrition in Vietnam is widespread, and beriberi and other ailments are
afflicting the army, according to the head of a military medical institute in
Hanoi. Page A3.

The Gauchos vs. U.S.S.R

Short but fast, the Gauchos, a South Bronx basketball powerhouse, will take on a
much taller Soviet team that is touring the country. Page B1.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 14, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, MAY 14, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1026 words



International    A3-15



The President was frequently told by Robert C. McFarlane, the former national
security adviser, of what his staff was doing to help the rebel forces in
Nicaragua, Mr. McFarlane told investigators.  A1



News analysis: The President knew more about aid to the contras than he or his
aides have been saying, testimony suggests, and aides now worry their initial
tactic has left them too little maneuvering room.    A13



Soldiers took control of Fiji and removed Prime Minister Timoci Bavadra and 27
other officials to an unknown destination. The island's international airport
was under military control and telephone links were cut.     A1



Klaus Barbie refused to continue taking part in his trial on charges of crimes
against humanity in Lyons. The surprise move means Mr. Barbie will not be
confronted directly by his declared victims.    A8

Laser weapons testing is not banned explicitly by the Antiballistic Missile
Treaty, according to an opinion issued by the State Department's legal adviser,
Abraham D. Sofaer.

    A11

Punitive psychiatric treatment should be investigated and abolished by creating
an international tribunal, a Russian dissident psychiatrist, Anatoly Koryagin,
told American reporters.    A15



News analysis: 24 nations failed at a Paris conference to agree on policies to
improve the global economy. Many ministers from the industrialized countries
predicted a grave future.

    D5



Malnutrition plagues Vietnam

    A3



Istanbul journal: A changing city

    A4



U.S. concerns defy Pretoria

    A6



Rebel impresses church parley

    A7



Conference stirs Warsaw ire

    A9



U.N. cites Iraqi chemical attacks

    A14



National    A18-24, A28-29, B12-16, D26



U.S. prosecutors, rebuffed by a judge on a request for more time to seek an
expanded indictment, asked for the dismissal of insider-trading charges against
three prominent Wall Street professionals.    A1



A.T.&T. said it would lower rates for basic domestic long-distance telephone
service by an average of 4.8 percent on July 1. It said the cuts would save
consumers more than $590 million a year.    D1



The Supreme Court was criticized for its decision upholding job preferences for
women and minorities in a statement drafted by the U.S. Commission on Civil
Rights that calls the Court's reasoning ''wrong.''    A1



Adultery is a difficult topic for many Presidential candidates interviewed in
the aftermath of Gary Hart's downfall. Some said they viewed sexual questions as
demeaning to the political process.    A1

Students decrease but tuition rises in higher education's unique economic
equation. Many experts say education is an industry where the usual rules
shouldn't be expected to apply.     B13



Peak-hour flights should be curbed at major airports and in heavily traveled
airspace between cities in an effort to avert an ''erosion of safety,'' the
National Transportation Safety Board urged.    A18

Three Colombians were convicted of first-degree murder in the shooting of a key
government drug witness last year in Baton Rouge, La.    A19



New Pentagon rules on conduct covering drug and alcohol abuse and sexual
misconduct will affect nearly three million military and civilian employees and
defense contractors who hold security clearances.    A18



Republican Senators delayed a vote on a military spending bill in a dispute over
space tests for the proposed Star Wars program. They did so by interrupting
roll-call votes on other matters, a tactic that had not been seen on Capitol
Hill in 25 years.    A10

Historic roses are in vogue at Roses of Yesterday and Today Inc., a California
nursery that specializes in species grown prior to 1867. A renewed interest in
all things antique is fueling demand.    C1



House approves debt ceiling bill

    A21



Charges dropped against airman

    A22



New evidence seen for atmosphere on Pluto

    A23



4 win cancer research prizes

    A24



Mother accused of killing her son

    A28



Hundreds seized in drug sweep

    A29



Washington Talk    B12



Discreet power of career secretaries

Domenici out of the spotlight

Regional    B1-11



A jump in summer criminal cases was cited by New York State's Chief Judge in
urging all New York City judges to reschedule vacations and ordering them to
attend a three-day review amid 105 percent occupancy in the jails.    B1



Morris Tarshis refused to testify before the city's Department of Investigation
this week, according to Mayor Koch. Mr. Tarshis resigned as New York City's
franchise director earlier this month.    A1



Homelessness is increased by New York City's cutoff of welfare benefits to
thousands of families each year for reasons unrelated to financial need, a new
survey of homeless families has found.    B1



A jury saw Bernhard H. Goetz, in a two-hour videotape, discussing his shooting
of four youths in a subway train. He was angry and sarcastic as he told New York
City police detectives he was ''in his heart'' a murderer.    B1

The South Bronx takes on Soviets in basketball tonight, despite decided
disadvantages in height. The Soviet national team's New York stop is part of a
nine-city, nation-spanning American tour.    B1



A missing Stradivarius violin has been found in Connecticut. The instrument was
stolen from a Carnegie Hall dressing room in 1936 and sold to a violinist, now
deceased, who performed at society functions.    A1



Union trustee replaced by judge

    B1



Yonkers budget is proposed

    B2



Knishes are toast of Washington

    B2



Women excel in first coed class

    B3



Accused officer called a ''victim''

    B4



U.S. seeks lawyer's interview

    B11


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 14, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM TELLS OF WIDE MALNUTRITION

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 521 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 13


Malnutrition in Vietnam has become serious and widespread, and beriberi, a
diet-related nervous disorder, is occurring in the army in epidemic proportions,
according to the head of a military medical institute in Hanoi.

Troops are also afflicted by malaria, encephalitis, intestinal problems, fungal
skin diseases and other ailments whose treatment is hampered by lack of medical
supplies and proper sanitation, the institute director, Le The Trung, wrote in
the Vietnamese Communist Party's daily newspaper, Nhan Dan.

His 1,900-word article contains some of the most specific information available
on the deteriorating state of health in Vietnam, one of the world's poorest
nations.

The article follows a series of more general criticisms from the army about the
effects of poor economic management in Vietnam. It also comes at a time when
urgent calls for policy changes seem to be encountering sharp resistance from
advocates of political orthodoxy.

Evidence of Malnutrition

International health and welfare organizations have been concerned for several
years about mounting evidence of malnutrition in Vietnam, which lags well behind
most Asian nations in development. Vietnam is also thought to have one of the
world's highest birth rates, which further diminishes limited natural resources.

Exiles arriving in Thailand and other Southeast Asian nations by boat have begun
to tell of starvation in Vietnam. Some diplomats in Hanoi, using international
projections based on malnutrition data, say some Vietnamese might be dying of
hunger. But there has been no verifiable evidence of this.

Doctors in Vietnam tell reporters that intestinal diseases are dangerously
widespread, however, and this, coupled with inadequate intake of proteins or
vitamins, puts children and the elderly at great risk. A hospital director in Ho
Chi Minh City explained that in cities sanitation systems installed by the
French more than half a century ago were often the cause of the problem, as
broken pipes allowed contaminated water to flow into drinking supplies.

The article by Mr. Trung, published on April 6 and translated early this month
by the British Broadcasting Corporation's foreign monitoring service, said that
the military medical institute had studied more than 1,000 cases of beriberi, an
illness of the nervous system that results from a deficiency of vitamin B-1, or
thiamine.

Epidemic Forms of Diseases

Malnutrition-related diseases, Mr. Trung wrote, ''occur in some localities in
apparently epidemic forms, such as beriberi and neuritis, followed by organic
atrophy.'' In some cases, he said, ''they affected even the brain and heart.''

Beriberi has been common in Asian countries in which people subsist on a diet of
polished white rice. It is characterized by inflammation of the nerves, heart
problems and edema.

Mr. Trung also said that in some areas, ''types of persistent and virulent
malaria'' have ranked as the most prevalent internal diseases.

''Such internal diseases as diarrhea, dysentery, hemorrhagic fever,
conjunctivitis, influenza and encephalitis are also noted,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 14, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: CAREER SECRETARIES;
WIELDING POWER DISCREETLY

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 902 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 13


Presidents may falter, budget deficits may climb, Cabinet members may come and
go. But within the Federal Government the executive secretary stays on, part of
a permanent, little-noticed network of civil servants, predominantly women, who
are privy to much and tell absolutely nothing.

''They are really the indispensable people,'' said Bradley Patterson, who worked
at the White House in three Administrations and is now at the Brookings
Institution writing a book about the permanent White House establishment.

''They are service people but they are right on the edge of being policy makers
themselves,'' he said. ''They look at correspondence, make judgments as to
priorities of time; judgments about who will get in and who will not, and in
what order. That sounds routine, but it is anything but routine when you are
dealing with senior people in Government.''

It is the longtime governmental secretary who understands how the system works.
How to cut through bureaucratic thickets. Whom to call. How to get attention
paid. Catherine Mallardi went to work for the Government in 1942, first at the
Council of Economic Advisers, then at the White House. For the last 18 years she
has served as executive secretary to the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board,
working in succession for Arthur Burns, G. William Miller and now Paul A.
Volcker.

''In this job,'' Mrs. Mallardi said recently, ''you can't be a talker.''

Over the years she has also worked with George P. Shultz, ''when he was our
labor economist,'' she said, and with Alan Greenspan. She also worked for
Maxwell Rabb before he was succeeded by Robert Keith Gray as White House Cabinet
secretary in the Eisenhower Administration.

''I inherited Catherine from Max,'' recalled Mr. Gray, who is now in public
relations. ''She was invaluable, she had a body of experience - it was like
having Max stick around on the job.''

Many secretaries who work in agencies where political appointees come and go
serve as an institutional memory. ''They are the right arm, the left arm and
both ears,'' said Patrick Daly, a State Department protocol officer.

Maria Sotiropoulos joined the State Department in 1963, working for many years
in the Bureau of European Affairs with such figures as Douglas MacArthur 2d,
John Eisenhower and Frank Carlucci when he was Ambassador to Portugal.

''It is helpful to know all the layers,'' said Mrs. Sotiropoulos, who now works
in the protocol office. ''When you go into base negotiatons with countries, for
example, you are the institutional memory because you are the one who has been
there during previous negotiations and disputes.''

Normally, directors of State Department bureaus change every two years, so it is
often the secretary who is most familiar with the files, the task force reports,
the political and economic contingency plans for anything from the fall of a
foreign government to the kidnapping of a political figure. When Franco died, it
was Mrs. Sotiropoulos who remembered a five-year-old file that had been prepared
for such a moment.

Connie Gerrard first came to the White House in the Johnson Administration as
personal secretary to George Reedy, the press secretary. ''I figured out the
other day I'm now working for my 10th press secretary,'' Ms. Gerrard said.

She has seen the White House press corps increase more than tenfold. She has
traveled to every continent and every state of the union. She has survived the
political traumas of Vietnam, Watergate and now the Iran-contra affair.

The first rule for survival in a White House where all jobs are considered
political and there is no job security, she says, is discretion. That translates
to ''no interviews.''

She would only say: ''You can't be dogmatic about the way things were done in
the past, you can give them the benefit of your expertise. But each President
sets his own tone.''

The secretarial network is much like the capital's old-boy network.

''You develop contacts with other secretaries and there is a network among us,''
said Nancy Frey, 45 years old, who has worked for the Government since the age
of 17.

From the International Affairs Division of the Office of Management and Budget
where Mrs. Frey works, her network of colleagues who deal with equally
confidential matters stretches from the State Department to the Treasury
Department to the White House.

For many of these women, their jobs paved the way to a world quite apart from
the small towns where they grew up.

For Mrs. Frey, ''it was a way out,'' she said, from a depressed Appalachia.

For Lois Pflieger of Gurnee, Ill., who has worked in the public affairs office
of the Secretary of the Navy for more than two decades, it meant a career that
crisscrosses the seas.

''I had four scholarships offered me out of high school,'' she recalled, ''but I
came from a large family and needed to earn money. I'm lucky -I've worked for
the cream of the crop starting with Paul Nitze. I've met Henry Fonda and Clint
Eastwood and seen all the Presidents and shaken hands with one President and one
First Lady.''

Many of the young junior naval officers with whom Ms. Pflieger worked over the
years have risen to top commands. She receives calls, she says, from ''all over
the world.''

''They'll call and say, 'Oh gosh, I'm so glad you are still there. Can you go
back in your memory and tell me. . . .'

''And usually I can,'' Ms. Pflieger said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Nancy Frey; photo of Lois Pflieger (NYT/Michael Geissinger);
photo of Catherine Mallardi

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 14, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ADVERTISING;
Direct Inc. Gains

BYLINE: By Philip H. Dougherty

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 74 words


Direct Inc., a subsidiary of D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles, has been retained by
Time-Life Books for a direct marketing program to promote via TV, print and mail
the sale of four of its continuity book series. They are The Vietnam Experience,
Healthy Home Cooking, Great Meals in Minutes and The Good Cook. The billings
will be in the undisclosed millions. The previous agency was Wunderman, Ricotta
& Kline, a subsidiary of Young & Rubicam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IDENTICAL TWIN SISTERS MAKE WEST POINT HISTORY

BYLINE: By JACK CAVANAUGH

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 818 words


Whenever Brig. Gen. Roy R. Flint encounters Cadets Tara or Tracy Miller on the
grounds of the United States Military Academy at West Point, N.Y., he plays it
safe. They are identical twins, and he is never sure which is which.

''I've known them since they were plebes, but I still can't tell the
difference,'' said General Flint, who taught the twins in his course ''The
History of the Korean War and Vietnam.'' ''Their name tags don't help, since
they both read 'Miller.' So when I meet them, I just smile and say, 'Hello, Miss
Miller.' They're delightful women - very cheerful, very thoughtful and very
talented.''

The brown-eyed, dark-haired Miller sisters are 23 years old. Each weighs about
125 pounds, but Tara, at 5 feet 8 inches, is a quarter-inch taller than Tracy.
In their military uniforms, they are virtually indistinguishable.

The Millers are the first identical female twins to attend the academy. Academy
officials said that although other female twins have attended or are attending
West Point, none of them were identical. Two sets of female twins have
graduated, and another set, Sigrun and Ellen Denny of Katonah, N.Y., are in
their second year. An academy spokesman said that no records had been kept on
the number of male twins, identical or otherwise, who have been enrolled.

Though women have been accepted at West Point since 1976, the academy is still
essentially a male domain. On May 27, 933 men are scheduled to graduate, and 119
women.

But the twins said that this milieu has served as an incentive for them to work
harder academically.

''When you put twins into such a highly competitive environment -particularly
female twins in what is basically a male environment - the competition is
definitely enhanced,'' Tracy said during an interview at her parents' home in
Stamford, Conn., where she and her sister were spending a recent weekend. ''I
think we've both thrived on it. And even though women are in the minority at the
academy, we don't feel we've been at any disadvantage. Cadets are cadets.''

At West Point, the Miller sisters have produced remarkably similar academic
records. After seven semesters, they were within one one-hundredth of a point of
each other in their class standings. Tara's academic concentration is in
history, while Tracy's is in national security and public affairs.

The twins first visited West Point as high-school sophomores. ''We were both
emotionally stirred during our one-day visit,'' Tracy said.

Tara added: ''We're from a very patriotic family, and because of our upbringing
and the type of parents we have, we believe in a calling that is going to help
others. When we went to the academy for a visit, we had just got back from
India. The trip made us appreciate our country all the more. And I think we had
become convinced that we wanted to become both leaders and servers.''

'The Place for Me'

Tracy said she was more hesitant about the academy: ''I was a little intimidated
by the practically all-male environment. And I didn't have the confidence level
that Tara did. But after going back a second time, I became convinced and said,
'This is the place for me.' ''

Both parents said they were surprised the twins decided to go to West Point.
Their father, Charles Miller, is retired and was a vice principal at Westhill
High School in Stamford. Their mother, also named Tara, is a personnel
consultant in Stamford.

''We found it difficult to understand why women would want to put themselves
through such a tough grind,'' Mrs. Miller said. ''But we also knew they liked
the academy from the time they first saw it and that they were intrigued by the
honor code. When they did make up their minds, we were behind them 100
percent.''

Both the twins are athletic. Tara, who was named to the all-state field hockey
team as a senior in high school, became the first woman to play on the soccer
team at the United States Military Academy Preparatory School at Fort Monmouth,
N.J., which the twins attended for a year before enrolling at the military
academy itself. There, Tara has played women's varsity softball, and Tracy,
women's lacrosse.

The sisters, who are to be commissioned as second lieutenants next month, will
attend the six-month Army intelligence program at Fort Huachuca, Ariz. Then, for
the first time in their lives, they will go separate ways: Tara to Fort
Campbell, Ky., and Tracy to Fort Monmouth.

''It's going to be strange being apart, not only because we're identical twins,
but also because we're best friends,'' Tracy said. ''We've always been able to
turn to each other. For example, when I came back from a bivouac, I told Tara
all about it, and she knew that since I had done it, she could, too. And it
worked the same way when Tara got back from a chemical-warfare training program
and told me about it. We both always knew that if one of us could do something,
so could the other.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Tara and Tracy Miller (NYT/Suzanne DeChillo)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Aquino Must Address Filipinos' Poverty

BYLINE: By Ray Bonner: Ray Bonner is author of a book about the Marcoses and
making of United States policy toward the Philippines.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 886 words


Three decades ago, the United States launched one of its first counterinsurgency
wars, in the Philippines. The ''enemy'' was the Huks, an army of peasants with
legitimate grievances and a Communist ideology. This covert campaign, a
combination of paramilitary operations and political reforms, was probably
America's most successful counterinsurgency war.

Today, even as covert operations in Central America are being scrutinized by
Congress and by a special prosecutor, President Reagan has reportedly signed
another ''finding,'' authorizing increased covert activity by the Central
Intelligence Agency in the Philippines. A considerable number of United States
military officers have arrived for duty in Manila, direct from their experience
with counterinsurgencies in Central America.

The enemy in the Philippines is again the Communists; but this time the United
States might not be successful, at least not unless President Corazon C. Aquino
shows a greater willingness to address the issues of economic disparity and the
power of the elite that the Communists are exploiting to gain adherents.

It may seem surprising that President Aquino, widely portrayed as a nationalist
and committed to reform, has turned to the C.I.A. and the Pentagon, even
criticizing the latter for not providing more assistance. But she has welcomed
the Americans rather than take on the Philippine elite.

Back in December 1985, when Mrs. Aquino was beginning her campaign against
Ferdinand E. Marcos, a Filipino journalist who was staunchly anti-Marcos said
that even if Mrs. Aquino became President she would not be likely to enact the
programs that he and other moderates, as well as some liberals and leftists,
felt were necessary. ''She would have to go against her friends and her class,''
he said.

He was right, and Mrs. Aquino, a member of one of the country's wealthiest
clans, has been unwilling so far to alienate them.

In a country where at least two-thirds of the population lives in rural poverty,
a land redistribution program would be the most visible demonstration that Mrs.
Aquino is committed to a more economically just society. Yet, for more than a
year, President Aquino has squandered her authority, moral and legal, to
implement land reform.

At a minimum, she could have set an example by agreeing to turn over a small
portion of her own family's 12,000-acre farm, Hacienda Lusita, to peasant
workers. But she hasn't even done that. Indeed, she once said that the farm
workers at Lusita, who toil in the blistering sun for a few dollars a day, were
better off than a peasant who owned his own plot, a statement that startled
diplomats in the United States Embassy in Manila.

Mrs. Aquino's failure to root out corruption has also caused concern among many
Filipinos. In a recent cover story, the Far Eastern Economic Review recounted
charges of cronyism, nepotism and corruption in the Aquino administration. A
disturbing article, it is instructive for those whose sharply critical views of
Mr. Marcos have been replaced by a faithful embrace of Mrs. Aquino. Her personal
probity may be beyond reproach, but she has not demanded the same high standards
of others.

Illustrative of her lax approach to malfeasance is the case of Ernesto Maceda,
who had once been an operative for Mr. Marcos. In the 1969 Presidential
election, he flew around the country in an air force plane distributing
envelopes filled with pesos to mayors and local political captains.

Despite objections from her close advisers, Mrs. Aquino appointed Mr. Maceda to
a Cabinet position, dismissing him only when charges of corruption in his agency
could no longer be ignored. But she then put Mr. Maceda on her slate of
senatorial candidates, and he was expected to win a seat (though the official
results won't be known for several days).

President Aquino is often compared favorably with President Raul Alfonsin of
Argentina. However, unlike Mr. Alfonsin, who has acted decisively to help
restore democracy in his country, Mrs. Aquino has not taken actions against
military officers responsible for torture, killings and other human rights
abuses during the Marcos years.

The February 1986 ouster of Mr. Marcos has been termed a ''revolution.'' But it
wasn't. It was an uprising that resulted in the defeat of a corrupt dictator but
not in any alteration of the economic and political structure. A revolution in
the Philippines still seems inevitable. It can be a peaceful, democratic one, or
it can be a Communist one.

Gen. Edward G. Lansdale, who led the counterinsurgency against the Huks in the
1950's, noted at the time that the Philippines had ''a Government of the
privileged few, not of the people.'' In the mid-1960's, the C.I.A., in a secret
national intelligence estimate, observed that the Philippines was beset by
''land hunger in the countryside; unemployment in the cities; and a grinding
poverty for the overwhelming majority of the people.'' Without a program to
address ''basic domestic socio-economic problems,'' the agency stated,
''nationalism and discontent are likely to lend themselves to leftist
exploitation.''

We have no evidence today that these warnings have been heeded or that the
lessons of Vietnam - that covert and military operations alone cannot defeat the
Communists -have been learned.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

McKINNEY RECALLED AS FIGHTER FOR THE POOR

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. MADDEN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 545 words

DATELINE: SOUTHPORT, Conn., May 14


With solemnity and laughter, friends and political associates paid tribute today
to the late Representative Stewart B. McKinney for fighting the causes of the
forgotten while representing one of the nation's most affluent Congressional
districts for almost 17 years.

Led by Vice President Bush, Gov. William A. O'Neill and about 40 Congressmen,
more than 1,000 people overflowed the Trinity Episcopal Church here for a
memorial service to Mr. McKinney, a 56-year-old Westport Republican, who died
last Thursday of an AIDS-related infection.

''From alleviating wretchedness in housing in Father Panik Village to loving the
unwanted children of Americans in Vietnam, this was a working patriot and
Christian,'' Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr., a Connecticut Republican, said in a
eulogy at the 262-year-old gray clapboard church.

While most of the speakers at the two-hour service praised Mr. McKinney for his
legislative work, such as helping the homeless and improving housing for the
poor in the deteriorated Father Panik Village housing project in Bridgeport,
there were references as well to the debate about how he died.

''It is a fantastic tribute to this man's courage and compassion that he
insisted on making known the cause of his death,'' the Rev. William Sangiovanni
said in his homily.

Father Sangiovanni, who was a key legislative and politial aide to Mr. McKinney
before entering the Roman Catholic priesthood in 1977, said: ''Doesn't it make
you feel good that through Stewart McKinney, others may survive this lethal
disease? It makes me feel wonderful and it makes me feel so proud.''

After Mr. McKinney's death in Washington, his physician, Dr. Cesar Caceres, said
the Congressman had contracted acquired immune deficiency syndrome from blood
transfusions he received during heart bypass surgery in 1979. Dr. Caceres said
Mr. McKinney wanted the information to be made public to help others deal with
the AIDS crisis.

Subsequently, news accounts quoted friends and associates as saying that Mr.
McKinney had had homosexual relationships. Homosexuals are among the primary
groups at risk of contracting AIDS.

The church, where Mr. McKinney and his wife of 37 years, Lucie, were married in
this community of stately homes on Long Island Sound, could not accommodate the
crowd. About 400 people sat on folding chairs under the maple and dogwood trees
on the front lawn to hear the service on loudspeakers.

A Mickey Mouse Telephone

Representative Hamilton Fish Jr., a New York Republican, drew laughter when he
recalled how Mr. McKinney used a Mickey Mouse telephone in his Washington office
to transact business and how Mr. McKinney, a heavy smoker, kept on his wall a
plaque that read, ''It's better to smoke here than in the hereafter.''

But many people in the audience had trouble keeping their composure as each of
Mr. McKinney's five children read excerpts from poems.

Father Sangiovanni said that while some people surrounded themselves with walls
against outside problems, ''Stewie never did that.''

''That's why it is no accident,'' the priest said, ''that from the Gold Coast
towns of his district to the poorest poverty pockets in his district, Stewart
McKinney was at home with his people, and they were at home with him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 16, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HEALTH OFICIALS SEEK AIDS TESTS FOR IMMIGRANTS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1282 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 15


The Public Health Service today recommended mandatory AIDS testing for the more
than 500,000 applicants seeking permanent residence each year in the United
States.

The proposal, which goes far beyond previous measures, is subject to approval by
the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Dr. Otis R. Bowen, and the White
House Office of Management and Budget. Government officials said they expected
the Administration to approve the measure.

Jim Brown, a spokesman for the Public Health Service, said the agency wanted to
add infection by the HIV virus, which can cause AIDS, to the list of ''dangerous
infectious diseases'' that is used to prevent infected aliens from gaining
permanent resident status. The agency had previously proposed adding AIDS to the
list but only sought to bar those actually showing symptoms of the disease.

The list of dangerous diseases includes leprosy, tuberculosis, syphilis and
gonorrhea. Aliens with these diseases are excluded from the United States.

How the Proposals Differ

Mr. Brown said the new proposal, first reported today in The Los Angeles Times,
would bar aliens who test positive for the virus, but have no symptoms of AIDS.
Health officials have said that a person infected with the virus, but has no
symptoms, is assumed to be capable of spreading it to others. People who test
positive have about a 20 percent to 30 percent chance of getting AIDS within
five years, according to the Federal Centers for Disease Control.

Under a previous proposal, a physician examining an individual seeking permanent
residence could require the applicant to take the AIDS test only if ''the doctor
sees symptoms or manifestations of AIDS.'' That proposal had been approved by
the Department of Health and Human Services but not by the Office of Management
and Budget. Routine blood screening for AIDS was ruled out under the earlier
proposal.

Under the new plan, however, ''everyone who wants permanent status will be
tested,'' Mr. Brown said.

Under Federal law, any alien seeking permanent resident status must undergo ''a
physical and mental examination.''

Since 1980, the number of aliens accepted by the United States as permanent
residents - those granted immigrant visas, or ''green cards'' - has ranged from
530,000 to 600,000 a year.

The proposed requirement would not apply to tourists or visitors, nor would it
be used to deny a temporary visa to a foreigner.

Question on Amnesty Program

Mr. Brown said he did not know what impact the testing proposal, if adopted,
would have on illegal aliens applying for permanent status under the amnesty
program that started this month. The Immigration and Naturalization Service
estimates that up to 3.9 million illegal aliens will apply for legalization
under the program.

Some Immigration and Naturalization officials have already called for AIDS
screening for all applicants but such suggestions were rejected earlier.

Officials conceded this evening that the proposal to test all people seeking to
immigrate to the United States raised difficult questions. One official said it
was unclear what would happen if a foreigner on a student visa seeks to take up
permanent residence and took the AIDS test and tested positive. The official
said it was uncertain whether the student would have to leave the country
immediately or could remain until his student visa expired.

Kennedy Legislation Offered

Meanwhile, Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusets, today proposed
legislation to increase AIDS education and prevention programs as well as steps
to deal with the care and treatment of victims of the disease. Mr. Kennedy
called his proposal the first comprehensive legislation on AIDS, and said it
would cost about $900 million a year. That is about the same amount recently
approved by the Senate Budget Committee for fiscal 1988 to deal with AIDS.

Mr. Kennedy said the Reagan Administration had offered ''ideological bickering
and paper policies'' and has ''squandered precious time.''

''By 1991, AIDS will claim more lives each year than the entire Vietnam war,''
Mr. Kennedy said. ''We must act immediately and decisively to halt this
killer.''

The disease, for which there is no cure, cripples the body's immune system,
leaving victims exposed to infections and cancer. The AIDS virus spreads through
sexual intercourse with an infected partner, transfers of blood, as with
hypodermic syringes shared by intravenous drug users, and from mother to fetus
in the womb.

As of May 4, AIDS has been diagnosed in 35,219 Americans, of whom 20,352 have
died, all since 1979.

The initial report of the Public Health Service proposal seeking testing for all
immigrants applying for permanent residence came in a memorandum from Robert E.
Windom, Assistant Secretary for Health in the Department of Health and Human
Services. Mr. Windom supervises the Public Health Service.

''We believe this is necessary because any person infected is assumed to be
capable of transmitting the virus,'' Mr. Windom said.

If the proposal is approved by Dr. Bowen and the Office of Management and
Budget, the final rule would be published in the Federal Register, inviting
public comment. It would become a part of the Federal regulations after any
major legal objections are resolved.

Should the United States seek to test all foreigners seeking permanent
residence, it would follow the lead of some other nations, including some that
have relatively stringent rules on visitors carrying the AIDS virus.

China, for example, tests applicants for student visas and researchers planning
to stay for more than six months. South Korea demands the AIDS test for
foreigners seeking long-term residency.

Saudi Arabia requires an AIDS test for long-term visitors and those seeking work
permits. Belgium and India require AIDS tests for those applying for student
visas.

Japan and other nations are considering AIDS testing for long-term foreign
visitors but have taken no action yet, according to State Department officials.

Senator Kennedy said today that he was working with Representative Henry A.
Waxman, Democrat of California, the chairman of the House Energy and Commerce
Committtee's Health panel, on additional proposals to expand voluntary AIDS
testing programs. Mr. Kennedy said that in certain areas, such as the military,
he endorsed mandatory AIDS testing.

Mr. Kennedy's bill seeks increased funds for an education campaign, recruitment
and training of new medical personnel and full use of television and other media
to inform the nation about the prevention of AIDS. The proposal also seeks more
involvement by community physicians in the treatment of AIDS victims, and the
increased use of home care and day care as a substitute for hospital treatment.

The measure also seeks improved procedures for placing Federal funds into
research laboratories and clinics. The National Institutes of Health would have
to cut grant approval time to no more than six months, and more money would go
for researchers and a network of AIDS research testing centers.

Senators Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, and Barbara A. Mikulski,
Democrat of Maryland, joined Mr. Kennedy in sponsoring the legislation. He said
Senators Bob Dole, the Republican leader, and Lowell P. Weicker Jr., Republican
of Connecticut, worked on the proposal and ''we're counting on their support.''

Mr. Dodd said the legislation was especially important to him because he had
recently attended a memorial service for Representative Stewart B. McKinney, a
nine-term Republican from Connecticut, who died of an infection brought on by
AIDS. ''The figures are horrifying,'' Mr. Dodd said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 16, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GORDON SHERMAN OF MIDAS MUFFLER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 392 words


Gordon B. Sherman, the creator of the Midas muffler shop chain who resigned from
the company and failed in a proxy battle to regain control, died of cancer on
May 8 at his home in Mill Valley, Calif. He was 59 years old.

Mr. Sherman was born in Omaha in 1927. He entered his father's automobile parts
business in 1950, two years after graduating from the University of Chicago.

He conceived the idea of franchising retail outlets to sell gold-plated mufflers
under the Midas name. Started in the 1950's the idea caught on quickly and the
Midas Company grew rapidly.

In 1967 he became president of the Chicago-based company, by then the Midas
International Corporation, succeeding his father, Nate Sherman, who became
chairman.

But in September 1970, after a series of conflicts with his father over his
management of the company and his sponsorship of public-interest groups, Gordon
Sherman resigned and his father once again took command.

The elder Mr. Sherman was said to have been disturbed over a drop in profits,
but he also complained that his son had been alienating Midas dealers and
customers through some of his pursuits.

Funds for Ralph Nader

Among other things, Gordon Sherman had been channeling money from the company
foundation to Saul Alinsky, a community organizer, and Ralph Nader, the consumer
advocate. He had also sponsored a group in Chicago, Businessmen for the Public
Interest, whose goals included helping the poor, ending discrimination and
improving the environment through legal action.

Explaining his motives, Mr. Sherman said: ''It was Vietnam that turned me on.
Something began to rise in me. Before this I'd been a typical hawk by default.
But I became serious, I read.''

Of his assistance to Mr. Nader, he explained: ''I told Nader it was O.K. if he
put us out of the muffler and exhaust business, so long as he put all of our
competitors out of business too.''

Shortly after leaving Midas, Mr. Sherman began a proxy fight to regain control
of the company but lost. In 1971, he moved from Chicago to California, where he
became a music teacher and a nature photographer.

Survivors include his wife, Corinne; four sons, Stuart and Loren of New York
City, Jeremy of Berkeley, Calif., and Robert of Boston; two sisters, Sarita
Warshawsky and Bette Lou Seidner, both of Chicago, and two grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gordon B. Sherman (1967)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 16, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TOKYO PUNISHES 2 COMPANIES IN SALE

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 37, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 682 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, May 15


In a rare punitive action against Japanese industry, the Government today
imposed a limited export ban on two corporations for illegally selling
technology to the Soviet Union that enables it to make submarines harder to
detect.

The Ministry of International Trade and Industry said that the prime offender
was the Toshiba Machine Company, a subsidiary of the Toshiba Corporation, the
electronics giant. The ministry ordered Toshiba Machine to suspend all exports
to 14 Communist countries for a year, starting next Friday. Company sales to
those countries in 1986 came to $36 million, or 13 percent of total exports.

A large trading concern that had helped to arrange the Toshiba deal, C. Itoh &
Company, was ordered to suspend machine-tool exports to the Communist bloc for
the next three months.

A senior Foreign Ministry official said that the technology sale, which has
brought protests from the United States, might have compromised American and
Japanese security. ''We are still in the process of assessing how much security
damage was done,'' the official, Yukio Okamoto, said.

The Japanese action comes just two days after Norway's Government announced
tighter export controls and the reorganization of a state-owned company,
Kongsberg Vapenfabrik, that was involved in the technology deal.

In Washington, military officials have described the technology transfer as one
of the more serious violations of export controls governing the United States
and its allies since the end of World War II.

Mr. Okamoto said that Washington had been consulted about the potential ''impact
on mutual security,'' but insisted that Japan imposed sanctions on its own
initiative, without American pressure. He added that export controls over
sensitive material would be tightened in the future.

According to Japanese officials, Toshiba Machine had lied to the trade ministry
about what it was selling when it applied for, and received, permission in 1981
to go ahead with the deal. In doing so, it violated both Japanese trade laws and
rules established by the Allied Coordinating Committee for export controls.

Almost immediately after today's announcement, Toshiba Machine's president,
Kazuo Iimura, submitted his resignation, saying, ''We sincerely accept the
order, and we sincerely apologize.''

In the case of C. Itoh, Mr. Okamoto estimated that the ban could cost the
company $18 million to $19 million. In addition, he said, the Government had
given ''a serious warning'' to another trading company involved, Wako Koeki.

''To my knowledge, no administrative sanction of this magnitude has ever been
imposed on Japanese companies,'' Mr. Okamoto said. He added that, while there
were no pending investigations into other possible export violations, the
penalties today served as ''a very decisive'' message to Japanese industry.

Japan's ability to protect sensitive information has become a growing concern
now that the Nakasone Government has agreed to let Japanese companies join the
Reagan Administration's missile-defense program, the Strategic Defense
Initiative.

The equipment sold to the Russians involved four milling machines, essentially
computer-controlled industrial robots. These machines, worth a total of $23
million, contain nine-pivot blades and are guided by sophisticated computer
programs, known as numerical control systems, obtained from Kongsberg
Vapenfabrik.

Once they had the advanced milling machines and computer programs, Soviet
engineers were able to build propeller blades that eliminated the noise that in
the past allowed the United States to track submarines.

Mr. Okamoto said that the Government would monitor Toshiba Machine in the next
12 months to make sure that it not divert exports from the Communist bloc to
other countries. No criminal charges would be filed, he added, because the
statute of limitations had expired on the sale.

The 14 countries affected by the export ban are the Soviet Union, China, Cuba,
East Germany, Poland, Hungary, North Korea, Vietnam, Czechoslovakia, Rumania,
Bulgaria, Albania, Mongolia and Afghanistan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CANDIDATES AIMING AT BABY BOOMERS, SEEN BY MANY AS KEY TO '88 VICTORY

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 32, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1607 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 16


Who will decide America's political future? Thomas E. Donilon, an adviser to
Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., has a ready answer: ''A 36-year-old accountant from
the suburbs of Atlanta.''

Mr. Donilon says the South will be important in 1988, and so will white-collar
people living in suburbs. But the crucial fact about his accountant is that he
is 36 years old - under 40, part of the post-war baby boom.

''The future,'' Mr. Donilon said, ''is passing into the hands of a new
generation.''

If there is one theme emerging clearly in the sometimes muddled contest to
succeed President Reagan next year, it is the idea of ''generational politics.''
This idea was central to Gary Hart's Presidential campaign in 1984, when it
nearly won him the Democratic nomination. It is now part of his legacy and of
everyone else's calculation.

Idealism Is Seen as Key

Mr. Biden, a 44-year-old Delaware Democrat, is betting his political future on
the idea that the baby boom generation is ready to recapture the idealism of its
youth. He plays his generational politics explicitly, constantly invoking the
memories of the Kennedys and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and stirring
Democratic audiences with his promise to lead the nation through a new era of
social change.

But almost all of the Democrats look to John F. Kennedy as a model, not only
because many in the baby boom generation remember him fondly, but also because
he was one of the most successful practitioners of ''new generation'' politics.

In promising in his 1960 campaign to ''do better'' and to ''get the country
moving again,'' the 43-year-old Kennedy was staking out a clear contrast between
himself and the aging Dwight Eisenhower, whom he wished to succeed. What better
model is there for Democrats in the closing year of Ronald Reagan's Presidency?

Thus, when formally announcing their candidacies, Michael S. Dukakis, the
53-year-old Governor of Massachusetts, and Richard A. Gephardt, a 46-year-old
Representative from Missouri, gave speeches that were liberally sprinkled with
passages inspired by those Kennedy delivered in the 1960 campaign.

Gore Sees 40 as Just Right

Senator Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee, one of the more recent entries in the
Democratic stakes, goes his opponents one better. He argues that youthfulness
will be read this time as it was in Kennedy's - more as a sign of vigor than of
immaturity. Mr. Gore, the youngest of the contenders, has been telling Democrats
that with about half of the electorate under the age of 40 -his own age in March
1988 - 40 years old may be exactly right.

But interest in generational politics is not confined to Democrats.
Representative Jack F. Kemp of upstate New York says that his optimistic message
about the future and his youthful appearance are what the Republican Party needs
to compete against the new generation of Democrats. Mr. Kemp is 51 years old.

Former Gov. Pierre S. du Pont 4th of Delaware is casting himself as ''tomorrow's
leader.'' He says he is the only candidate really addressing the issues of the
future, notably relieving the young from some of the burdens of Social Security
taxes. Dennis Rochford, his Iowa campaign manager, said Mr. du Pont, 52, was
aiming his campaign squarely at Republicans in their 20's and 30's.

Most surprising of all, perhaps, is the appeal that Vice President Bush, who is
62, seems to have to the young. According to New York Times/CBS News Polls and
other surveys, Mr. Bush's biggest advantage over Bob Dole of Kansas, 63, the
Senate minority leader, is among voters under 30. Mr. Bush's campaign director,
Lee Atwater, who is in his 30's and was once a member of a rock band, is a
specialist on the baby boom vote. He sees one of his central tasks in the
campaign as maintaining Mr. Bush's lead among younger voters.

But if generational politics is a popular concept, it is also a slippery one.
Just who is the ''new generation?'' One definition refers to the baby boom. In
America today, there are 72 million people who were born from 1946 to 1964, the
years demographers have identified as the years of the post-war baby boom.
Especially interesting to politicians are the 50 million people in the leading
edge of the baby boom, those over 30 years old.

That is the time of life when many who did not vote before begin leading more
stable lives and start casting ballots. Thus, it is very nearly a statistical
certainty that the turnout among members of the baby boom generation will grow
in 1988.

But the focus on the baby boom generation leaves out the very youngest voters,
who constitute one of the most Republican segments of the electorate, according
to polls. And while Democrats see generational politics as a way of surmounting
the old debates in their party about ideology - ''new versus old is better than
left versus right,'' in the words of one strategist - Republicans have in fact
been posting major gains among the young voters.

Reagan Favored Over Carter

This is especially true for those under 30, for whom the Presidencies of Jimmy
Carter and Ronald Reagan were formative political experiences, and who think Mr.
Reagan comes out much better in the comparison.

In this group, Republican loyalty is holding up remarkably well, despite the
Iran-contra affair, and so is loyalty to Mr. Reagan. Kevin Phillips, a
Republican voting analyst, argues that Mr. Bush's is popular among the young
largely because he is inheriting Mr. Reagan's high standing, as is the
Republican Party.

In October 1986 and again last month, The New York Times/CBS News Poll asked
registered voters which party's candidate they expected to support in 1988. In
October, those under 30 picked the Republicans over the Democrats by a margin of
45 to 33 percent. The survey in early April found the margin closer, but still
gave the Republicans the advantage, 43 percent to 37 percent.

Among older members of the baby boom, though, there are signs of volatility that
are at the heart of Democratic hopes. In October, those 30 to 44 years old said
they expected to vote Republican in 1988 by a margin of 37 to 30 percent. But
last month, the numbers reversed. Democrats led by exactly the same margin.

For a candidate like Mr. Biden, who invoked a Bruce Springsteen song in the
middle of an economic speech last week, those are the numbers of political
opportunity.

Mr. Biden and many other Democrats are trying to appeal simultaneously to two
segments of the baby boom generation: the more affluent, college-educated, many
of whom, Democrats believe, are yearning for a new round of political commitment
and idealism; and the less affluent baby boomers, sometimes called ''new collar
workers,'' many of whom fear that their standard of living is going be lower
than that of their parents.

Dual Strategy With Limits

But the very need to pursue such a dual strategy also suggests the complications
and limits of generational politics. Paul Maslin, a Democratic poll-taker,
argues that the idea of a block ''generational vote'' is as suspect as the idea
of a single ''women's vote.'' The baby boom generation, he noted, is divided not
only by economic class and race but by values.

''Not everybody in the 'new generation' looks back with the same fondness to the
1960's,'' he said. Vietnam veterans, for example, had a profoundly different
experience of the period than did those who avoided the war through college
deferments.

Ralph Whitehead, a professor at the University of Massachusetts and a specialist
on the baby boom generation, has discerned substantial differences between the
young professionals, the ''yuppies,'' and his less affluent ''new collars.''

On the one hand, the yuppies are richer and more secure in their jobs, and thus
more sympathetic to conservative economics. The ''new collars,'' a kind of
proletariat of the service economy, are paid less and are more likely to see
their jobs under threat from economic change. They are thus more open to
government involvement in the economy.

But on social issues, Mr. Whitehead said, the young professionals are more
likely to have libertarian views. The new collars have adopted some of these
values - they were influenced by the 1960's and rock 'n' roll, too - but tend to
feel a stronger tug from the traditional values of their parents regarding
family life.

The Republicans have shown themselves to be especially adept at turning these
contraditions within the baby boom generation to their advantage. This was
especially true in Mr. Reagan's 1984 landslide victory and in a variety of
Southern electoral contests.

He appealed to the more afluent baby boomers with his low-tax policies and to
the less affluent with his emphasis on patriotism.

A New Democratic Ideology

In 1988, the Democrats will be fighting back. In different ways, all the
Democrats have begun to form a new ideology aimed at various elements of the
baby boom generation.

All emphasize individual initiative and praise young entrepreneurs - and workers
- who defy economic convention. Yet they also attack ''greed'' on Wall Street,
corporate take-over specialists and the failures of old-style managers.

One Democratic poll-taker, Peter Hart, argues that the sheer youth of the
Democratic field may be the key to its success in wooing the young.

Mr. Hart asked 501 adults in the Washington metropolitan area whether they would
be more inclined to support Presidential candidates ''in their 60's with 20 to
25 years in public life'' or those ''in their 40's with 10 to 15 years in public
life.'' The winners? Those in their 40's, by a margin of 50 percent to 29
percent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JERSEY CHURCH HELPS REGION'S ALIENS

BYLINE: By ALFONSO A. NARVAEZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 50, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 736 words

DATELINE: FORT LEE, N.J., May 15


For the last few weeks, scores of undocumented aliens have come through the
doors of the Episcopal Church of the Good Shepherd here seeking information on
the amnesty program that will permit many of them to legalize their status in
this country.

They are natives of many countries, including Korea, Japan, Poland, Iran, El
Salvador, Guatemala, Vietnam and the Philippines.

''This has been very encouraging,'' said the Rev. Hosea Lee, associate pastor of
the Church of the Good Shepherd and the minister in charge of the program here.
''People are slowly coming in. Many are still afraid - afraid of the authorities
- afraid that this is some sort of a hoax and that it is the Government's way of
identifying aliens for an eventual round up.''

He said hundreds of telephone inquiries had been received and that 82
applications were being processed.

The church is one of 40 agencies in the New York region that has been approved
by the Federal Immigration and Naturalization Service to help illegal aliens
fill out the application forms. They are in addition to the Government offices
that opened this week in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut. #7 Years in
Hiding Mr. Lee said that the most pathetic case he had found was that of a woman
who had read about the program in a Korean-language newspaper in New York.

''After I spoke with her she asked me 'Can I go out now?' '' Mr. Lee said. ''She
had come here seven years ago and had not left the house because she was afraid
of being picked up and deported.''

Mr. Lee's mastery of foreign languages - he speaks Korean, Japanese and Chinese
- has attracted aliens from outside Bergen County. Some from as far away as Long
Island came to the church this week.

Although immigration authorities allow organizations to charge up to $75 for
each application processed, the Rev. Richard L. Gressle, the rector of the
church, said that no fees were being charged for the services they were
providing, three hours a morning, six days a week.

''We feel it is just part of the work of the church,'' he said. ''The church is
not in business.''

Government Offices

Mr. Lee and others directing the programs at different churches and social and
civic organization, have either undergone training offered by the immigration
service or by immigrant advocacy groups.

Applicants whose papers appear to be in order will be sent to the immigration
legalization offices set up in Paterson and Jersey City, where Government
employees will go over the applications to check the information and
documentation, personally interview applicants and then recommend approval or
disapproval.

Once the applicant has turned over his documents and paid the fee of $185 for an
adult and $50 for a child (a maximum of $420 for a family) they will be given a
temporary permit allowing them to work pending a final determination of their
case. The final decision will be made by immigration service officials at a
regional office in Vermont.

For one 34-year-old man who came to the church this week, the path to
legalization, temporary residency and eventual citizenship, will be fairly easy
- if all his proof are accepted by immigration. He came to the United States in
1979, using a friend's passport and immediately began to work. He found a place
to live, is employed as a security guard and has paid income taxes over the
years.

Terms of Law

His documents appear to qualify under the terms of the amnesty law - entry prior
to 1982, no arrests for a felony or three misdemeanors, steady work habits and
continuous residency, with no extended trips out of the country from the time he
arrived.

''My reason for wanting to legalize my position here is so that I will have a
feeling of security living here,'' the man said. ''It will also allow me to go
and visit my parents who I haven't seen in eight years.''

Despite assurances that all information is confidential and cannot be used in
deportation hearings or by other government agencies, some applicants are still
reluctant to be photographed or to speak openly.

''No, no, no,'' said a woman when asked if a photographer for a newspaper could
be taken at an angle that would show just the back of her head as she spoke with
Mr. Lee. ''Something could be made of it.''

She is already a permanent resident of the United States but was seeking to
legalize the status of her 41-year-old daughter and her granddaughter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the Rev. Hosea Lea helping out Freddie Flores to fill out
forms for amnesty (NYT/Sara Krulwich)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A RELATIONSHIP LIKE NO OTHER

BYLINE: By RICHARD H. ULLMAN; Richard H. Ullman, a professor of international
affairs at Princeton University, is a co-editor of the recently published
''Western Europe and the Crisis in U.S.-Soviet Relations.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2858 words



WALTZING WITH A DICTATOR
The Marcoses and the Making of American Policy. By Raymond Bonner. Illustrated.
533 pp. New York: Times Books. $19.95.

WHY does the United States so often support dictators? That is the question,
Raymond Bonner tells us, that drove him to write this impressive study of the
relationship between five American Presidents and Ferdinand Marcos, who ruled
the Philippines from 1965 until 1986.

A lawyer and investigative journalist who reported for The New York Times from
Central America from 1980 to 1982 (his previous book was ''Weakness and Deceit:
U.S. Policy and El Salvador''), Mr. Bonner surely had a fairly good notion of
the answers to that question before he started. He sums up one answer by quoting
Franklin Roosevelt's oft-cited characterization of Nicaragua's Anastasio Somoza
Garcia: ''He may be a son of a bitch. But at least he's our son of a bitch.'' Of
course we would prefer it if constitutional democrats ruled everywhere. But the
third world too often seems to offer only a choice between ''our'' and ''their''
(meaning the Soviet Union's) dictators.

Or so we say. But as Mr. Bonner points out, American Administrations have
frequently sought to keep nationalist third-world leaders from office even when
they have had no evident links to Moscow. More often than not the real choice
facing Washington policy makers is not between unsavory but compliant dictators
and Moscow-oriented Communists. Rather, it is between the dictators and militant
nationalists who threaten to deprive American business interests of their
special privileges and to remove from positions of influence the officials and
politicians who, as America's clients, have made sure that the privileges were
properly protected. In short, they often seek to end the cozy relationships with
the United States - official and private - that serve to enrich a local elite at
the expense of the mass of their compatriots and, frequently, their national
patrimony.

In the Philippines, not only business interests have been at stake. At Clark
Field and Subic Bay, the Air Force and Navy respectively have two of their
largest overseas installations. Outside their gates, the towns of Angeles and
Olongapo, with their seedy bars, strip joints, massage parlors and teen-age
prostitutes, combine the worst aspects of Asian and American culture. For
decades, just as assistant secretaries of state and Pentagon generals and
admirals have trooped to Congress to testify to the critical role the bases play
in the worldwide defense of freedom, so opposition to the bases has been a
staple of political rhetoric in the Philippines. The first question that State
Department and C.I.A. analysts have tended to ask about Philippine politicians
is not what difference these politicians might make to the way their fellow
citizens lead their lives, but whether their coming to power might jeopardize
the bases.

As Mr. Bonner emphasizes, the United States' relationship with the Philippines
is like no other. Nowhere else, not even among the tormented republics of
Central America, has the United States had so profoundly shaping an influence.
The apt comparison is with the dominant role of France in the political economy
and culture of its former West African colonies. (The Philippines, after all,
was an American colony from 1898 until 1946.) English remains the unifying
language. Philippine weddings and political campaigns gyrate to American popular
music. The Philippine Constitution derives from our own. American companies are
deeply intertwined with every aspect of the archipelago's economy. The armed
services (like those in other American client states) ape ours - without, of
course, the democratic tradition of staying out of politics.

Given the pervasive extent of American influence, it is scarcely surprising that
Washington Administrations and, to an even greater extent, the Congress have
been the targets of much of the posturing on the Philippine political stage.
When Ferdinand Marcos neared the end of his second and, according to the
Constitution, final presidential term in 1972, he trumped up grounds for
declaring martial law so he could remain in power. For him, the audience that
mattered was in Washington, not Manila; had the United States disapproved and
cut off the flow of aid, his own armed services, even his cronies in the
Philippine establishment, might have turned against him. AS the record shows,
the United States did not openly disapprove. Mr. Bonner takes the record one
step further and asserts that Mr. Marcos cleared his move in advance by
telephone with President Nixon. Mr. Nixon has denied that any such conversation
took place. But on this matter as on others, the evidence in Mr. Bonner's book
seems convincing; indeed, one of the book's great strengths is the thorough
manner in which its author documents his contentions.

Right up to the end, Mr. Marcos focused on American reactions. In November 1985,
when he called a snap presidential election, he did so not to give Filipinos a
choice of leaders - he fully expected to be able successfully to manipulate the
outcome, just as he had those of previous elections - but to give his friends in
the Reagan Administration and Congress a rationale for continuing their support
at a time when his regime was appearing more and more brutal and corrupt. And
when his opponent, Corazon Aquino, accompanied the launching of her own campaign
with a New York Times interview in which she said that she favored removal of
the United States bases and a dialogue with the guerrillas of the Communist New
People's Army, liberal American supporters, says Mr. Bonner, hastily arranged
for a New York public relations firm to take her under its wing to prevent such
gaffes in the future. Mr. Marcos, of course, had long been the client of a
public relations firm with solid roots in the Republican establishment.

In earlier times, however, Mr. Marcos had less need for such firms. His wife,
Imelda, was a master at manipulating American politics. She did so by means of
some considerable charm and an unrivaled boldness in insinuating herself into
the company of the powerful and the rich, all the while smoothing the way by
spending vast sums of money on gifts and on lavish entertainment, not only in
the Philippines but in the United States. She - and her husband - also
contributed to American political campaigns. Mr. Bonner believes that the
Marcoses contributed at least $250,000, probably considerably more ($1 million,
he suggests), to Mr. Nixon's 1968 and 1972 Presidential campaigns.

Many of those who accepted Imelda Marcos's invitations and extravagant offerings
never stopped to reflect on the ugly contrast between the world of cliched
glamour and show business personalities with which she constantly surrounded
herself and the desperate poverty in which the vast majority of Filipinos lived.
Nor did many stop to ask where she got the millions of dollars that, over the
years, her parties cost, or the equally large sums she spent in New York and
other fashion capitals - her shopping expeditions were maniac binges - on her
own clothes and jewelry.

Mr. Bonner, of course, did ask. He did so by means of extensive interviews with
more than 100 Americans and Filipinos who had been in or near the two
Governments, and through assiduous use of the Freedom of Information Act, by
which he was able to obtain some 12,000 pages of previously classified United
States Government documents. These sources enabled him to piece together a
detailed account of the ways in which the Marcoses were able systematically to
plunder and debilitate the Philippine economy for the benefit of relatives and
cronies and, especially, of themselves. MR. BONNER shows that most of the
Marcoses' largesse came from the Philippine business community. In effect, they
sold protection: those who did not pay soon found themselves no longer in
business, their property on occasion even expropriated. Sometimes the sources
were American payments - military assistance funds and other transfers that the
Marcoses diverted to their own accounts. Mr. Bonner's account of these
transactions is convincing to a fault. If his book has any flaw, it is that in
many passages he tends to overwrite to nail down his indictment. In many
instances, a paragraph would have been better than a page. Nonetheless,
''Waltzing With a Dictator'' is a signal achievement. Mr. Bonner's meticulous
investigation makes it plain that the Marcoses' depredations were well known to
United States diplomats in Manila and to their superiors in Washington.

An especially absorbing part of his book is his account of how successive
American ambassadors dealt with the ruling couple, who, of course, devoted
enormous efforts to co-opting them. Some were completely co-opted; then the
embassy's quite visible stamp of approval directly helped the Marcoses retain
power. A few maintained an ambivalent and uneasy arm's-length distance. One,
Stephen W. Bosworth, who arrived in Manila in April 1984, soon came to the
conclusion that the longer the Marcoses remained in the Malacanang Palace, the
stronger would grow the Communist guerrilla movement that was daily gathering
recruits among the population. By then, Mrs. Aquino was nearing the beginning of
her effort to seek the presidency. Mr. Bosworth was eventually to throw the
weight of the embassy discreetly behind her campaign.

As Mr. Bonner makes clear, interference in Philippine politics has been routine
for the United States Government. In 1986 it took the relatively benign form of
open funding of the Citizens' Organization set up to monitor the presidential
election, and covert funding of the Roman Catholic Church's opposition voice,
Radio Veritas.

Probably the most unconscionable instances of interference came in 1953. When
the embassy concluded that President Elpidio Quirino's administration was so
corrupt that a second term would fuel the Communist insurgency, the C.I.A.
drugged his drinks before a speech so he would appear incoherent, and funneled
more than $1 million to his eventually successful opponent, Ramon Magsaysay.
(This was a bargain: the C.I.A. director, Allen Dulles, had offered his Manila
station $5 million for the job.) A few months later the station went so far as
to plan and actually prepare for the assassination of one of the new President's
other opponents, a senator heading a movement protesting the Clark and Subic
base agreements.

Only in 1965, Mr. Bonner concludes, when Ferdinand Marcos first ran for the
presidency, does the evidence indicate that the United States kept hands off,
regarding both Mr. Marcos and his opponent as supportive of American interests.
When Mr. Marcos ran for re-election in 1969, however, he did so with large sums
of unaccounted-for United States Government cash on hand and with a state visit
from President Nixon, six months before the polling, in the unlikely event that
Filipinos might wonder where Washington stood. FOR the entire two decades of Mr.
Marcos's regime - indeed, up until its last few days in February 1986 -
Filipinos had no reason to doubt that Washington favored him. President and Mrs.
Reagan, and probably the Nixons as well, apparently felt genuine affection for
the Marcoses. When Mr. Reagan reluctantly concluded that the United States had
no alternative but to disengage from Mr. Marcos, he did so only after the
latter's efforts to steal the 1986 election were so flagrant as to make
continued support politically impossible. Lyndon Johnson, on the other hand,
made clear that he could not stand Mr. Marcos, telling one of his senior
advisers, ''If you ever bring that man near me again, I'll have your head.'' But
his Administration was unwavering in its support.

Even the Carter Administration, despite its stoutly declared emphasis on human
rights, did not noticeably depart from this pattern. Just four months before Mr.
Carter entered the White House, Amnesty International released a report -
characterized by the United States Embassy in Manila as ''essentially balanced
and accurate'' - stating that some 6,000 political prisoners languished in
Philippine jails, and that the most beastly acts of torture were widespread. Mr.
Bonner records in graphic detail the fierce bureaucratic battles between
Patricia Derian, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, who wished
to use the threat of reduced aid to induce the Marcos regime to reform, and
Richard Holbrooke, the Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs. Like his
predecessors, Mr. Holbrooke argued that the Philippines was too important
strategically to allow what he once called the ''preachy moralism'' of the human
rights advocates to deflect the policy. His superiors, both at the State
Department and in the White House, backed him up.

Mr. Bonner emphasizes, but perhaps not strongly enough, that the policy that
caused each American Administration to cling to the Marcoses was based on
profoundly flawed logic. For Washington, the Philippines has been real estate -
the site of two gigantic military bases. The bases are largely irrelevant to
Philippine security; there the threat is internal rather than external. For the
United States Air Force and Navy they are convenient but not essential. It would
undoubtedly cost more to carry out at other sites the activities now centered at
Clark and Subic. Yet Mr. Bonner's prodigious research did not uncover any
serious effort to calculate just what those costs might actually be. In their
steadfast support of a corrupt and cruel dictator, however, successive
Administrations have behaved as if the bases were valuable beyond price.
Otherwise, the terms of the entire Philippine-American relationship might have
been different.

Not surprisingly, Mr. Bonner compares Washington's long support of Ferdinand
Marcos with its even longer support of the Shah in Iran. In the Philippines, he
argues, unlike Iran, we were lucky: through no fault of Washington, there was a
moderate centrist ready to step in when the reigning dictator fell. Mrs.
Aquino's Government faces severe obstacles, however. The Marcos era was a
disaster for the Philippines - the nation's foreign debt rose from $2 billion to
$26 billion while its economy floundered and the Communist insurgent movement
grew from a few hundred to nearly 10,000 fighters. While there now exists in
Manila a genuinely democratic yet remarkably pro-American Government, it has yet
to be proved that the United States can truly support democracy in the
Philippines.

SUING FOR THE TRUTH

His editor originally proposed that Raymond Bonner do a book on America's
relations with several of its favorite dictators, including the Shah of Iran,
Ngo Dinh Diem of South Vietnam and Ferdinand Marcos. At the time, Mr. Bonner, a
lawyer by training who later became a journalist, was completing a book on El
Salvador, and he reckoned that the Philippines might be America's next crisis
spot after Central America. So he chose to focus on Washington's ties with Mr.
Marcos and his extravagant wife, Imelda.

Mr. Bonner began with the conviction that the Marcoses held sway only because of
American support and that the United States bore responsibility for his
dictatorship. This belief was strengthened when he uncovered evidence showing
that the United States Embassy in Manila knew in advance that Mr. Marcos planned
to declare martial law in 1972 and did nothing to stop him.

Ironically, much of Mr. Bonner's book is based on State Department cables he got
declassified through requests under the Freedom of Information Act.

Mr. Bonner made about 150 such requests, in the form of short letters to the
State Department. Some came back with nothing, some with portions of documents
deleted, but some with full texts. He even received some material dating from
the time of Mr. Marcos's ouster in February 1986.

Mr. Bonner found that the more precisely he drew the description of what he
wanted - the narrower the time frame and more specific the subject - the better
his chances. Early on he discovered that the Government was not likely to comply
within the 10-day period required by law. But six months was too long, he
decided. So he filed a lawsuit in Federal District Court in Washington to make
the State Department pay attention.

The strategy worked. ''After the suit, the process accelerated dramatically,''
Mr. Bonner said.

''They didn't take me seriously before.'' Although his book is now finished, Mr.
Bonner is continuing with the lawsuit, both to help his own future work and for
the benefit of other investigative journalists.

He remains angry that in answer to some of his requests, he would get back two
copies of the same document, with different deletions in each. ''It shows the
process is arbitrary,'' he suggested. ''It has nothing to do with national
security.''

''If we are going to do things, we should do them openly,'' Mr. Bonner argues.
He believes the United States does have influence and can properly use it, but
''we shouldn't get involved in covert operations or interfere in elections.''
  FOX BUTTERFIELD

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Imelda and Ferdinand Marcos (From ''Waltzing with a
Dictator''; AP; UPI); photo of Imelda and Ferdinand Marcos (Agence
France-Presse) (page 56); photo of Raymond Bonner (Susan Meiselas); photo of
striking Filipino workers at Subic Bay (Reuters) (page 57)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. IN CROSSFIRE OF BORDER WAR

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 835 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


''THIS is the heart of Asia,'' said a poet reciting Pushtoon verse at a recent
mammoth celebration of the Soviet-backed government here. ''When Afghanistan
trembles, all of Asia moves.''

The poet's boast seems no exaggeration. More than ever, Afghanistan is affecting
the relationships among other major powers in Asia, helping to determine their
links with Moscow and Washington, and bringing strains between the Soviet Union
and the United States themselves. For the Reagan Administration, the most urgent
problem of the seven-year-old war in Afghanistan is the alarming spillover at
the Afghan-Pakistan border in the east.

The border region has become the setting for a fierce air war between the two
countries, with the United States apparently close to a decision to help
Islamabad by supplying some form of sophisticated aerial reconnaissance and
warning equipment. The possibility of such equipment and aircraft, or other
planes, going to Pakistan has alarmed India and seriously hurt Washington's
efforts in recent years to improve relations with New Delhi. Prime Minister
Rajiv Gandhi had already registered dismay at the ease with which the
Administration's $4.02 billion aid package for Pakistan seems to be sailing
through the Congress despite concern about Pakistan's nuclear weapons research
program.

In Washington, senior Administration officials were said to be ''agonizing''
over the possibility that introducing sophisticated new American equipment in
the border area would draw Pakistan into a dangerously deeper round of warfare.
Officials said the result might be to undermine what little hope exists for a
political settlement in the war.

The problem is that after years of serving as a conduit for covert American aid
to the anti-Communist Afghan insurgents, Pakistan has increasingly exposed
itself to retaliatory air strikes from the Afghan Air Force. The attacks began a
few years ago, as Afghan and Soviet troops sought to cut off the Pakistani
supply lines to the insurgents. Now Pakistan maintains that there have been 350
air attacks in the last three and a half months alone, resulting in nearly 200
deaths.

Last year, Washington responded to the aerial attacks inside Afghanistan by
quietly supplying the Afghan rebels with sophisticated Stinger missiles.
American officials assert that surface-to-air rockets in the hands of the rebels
have shot down as many as 15 to 20 helicopters or planes a month inside Afghan
territory. The claim is dismissed as exaggerated by Afghan officials here.
Nevertheless, the use of rockets by the rebels is said to have restored some
balance to the conflict after a year in which the rebels suffered serious losses
and were mostly on the defensive.

Meanwhile, Abdul Wakiil, Afghanistan's Foreign Minister, warned that it was the
United States that was widening the war, and he threatened ''serious
consequences'' if Washington escalated it further. Reinforcing Washington's
concern, India's Foreign Minister traveled this month to Kabul, indicating
Indian displeasure with American policy.

American officials acknowledge their concern about upsetting India, but they
also complain that New Delhi has been blaming the wrong superpower for war in
Afghanistan. ''We think India could probably be rather more influential with the
Soviet Union than perhaps India has been,'' Secretary of State George P. Shultz
told an Indian-American business group in Washington last week.

Big Covert Operation

But some American officials acknowledge that the larger consideraton is that for
years the war in Afghanistan has insured that American policy in all of South
Asia has been set by the priorities of the Pentagon and the Central Intelligence
Agency, which in Afghanistan has conducted the largest covert operation since
the war in Vietnam. Experts agree that for now at least, the ''covert'' war by
perhaps 250,000 guerrillas in Afghanistan commands broad support from Democrats
and Republicans alike, including those who call for a more conciliatory approach
in other parts of the world. Soviet and Afghan officials tell reporters that
this puzzles them. They say they wonder why, until the Soviet Union sent 115,000
troops into Afghanistan, the United States cared little about the future of a
country that had always been considered in Moscow's sphere of influence.

The reason why the growing border war is important is that for Washington, it
may signify a shift in which Americans get a closer view of the war's costs.
Some in Pakistan who support the war plainly fear the costs of a stalemate that
lasts until the end of the century. The bombing of Pakistan's border areas
underscores that fear, but so have the ethnic unrest and drug abuse believed to
have been caused by the presence of three million Afghan refugees inside
Pakistan. Thus the growing tensions among Afghanistan, Pakistan and India that
could force the United States to make some difficult reassessments about its
attitude toward the entire Asian subcontinent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Afghanistan and surrounding countries

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BRINGING THE TERRORS BACK HOME

BYLINE: By FRANK CONROY; Frank Conroy, the author of the autobiography
''Stop-Time'' and ''Midair,'' a collection of short stories, will become the
director of the Iowa Writers Workshop in August.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1744 words



INDIAN COUNTRY
By Philip Caputo. 419 pp. New York: Bantam Books. $18.95.

SOMEWHERE early in ''A Rumor of War,''

Philip Caputo's memoir of his soldiering years in Vietnam, he mentions, almost
in passing, a syndrome I believe he called combatitis veteranitis - nightmares,
an inability to concentrate, mood swings - that he and some others who survived
the fighting fell prey to. He was writing in the 1970's, and the book, which was
very good, was about the war rather than its aftereffects. With combat far
behind him, he confessed to ''a feeling of being afraid when there was no reason
to be. . . . Although I've had a decade to think about it I am still unable to
explain.'' In the 80's, we've heard a great deal about these matters:
post-stress syndrome used in the defense of an accused drug smuggler, for
example, or how the shell shock of World Wars I and II was different from this
more modern phenomenon. But the dialogue has been label-ridden, jargon-ridden,
and the whole matter has remained fairly murky. In addition to its other
virtues, Mr. Caputo's new novel may help clear the air a bit.

''Indian Country'' is a fine traditional novel that handles a difficult theme
both cleverly and artfully, and if at times it seems a bit rough-hewn - the
prose style, for example - it has real strength. More than enough. The book is
not autobiographical, but it is surely informed by the author's meditations on
the particular kind of fear mentioned above. The hero, Christian Starkmann, a
Vietnam vet, is a man with that kind of trouble, and a whole lot of it.

The point should quickly be made that this is not a war novel; it takes place
mostly in the present and mostly in Michigan's Upper Peninsula. A crude and
highly reduced formula for the narrative movement of this psychological study
is: fear in the presence of isolation becomes paranoia, which becomes mania,
which in turn threatens the disintegration of personality. (As this process
progresses the writing gets stronger.) Mr. Caputo quite correctly avoids this
kind of lingo; rather he gives us the man and bravely attempts to dramatize what
is happening to him. He wants us to be inside Christian, to feel what he is
feeling, and he often succeeds. Not always, but often enough to keep the novel
from reading like a case history.

Mr. Caputo's task is more than ordinarily difficult. Fear attached to nothing in
particular - what the professional literature calls free-flowing anxiety - is
hard to describe. As gifted a writer as Freud more or less threw in the towel,
and it is well known that ordinarily articulate people who have suffered panic
attacks are unable to find language, either while the attacks are going on or
afterward, to express what is happening. (It is a side effect that is
particularly terrifying in itself -to be scared to death and unable to explain
why.) Mr. Caputo must perforce spiral in on the fear, describing nightmares,
vertigo, a kind of tension or stiffness in Chris, and trust us to understand.
Chris himself is almost entirely silent, monosyllabic even to his wife (a
simple, strong, loving woman, exceptionally well drawn as a character) and
infuriatingly self-absorbed. This may be symptomatically accurate, but it
doesn't make things any easier, technically speaking. If we do not always feel
Chris's fear, we do feel how cut off he is, how clumsily he moves through life,
as if trapped inside some impossibly heavy and unwieldy suit of armor.

Chris's paranoia - his suspiciousness of King, a fellow worker, and of other
people and certain places -may be slightly mechanical, as if the author were to
some extent losing patience with his own character. Mr. Caputo walks a fine line
here. He draws Chris in such a way as to keep us at a certain distance. We do
not identify with Chris as a sensitive nice-guy everyman, or as a person we are
necessarily pulling for with any great enthusiasm (as we pull for June, his
wife). Indeed, we grow increasingly irritated with him, and after 200 pages of
his ''yups'' and ''nopes,'' dumb brooding and myopia we might even be tempted to
put the book aside. That would be a mistake, for in a single paragraph on page
233 ''Indian Country'' begins to transform itself from a workhorse to a
thoroughbred. Chris has turned down the opportunity of graduate school courses
at the expense of the Great Superior Iron and Timber Company, for whom he works
as a timber cruiser, scouting for harvestable trees. June has just found that
out, from Chris's bete noire, King, and she is angry:

''He was splitting firewood by the shed as she came up the road. From a distance
he appeared woodsy and Lincolnesque in his wool mackinaw, his long arms
rhythmically swinging the maul; but when she got closer, and he looked up to
wave hello, she noticed the unusual narrowness of his head. It resembled a
rectangle standing on end. This unattractive feature had somehow escaped her
attention all these years, and the discovery of it now added to her
disappointment in him.''

I was greatly relieved to see that June, although completely in the dark about
the causes of her husband's illness, and, as well, about much of its nature,
realizes nevertheless that the man is turning into a blockhead. There is nothing
romantic in this particular case of combatitis veteranitis, Mr. Caputo seems to
be saying. It is reductive, and dangerous. From this point on the book opens up
and moves forward with speed and grace.

As Chris enters the phase of mania, the author has just the right pace, just the
right details to make it completely believable. Mr. Caputo is a fine action
writer, controlling the sweep of the narrative with musical skill, and never
cheating the reader. The climactic passages have a kind of hallucinatory
clarity, and they stick in the mind. It is very much to the author's credit that
we feel a kind of wild release (after so much minutiae) in action, as perhaps
the tension sustained by a phobic, paranoid veteran might be released in the act
of murder, suicide, or both.

''Indian Country'' would not have worked without June, a mother and a social
worker (there are some fine observations on poverty in Upper Michigan),
tough-minded without being tough-skinned, hard-working and thoroughly engaged
with life. She is as open as her husband is closed and provides a necessary
balance in the narrative. Her strength comes not only from her soul, but from
her constant awareness and contact with the world around her -the same world
Chris runs from. This irony enriches the story. Necessary to the novel, but much
more simply drawn, are Chris's father, an unloving, politically active preacher,
and Chris's surrogate father (I mean surrogate in the old, nonbiological sense),
an aging American Indian medicine man. The preacher is too much of a caricature
for us to understand why Chris wants his love or grieves his loss. The Indian
comes more successfully to life, but the reader's tolerance for mumbo jumbo will
be tested in some passages. Mr. Caputo needed a character to work against
shrinks, rap sessions and all the other paraphernalia of institutional forces
trying to help troubled Vietnam vets, and the wise old Indian medicine man may
be acceptable in this capacity. BUT there is simply too much writing about these
ancillary people, too many pages, and the book would have been stronger with
some deft cutting. There is some splendid writing about nature, and also about
work, whether it be social work or logging. ''Indian Country'' is strengthened
by a strong sense of place. Upper Michigan seems both exotic and entirely
American, a boondocks with its own special flavor.

A less ambitious writer might have presented us with a screwed-up Vietnam vet,
asking us to accept his condition as a given, and gone on to write his novel.
Mr. Caputo is interested in etiology and gives us a specific man with a specific
history. Chris's childhood friendship with an Indian boy, his relationship with
his own father, his emotional shallowness, his reaction to civilian attitudes
toward the war - these and other elements come together in a unique mix. Some
people broke down, Mr. Caputo says, but each in his own way. It wasn't just the
war, it was the particular way the war worked on particular men. Some came out
O.K., and some didn't. Some of those who were hurt emotionally healed rapidly,
some slowly, and some not at all. It turns out there are as many different forms
of combatitis veteranitis as there are people suffering from it, and that makes
sense. There are many different ways of healing, and that makes sense too.
''Indian Country'' makes the point that we should not try to understand these
things too easily.

A FLING WITH PARANOIA

A battle wound, of sorts, gave Philip Caputo the opportunity to complete his
first book, ''A Rumor of War,'' a memoir-commentary on the Vietnam War: in
October 1975, while reporting from Beirut for The Chicago Tribune, he was caught
in a crossfire and hit in the left ankle and right foot. The book was finished
during a year's convalescence, and then The Tribune sent him to Moscow. ''Partly
because I hated Moscow, partly because I got a sufficient advance for 'Horn of
Africa' [a novel], I quit being a journalist,'' Mr. Caputo said in a telephone
interview from his home in Key West, Fla., where he is working on a collection
of novellas, entitled ''Expatriates,'' and a screenplay for ''Horn of Africa.''

''Indian Country'' deals, as his other books have, with men damaged by war. Was
Mr. Caputo damaged by his service as a Marine in Vietnam? ''I had nightmares for
a few years,'' he said, ''but they faded. So 'Indian Country' was not a
catharsis; not even 'A Rumor of War' was a catharsis. Someone said, 'Writers
don't write to be saved; they write to be damned.' There is no personal
salvation through writing.''

Early in ''Indian Country,'' the protagonist, Chris Starkmann, directs a bombing
run in Vietnam. He may have made a mistake that led to American deaths. Mr.
Caputo permitted this ambiguity because, he said, ''in those circumstances, no
one knows what the hell is going on.''

A psychologist in the novel suggests that Starkmann has nurtured the memories
that have lead to his breakdown. Is Mr. Caputo saying some veterans are
psychiatric malingerers? ''That's true of an awful lot of these people,'' he
said. ''They sort of make a treasure of their trauma. Our experiences are what
we make of them.''
  BARTH HEALEY

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing; photo of Phillip Caputo (Lawson Little)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

GUNNAR MYRDAL, ANALYST OF RACE CRISIS, DIES

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3041 words


Gunnar Myrdal, the Swedish economist and sociologist whose 1944 book, ''An
American Dilemma,'' helped to destroy the ''separate but equal'' racial policy
in the United States, died yesterday in a hospital in Sweden. He was 88 years
old.

Reports from the Swedish capital said he had been hospitalized for more than two
months. At his bedside were his daughter Kaj Folster and a grandson, Janken
Myrdal, who said Mr. Myrdal had ''died naturally of old age.''

Mr. Myrdal, the 1974 Nobelist in economics, was the widower of Alva Myrdal,
co-winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1982 for her efforts to promote world
disarmament. She died in 1986.

A Footnote to History

Mr. Myrdal has been called the leading economist and social scientist of his
epoch. Statesman, reformer, dissenter, pacifist and foe of inequality, an
architect of the Swedish welfare state, he literally left his mark in a footnote
to history - the famous footnote 11 to the United States Supreme Court's 1954
ruling that segregation in public schools was unconstitutional. Listing sources
to prove that schools could not be ''separate but equal'' because separation
implied and enforced inferiority, the Court said, ''See generally Myrdal, An
American Dilemma 5/81944).''

The work appeared in two massive volumes in 1944, in an edition of only 2,500
copies; there have been about 30 editions since, but all have been small, with
sales totaling 100,000. Nonetheless, the work has often been compared with
Toqueville in its importance as a study of the United States.

''An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy'' was, Mr. Myrdal
once said, ''not a study of the Negroes but of the American society from the
viewpoint of the most disadvantaged group.'' The predicament, he wrote, was the
conflict between the ideals that white Americans proclaimed and their betrayal
in daily life. He held that this was particularly true in the South, where, he
argued, discrimination was due less to bias than to a failure of the courts and
the police to enforce the Constitution.

Though segregationists protested that the Court had fallen under the influence
of a radical foreigner, the Myrdal study was highly optimistic about America's
ability to solve its racial problem - over-optimistic, as Mr. Myrdal would
acknowledge. The study was infused with admiration for this country, which he
called his second home. He had no doubt that the conflict between American
idealism and the reality of racism would be resolved in a reasonable time. ''No
social utopia can compete with the promise of the American Constitution and with
the American creed which it embodies,'' he wrote.

Above his desk in Stockholm hung two framed documents, the Declaration of
Independence and a citation from Lincoln: ''To sin by silence when they should
protest makes cowards of men.''

Explaining his views, an American friend, the economist Paul A. Samuelson, said,
''He's always lecturing us like a Dutch uncle because he loves us.'' Mr. Myrdal,
talking with a reporter in 1972 about his long campaign against the Vietnam War,
remarked, ''I don't say it's a pleasure, but for my conscience I could not say
no.''

''I've always been optimistic about America,'' he continued. ''Why? Why do I sit
here when I could spend my time with wine and girls? Because ideals mean
something. They mean something special in America.''

Left Deep Mark on Homeland

He also left his mark on Sweden, where he helped draft many social and economic
programs, and to a smaller extent on South Asia, where he vigorously preached
land reform. Furthermore, as a United Nations official he promoted East-West
detente before it became fashionable, and as an economist he criticized orthodox
patterns of thinking and pioneered new ones.

Born on Dec. 6, 1898, in the rural parish of Gustafs, in central Sweden, the son
of Karl Adolf Myrdal, a railroad employee, he was christened Karl Gunnar but
eventually dropped the first name. He studied law and then economics at
Stockholm University, so impressing his teachers that on graduation he was named
to the faculty.

He was also a brash young man, as later he was called a brash old man. The story
was told that Gustav Cassell, the great Swedish economist, warned him, ''Gunnar,
you should be more respectful to your elders, because it is we who will
determine your promotion.'' ''Yes,'' the young man is said to have replied,
''but it is we who will write your obituaries.''

In 1924 Mr. Myrdal married a fellow student, Alva Reimer, who became a leading
feminist, pacifist and diplomat. They had three children: Jan, a writer and
anthropologist; Sissela Ann Bok, an author and authority on ethics who is the
wife of Derek C. Bok, president of Harvard University, and Kaj Folster, who is a
sociologist, as her mother was.

Friends remark that the career of Mrs. Myrdal was wrongly overshadowed by that
of her husband. Eleanor Roosevelt, meeting Sissela, said, ''You're the daughter
of Gunnar Myrdal, aren't you?'' ''Yes,'' she replied, ''and of Alva, too.''

An Advocate of Feminism

Mr. Myrdal shared his wife's feminism. She accompanied him on a Rockefeller
Foundation fellowship to the United States in 1929-30. Long afterward, he
recounted, he told another grantee that he had persuaded the foundation to pay
for wives, too, and the young man grumbled: ''So it was you. I'd been looking
forward to that holiday for years.''

A classicist, Mr. Myrdal held that ideals, cultural attitudes and social
structures were primordial in shaping economic ideas. But he was at first
fascinated by the abstract mathematical models coming into fashion in the 1920's
and helped found the Econometric Society, based in London.

Later, however, he accused the movement of ignoring the problem of distribution
of wealth in its obsession with economic growth, of using faulty statistics and
substituting Greek letters for missing data in its formulas and of flouting
logic. ''Correlations are not explanations,'' he wrote, ''and besides, they can
be as spurious as the high correlation in Finland between foxes killed and
divorces.''

Similarly, Mr. Myrdal was early in supporting the theses of John Maynard Keynes,
maintaining that the basic idea of adjusting national budgets to slow or speed
an economy was first developed in Sweden. But when the doctrine became orthodox
he was well ahead of such other liberal Keynesians as John Kenneth Galbraith in
abandoning it, on the ground that it ignored social justice and was used
primarily to support inflationary policy; the brakes were seldom applied, and
then they hurt the weak.

''I am often considered almost not a part of the profession of Establishment
economists,'' he observed in an essay. ''I am even referred to as a sociologist.
And by that economists usually do not mean anything flattering. Another, in some
respects like-minded, rebel, Galbraith, who in addition writes a beautiful and
forcible English, is often handled even more rudely by being classified by his
colleagues as a journalist.''

Defenders of Status Quo Derided

As early as 1929 Mr. Myrdal unsettled the dovecotes of the profession with a
book, ''The Political Element in the Development of Economic Theory,'' that
charged that orthodox economists distorted theory and logic to defend the status
quo. Two years later his ''Monetary Economics'' called for government spending
to combat the Depression.

He held later that such policies arrived in Sweden more by circumstance than
intent. But with the accession of Swedish Socialism to power, he and his wife
helped shape the welfare state. Their 1934 book, ''Crisis in the Population
Question,'' diagnosed the declining birth rate in Sweden and prescribed family
planning, sex education, public housing and child care.

As one result their name became a household word: a Myrdal house is designed for
large families; a Myrdal bicycle has two or three seats; a Myrdal sofa is a very
long one; a Myrdale is a community of unwed couples; ''to Myrdal'' even became
ironic slang for the act of procreation.

Mr. Myrdal occupied posts involving housing, population and banking, and served
in the Senate from 1936 to 1938 and again after World War II. The Swedish
economy recovered more quickly from the Depression than most others, and aided
by the country's neutrality during the war, it grew to be the most prosperous,
per capita, in the world, witnessing the virtual elimination of poverty and
slums.

Swedish Experience Defended

This was often cited by Mr. Myrdal as disproving the common argument of
economists that social change that raised wages and reduced the profits needed
for investment would slow industrial growth. In later years he was scornful of
suggestions that affluence and security had made Swedes neurotic and even
suicidal (it was widely but erroneously believed that Sweden had the highest
suicide rate in the world). ''This is a fantastic lie,'' he said in a 1976
interview. ''Why in hell should the protection of your life from economic
disasters and from bad health, the opening of education for your people,
pensions for old people, nursery care for children - why should that make you
frustrated?''

With the changes in Sweden well under way by 1938, Mr. Myrdal accepted an
invitation from the Carnegie Corporation to direct a two-year, $250,000 study of
Negroes in the United States. He liked to tell friends that he had been chosen
because he ''could play the innocent, dumb Swede.''

This was never the view of the 48 writer-scholars he recruited, including such
luminaries as Ralph J. Bunche and Kenneth B. Clark. ''He drove himself,'' Dr.
Clark once recalled. ''He was enthusiastic, opinionated but stimulatingly so,
constantly searching for answers and usually the first to find them. He was the
optimist and I was the pessimist. Now we've shifted almost 100 percent.''

From Hope to Disillusionment

Mr. Myrdal predicted that American idealism and the Constitution would gradually
assert themselves and discrimination would fade out in a generation. Gradually
he became disillusioned.

In recent years he freely confessed to errors in ''American Dilemma'': It had
underestimated the degree of bias in the North; it had predicted that unions
would support Negro rights; it had failed to forecast the civil-rights upheaval
in the South. He said he could not have foreseen the way technology would drive
blacks from the farms and squeeze them out of factories, nor that the country
would have permitted its cities to decay while whites fled to the suburbs.

''Any scholar expects to have errors,'' Professor Samuelson observed. ''The
point is to have interesting errors. I think that in 'American Dilemma' he
did.''

When riots flared in the ghettos in the early 1960's, Mr. Myrdal was still
hopeful. He said the fact that blacks were fighting for their rights reflected
their progress in jobs and education. But he warned that no solution would be
achieved unless the country eliminated slums and poverty for all, poor whites
included. He came to doubt that it would do so.

As the study was completed in 1940, the Nazis were overrunning Denmark and
Norway. Mr. Myrdal returned to Sweden, where he helped shape an economic policy
intended to finance an arms buildup in defense of neutrality. But he made no
bones about where his sympathies lay. He publicly vowed that Sweden would not
yield to the Nazi armies; with his wife he wrote a best seller, ''Contact With
America,'' in praise of its democratic institutions, and he spent part of the
war years in this country as an economic adviser to the Swedish Embassy.

Error in Postwar Program

Toward the end of the war Mr. Myrdal occupied himself with postwar planning.
Like most economists he expected peace to bring on a depression. That view led
to policy errors for which, according to colleagues, he received an unfair share
of blame because his brash ways made him an inevitable target.

One measure was a trade-and-credit agreement with the Soviet Union, which Mr.
Myrdal negotiated after his appointment as Minister of Commerce in 1945. In the
event, money became tight, markets were not lacking and the deal was officially
protested by the United States.

Though Mr. Myrdal was criticized by the Communists as a bourgeois reformist, he
steadfastly favored exchanges with the East, and he spent the decade 1947-57
promoting them as Secretary General of the United Nations Economic Commission
for Europe. In Geneva, Mr. Myrdal assembled what was regarded as a brilliant and
pragmatic staff, but the realities of the cold war and Western embargoes limited
its effectiveness. They also help explain why he was passed over as a successor
to Secretary General Trygve Lie at the United Nations.

Toward the end of the tour in Geneva Mr. Myrdal became obsessed with the problem
of poverty in the third world. He wrote a preliminary thesis, ''Rich Lands and
Poor: the Road to World Prosperity'' (1958), in which he stressed his concept of
''circular causality'' - that backwardness in education and social structure
worsens poverty, and vice versa.

Vast Study of Asian Poverty

At the same time he went to India, where his wife had preceded him to become
Swedish Ambassador, and began a 10-year study financed by the 20th Century Fund.
It culminated in the three-volume ''Asian Drama: An Inquiry Into the Poverty of
Nations'' (1968). Here he was more pessimistic than in ''American Dilemma.''
Exploring the societies of South Asia, he argued incessantly that land reform
and a narrowing of social inequalities were prerequesites for eradicating
poverty.

''Asian Drama'' also repeated Mr. Myrdal's warning that the United States was
heading for a fall in Vietnam. It predicted that pacification and
American-imposed land reform would fail, held that the United States had become
a hostage of its client in Saigon and urged that it open negotiations with the
Communists.

Returning to Sweden, Mr. Myrdal became a co-chairman of the International
Commission of Inquiry Into U.S. War Crimes in Indochina and head of the Swedish
Vietnam Committee, which helped inspire hospitality for American draft evaders
and deserters. He also presided over the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute, a Government-financed agency that has been an important source of
information on the arms trade.

He commuted to the United States, where he spoke at conferences and
Congressional hearings and taught at the Center for the Study of Democratic
Institutions in Santa Barbara, Calif., and at the City University of New York.
Everywhere, he preached peace, reform and racial justice.

'Defensive Self-Censorship'

Commenting on the fact that his war-crimes hearings had been ignored in this
country, he said: ''That is a defensive self-censorship. You are defending
yourselves against knowing too well what the world thinks of you.'' Appealing
before a Senate hearing for Government planning and spending to fight poverty,
he said: ''A strong America is a wise America. You are not very good losers.
Every time you are losing, an element of insanity enters your thinking that is
very dangerous. What you really need is not more private consumption but help
for the poor.''

Before a House subcommittee in 1969 he declared that the new Federal poverty
programs were ''spurious, badly administered and underconceived.'' He called
instead for a ''Marshall Plan'' to help the cities and the poor, at a cost of a
trillion dollars over a generation. ''I don't think America can stand a de facto
apartheid too much longer,'' he warned. ''It is against the vision of America.''

In 1974 the Swedish Academy of Sciences rendered a verdict of Solomon by
splitting the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science, awarding half to Mr.
Myrdal, the radical reformer, and half to Friedrich A. von Hayek, the
conservative Austrian economist. Both recipients are said to have been annoyed
by the pairing.

Two years later Mr. Myrdal said he had been caught off guard by the prize and
should have refused it. He called for its abolition on the ground that economics
was a ''soft'' science, loaded with value judgments.

For nearly 40 years, Mr. Myrdal argued his thesis that economists reflect their
own social biases and tended to err by reducing economics to abstract numbers.
''In reality, there are no 'economic' problems,'' he wrote. Above all in the
area of race and poverty issues, he accused his colleagues of underestimating
moral forces.

''The Negro problem, like all other political problems, is fundamentally a moral
issue,'' he said. ''This is realism, not idealism. Those of my colleagues who
believe that they are particularly 'hard boiled' because they overlook the fact
that human beings are struggling for their consciences are simply unrealistic.''

Interviewed in New York on news of the Nobel award, he was gloomy about the Ford
Administration's program on inflation and the energy crisis. ''The trend at
present is leading to hell,'' he said. ''America is the one rich country with
the biggest slums, the least democratic and least developed health system and
the most niggardly attitude against its old people.''

He was more hopeful about the race question once again. ''Jim Crow has broken
down,'' he said. ''Very definitely there has been great progress. When you look
at all the other horrors in the world, race is going in the right direction.''

At this time he revived a project he had often spoken of, a study that would
bring ''American Dilemma'' up to date, but it was stillborn. Mr. Myrdal had
survived a serious auto accident in 1952, which caused him to use a cane
occasionally, then had gone on to fulfill several careers for two decades. At
73, chain-smoking, he was still boasting to friends that he had survived a heart
attack that would kill most, but at 77 he finally found himself too fatigued for
a major undertaking. He eased into a spell of light teaching, writing and
speaking, in Sweden and this, his second country.

Mr. Myrdal is survived by his son, Jan, of Mariefred, Sweden; his daughters,
Mrs. Folster of Gottingen, West Germany, and Dr. Bok of Cambridge, Mass.; eight
grandchildren and two great-grandchildren.

Funeral arrangements were incomplete last night.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Gunnar Myrdal and wife Alva (AP)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

60'S PROTESTERS HOLD BITTERSWEET REUNION IN PARK

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 761 words


They came to Central Park, many with gray hair, some pushing baby carriages or
trailing teen-age children, and gathered in Central Park's Sheep Meadow, where
the aroma of coconut tanning lotion drifted on the breeze instead of the headier
scent of marijuana and the din of the antiwar protests of their youth.

''People used to be politically aware and now they're slapping on the Bain de
Soleil,'' said Mike Oberdorfer, a researcher at the National Institutes of
Health in Bethesda, Md., gazing at the glistening sunbathers.

About 50 men and women collected in this quiet corner of the park Saturday on a
sun-drenched afternoon for an unusual reunion: University of Wisconsin students
from the mid-1960's, members of the radical protest movement that faded in the
early 70's.

All of them marched against the Vietnam War, protested against companies such as
Dow Chemical and shouted outrage over the bombing of Cambodia.

'There's No Movement'

Many also attended protests and ''be-ins'' near the same rocks in Sheep Meadow
where they spread a white sheet painted with a red ''W,'' caught up with each
other's lives and recaptured moments when they felt on the cutting edge of
social and political change.

''It's very sweet and very nostalgic,'' said Ros Baxandall, who teaches American
history at the State University of New York. ''It's also sad. We've all grown
older and there's no movement. I used to think the 60's would go on forever.''

These were men and women mostly in their 40's. ''We're too old to have been
hippies,'' said Jeff Greenfield, a reporter for ABC-TV who left Madison in 1964.
''We were more like green book bags, black tights, hair pulled straight back and
dourness.''

A few men still had long hair, but most had long ago cut it short or watched it
fall out. Some had hands occupied with Aprica baby carriages instead of protest
signs and shoulder bags loaded with Dutch beer instead of Mexican marijuana.

'Is He Still Progressive?'

There was a lot of reminiscing.

''It was February 1965, the first bombing of North Vietnam,'' said Philip Levy,
Class of '68. ''Someone yelled at us, and my friend Stu yelled back, 'Fascist
pig!' I thought those were the two greatest words I'd ever heard.''

As with all reunions, time was devoted to finding out what had become of old
friends.

''Is he still progressive? I mean, he didn't vote for Reagan, did he?''

''She didn't become a minister; she became a spiritual therapist.''

''I don't recognize your last name.'' ''Well, I've had a lot of different
ones.''

Most at the reunion seemed comfortably middle-class. But the hard-core
intellectual protesters seemed relieved that old friends had not become bankers
and Wall Street wheeler-dealers.

'I'm Not a Sellout'

Wini and Paul Breines are college professors in Massachusetts; Stu Ewen (a
former Freedom Rider in Mississippi) teaches social history at Hunter College in
Manhattan; Melanie Brown has finished a book called ''Attaining Personal
Greatness'' and is heavily involved in transcendental meditation. There were
journalists, novelists and musicians.

Many talked of compromises that seemed impossible 20 years ago.

''I was never going to go into business,'' said Mr. Levy, a bookstore owner.
''If you had asked me in 1967 about what I'm doing now, I would have said,
'Sellout.' But I'm not a sellout.'' Fred Ciporen said he went from teaching to
selling advertising. ''Why? Money. But my politics are the same.'' Few at the
reunion were still politically active. ''I'm still liberal-lefty. I guess I'm
old-fashioned,'' said Julie Kurnitz, who played a 1940's breakfast-show
personality named Irene in Woody Allen's ''Radio Days.''

Tina Howe, author of the Broadway hit ''Coastal Disturbances,'' taught high
school in a Madison suburb from 1964 to 1967 while her husband, Norman Levy,
earned a graduate degree.

''It's very moving to be here because you wonder where the protest movement is
these days,'' she said.

Some hoped they passed their politics on to their children.

Josh Srebnick, 17 years old, said his parents, Amy and Walter, had succeeded.

''I think it would take another Vietnam, where your friends are getting shipped
off, to revive that kind of activism,'' he said. ''But I can still see the 60's
in my parents. They get outraged at the television set. They take a lot of pride
in what they did.''

There was some guitar playing and singing, and at one point Mr. Ciporen got up
to give a speech.

Clinging to his shoulder, Mr. Ciporen's toddler interrupted: ''D-a-a-a-ddy.
Let's go home.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of former U. of Wisconsin students (NYT/Angel Franco)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING;
Seeking a Commandant

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 140 words


Gen. Paul X. Kelley is due to step down this summer as commandant of the Marine
Corps, and with the spate of scandals involving such marines as Lieut. Col.
Oliver L. North and the guards accused of embassy espionage, the search for his
successor is in large measure geared toward finding a leader to help restore the
tarnished image of the Corps.

The new Navy Secretary, James Webb, himself a former marine, is said to favor
Lieut. Gen. Ernest C. Cheatham Jr., the deputy chief of staff for manpower. His
backers say he has the right ''warrior image,'' having won the Navy Cross for
gallantry in Vietnam.

But General Kelley is said to vigorously oppose General Cheatham, instead
favoring Gen. Thomas R. Morgan, now the assistant commandant. General Kelley
does not have a veto power, but his views would likely carry some influence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HIGH COURT HOLDS 1866 RACE-BIAS LAW IS A BROADER TOOL

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2139 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 18


In a significant expansion of Federal civil rights protections, the Supreme
Court ruled unanimously today that Arabs, Jews and members of other ethnic
groups may sue under a post-Civil War law's broad prohibition against
discrimination.

Some lower courts had ruled that because the 1866 statute banned only racial
discrimination, Arabs, Jews and others now regarded as Caucasians, which
includes most Hispanic Americans, could not invoke it in bias suits against
other white people.

Jewish, Arab-American, Mexican-American and other groups hailed the High Court's
decision both as a symbolic statement that all ethnic groups victimized by
discrimination have a legal remedy, and as a potent practical weapon to
supplement modern civil rights laws.

May Facilitate Some Suits

The main practical impact of today's rulings is likely to be in cases involving
job discrimination by private employers. While groups affected by the decision
are generally protected against such discrimination by other laws, rights
experts said that plaintiffs would have broader opportunities to recover damages
under the old statute.

In its two decisions today, the Court upheld the rights of an Iraqi-American
associate professor to use the law in a suit asserting that he was denied tenure
because of his Arab origins and of a Jewish congregation to use it in a damage
suit against eight men accused of spray-painting its synagogue with large Nazi
and anti-Semitic symbols and slogans.

In ruling that the 1866 law applied to these cases as well as to blacks, Justice
Byron R. White's opinions held that the post-Civil War Congress ''intended to
protect from discrimination identifiable classes of persons who are subjected to
intentional discrimination solely because of their ancestry or ethnic
characteristics.''

Jews and Arabs United

The cases found Jewish and Arab-American groups on the same side, arguing that
the protections should enable Arabs and Jews alike to sue other Caucasians for
discrimination.

They said that while the law was adopted mainly to bar racial discrimination
against former slaves, it should not be limited to blacks or others saying they
were discriminated against because of their memberships in one of the three
races that are widely recognized as distinctive today - the Caucasoid, Negroid
and Mongoloid.

Most beneficiaries of today's decision are likely to be Hispanic Americans. Like
people of Jewish and Arab origins, they are generally classified as Caucasians,
and they are far more numerous and more often bring claims of discrimination on
grounds of ethnicity.

There were about 29 million blacks, 17 million Hispanic Americans, 6 million
Jews and 2.5 million people of Arab descent in the United States population of
239 million as of 1985.

Jobs and Housing Affected

The number of employment discrimination suits by legal aliens, especially those
of Hispanic ancestry, is likely to increase in the wake of last year's overhaul
of the immigration laws, and today's decisions remove all doubts that the 1866
law can be used in such suits.

Under today's decision members of any ethnic group - whether of Italian,
Iranian, Chinese, Norwegian, Mexican or Nigerian ancestry - could recover
damages if they could prove they had been denied jobs, excluded from rental
housing, or subjected to other forms of discrimination, based on their
ethnicity, that are prohibited by the 1866 law.

Based on 19th-century reference works showing that the concept of race was
applied loosely to a wide variety of ethnic and national groups, and the
legislative history of the post-Civil War laws, Justice White said that ''such
discrimination is racial discrimination that Congress intended to forbid''
whether or not ''it would be classified as racial in terms of modern scientific
theory.''

The law, as amended in 1870, is now codified as Sections 1981 and 1982 of Title
42 of the United States Code. They provide, respectively, that all people in the
United States shall have the same rights as white people to make contracts,
including employment contracts, and ''to inherit, purchase, lease, sell, hold
and convey real and personal property.''

Virtually all groups that are eligible to use these sections under the logic of
today's decisions can also invoke the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which bans
employment, housing and other discrimination on grounds of race, religion,
national origin or sex.

'Big Stick' in Job Claims

But E. Richard Larson, legal director of the Mexican American Legal Defense and
Educational Fund, said today that Section 1981, in particular, was a ''big
stick'' in employment discrimination suits that often proves more useful than
the 1964 act.

The 1964 act has strict procedural requirements for timely filing of such suits
that trip up many plaintiffs, and limits the available remedies in most cases to
back pay and reinstatement orders. Section 1981, on the other hand, has fewer
procedural pitfalls and allows plaintiffs to seek large punitive damages,
compensation for pain and suffering and trial by jury.

Abdeen M. Jabara, president of the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee,
which filed a brief as a friend of the court in the two cases, called the ruling
''a historic decision.''

''What the Court is saying to the Arab-American community is that we have equal
rights to equal protection of the laws,'' he said, asserting that this is
important at a time when Arab-Americans ''have been subjected to racism'' and
''we have witnessed a rising tide of acts of vandalism, assaults and threats
which emanates out of America's military involvement in the Middle East or acts
directed against Americans in the Middle East.''

Other rights groups also applauded the ruling, some saying that while it might
have less impact than some other Supreme Court decisions, it was nonetheless
significant both as a symbol and in practice.

Racial Sorting Discussed

Justice White's main opinion, St. Francis College v. Al-Khazraji, No. 85-2169,
came in the suit filed by Majid Ghaidan Al-Khazraji, a United States citizen
born in Iraq who said he was denied tenure at the Pennsylvania college on
account of his Arab origin.

Justice White noted that ''there is a common popular understanding that there
are three major human races -Caucasoid, Mongoloid, and Negroid,'' but said
''many modern biologists and anthropologists, however, criticize racial
classifications as arbitrary and of little use in understanding the variability
of human beings,'' and that ''the particular biological traits which have
generally been chosen to characterize races have been criticized as having
little biological significance.''

In any event, he said, the meaning of the post-Civil War law should be
determined on the basis of the intentions of those who passed it, and ''plainly,
all those who might be deemed Caucasians today were not thought to be of the
same race at the time Section 1981 became law.''

Not Just Nation of Origin

A Federal District Court had held that the law could not apply to claims based
on Arab ancestry. Upholding an appellate court's reversal, Justice White said
today that Mr. Al-Khazraji ''will have made out a case under Section 1981'' if,
after further proceedings, he ''can prove that he was subjected to intentional
discrimination based on the fact that he was born an Arab.''

In Shaare-Tefila Congregation v. Cobb, No. 85-2156, Justice White said the same
logic required reversal of a 2-to-1 ruling by a different Federal appellate
court that members of the synagogue, in Silver Spring, Md., could not use
Section 1982 to sue the people they said desecrated their building.

The appeals court held that the congregation's only remedy would be a trespass
suit under state law, because Jews were not members of a distinct nonwhite race
and thus were unprotected by Section 1982. Justice White, reversing this
decision, said it was not necessary that Jews be members of a nonwhite race to
use the law.

The Supreme Court took these other actions today:

CHILD SUPPORT CAN COME FROM VETERANS' BENEFITS
  The Court ruled 8 to 1 that state courts may order disabled veterans to pay
child support out of their veterans' disability benefits and hold them in
contempt of court for failing to do so.

In a decision hailed by women's groups as a weapon for enforcing child support
obligations, the Court rejected the Justice Department's argument citing a
Federal law broadly exempting veterans' benefits from creditors' claims.

The decision upheld a ruling by a Tennessee appellate court holding Charlie W.
Rose, a totally disabled Vietnam veteran, in contempt for failing to pay $800 a
month for the support of his two children. His $3,107 in veterans' benefits and
$281 in Social Security disability benefits were his sole means of support.

Justice Thurgood Marshall's majority opinion in the case, Rose v. Rose, No.
85-1206, said ''we fully appreciate the physical sacrifice appellant made while
in the military service of his country.'' But he held that because veterans'
disability benefits, unlike military retirement pay, ''are intended not only to
benefit the veteran, but the veteran's family as well,'' it did not violate
Federal law for the state court to order payment of a portion of his benefits as
child support.

WHITES TO GET HEARING ON NEW YORK POLICE TEST
  The Court agreed to review an appeal by white New York City police officers
seeking promotions to sergeant who said they had been discriminated against as a
result of a court-approved settlement of a civil rights suit brought by black
and Hispanic candidates. An appellate court had dismissed their suit on
procedural grounds.

The white officers said they had been denied promotions even though black and
Hispanic candidates who had received the same scores or lower scores on a
competitive examination had received promotions.

The appeal, Marino v. Ortiz, No. 86-1415, grew out of a series of legal actions
beginning with a suit in 1984 by groups of Hispanic and black police officers,
who complained that they had been discriminated against because they had
disproportionately lower scores on the 1983 promotion test.

Under the settlement, all officers eligible for promotion on the basis of their
examination scores were promoted, along with enough lower-scoring black and
Hispanic officers to make the racial makeup of the new class of sergeants
proportional to the number of black and Hispanic officers who took the exam.

NEW YORK BUILDINGS LINKED TO MARCOS
  The Court left intact, without comment, a Federal trial judge's order blocking
the sale or other transactions involving three New York City buildings said to
have been purchased with money Ferdinand and Imelda Marcos stole from the
Philippine Government.

The Justices refused to hear an appeal by Ralph and Joseph Bernstein, two
longtime Marcos associates, and others claiming ownership and management
interests in the buildings, not including Mr. and Mrs. Marcos. (New York Land
Co. v.

Republic of the Philippines, No. 86-1383.)

Federal District Judge Pierre Leval's freeze order was obtained by the
Government of President Corazon Aquino, who succeeded Mr. Marcos, pending
investigation and courts of the Philippines.

The Aquino Government has accused the Marcos family of stealing billions of
dollars from the country over two decades. The three New York properties are the
Crown Building at 57th Street and Fifth Avenue, Herald Center at Sixth Avenue
and 34th Street, and 40 Wall Street, a 71-story office building. They are valued
together at more than $200 million.

BROADER UNION POWER TO DISCIPLINE MEMBERS
  The Court handed a defeat to the National Labor Relations Board in a decision
strengthening the hands of labor unions to discipline members working in
supervisory jobs for employers.

The case involved two supervisor-employees of electrical contractors near
Sacramento, Calif., who were members of the International Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers. The union fined them for violating its constitution by
working for companies that did not have contracts with the union.

By 6 to 3, the Court upheld the fines. The decision in the case, N.L.R.B. v.
Electrical Workers, No. 85-1924, rejected a longstanding N.L.R.B. doctrine under
which all union members employed as supervisors were treated, for purposes of
protection against union discipline, as collective bargaining representatives.

Today, the Court ruled that a law barring unions from coercing employers in the
choice of collective bargaining or grievance representatives did not limit the
ability of unions to discipline people working in supervisory positions who were
not actually engaged in collective bargaining or grievance adjustment as
employer representatives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Associate Justice Byron R. White (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AT STARK'S HOME BASE, FAMILIES WAIT IN DREAD

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 330 words

DATELINE: MAYPORT NAVAL BASE, Florida, May 18


Navy chaplains climbed in cars and vans today and headed across the Jacksonville
area, and relatives of the crew of the damaged frigate Stark braced themselves
for the possibility that they might come calling.

Jacksonville is home port of the Stark and 85 members of the ship's crew have
families living on or off the sprawling base where the St. Johns River empties
into the Atlantic.

The chaplains brought word of the dead and the wounded aboard the fighting ship
blasted by a missile fired from an Iraqi warplane.

''Everyone in the Navy is speaking a little softer today,'' said Navy Chaplain
William L. Perry. ''It's not important to personally know someone on the Stark.
We all wear the uniform and it's traumatic for all of us.''

There are 34 warships and 18,500 military personnel stationed here and word of
the devastating attack on the Stark was the worst single piece of bad news in
this port since the casualty lists of the Vietnam War.

''There are a lot of guys who are real gung-ho and want us to retaliate against
Iraq,'' said Rusty Love, a sailor on duty here. ''But there's too much diplomacy
to consider before we run off and start shooting.''

Families of crew members spent Sunday night huddled by radios and television
sets waiting for word of the damaged frigate and its crew. The first news was
that one sailor was dead. That figure rose to three and by early morning the
base was alive with rumors. Then in midmorning came the official word: At least
28 were dead aboard the Stark.

Each ship has a wives' club organized at the home port. It is normally a group
that gets together to play cards or go bowling to break the loneliness when men
go to sea for six months at a time. Today the Stark's wives' club had another
function.

''A lot of the wives have been together in groups since last night,'' said
Chaplain Perry. ''All they can do is wait. You have a feeling that everyone is
terribly fatigued and has a numbness deep down inside them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of the family of Lawrence Bareford waiting for word of his
condition (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: THINK TANKS';
Cato Institute Marks 10 Years

BYLINE: By WARREN WEAVER Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 773 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 18


When Edward H. Crane was working on a political campaign in Washington a dozen
years ago, he was impressed by public policy research groups like the Brookings
Institution and the American Enterprise Institute. They seemed to have a
remarkable impact on government, he now recalls thinking, considering how much
smaller and poorer they were.

But Mr. Crane, a libertarian, disagreed with much of the national security
policy in favor at the conservative A.E.I. and many liberal domestic attitudes
at Brookings. So he founded the Cato Institute, a ''think tank'' that manages to
combine dedication to the freest conceivable free market economy, the least
possible government, lower military spending, a smaller American military
commitment abroad and full civil liberties for all.

On Thursday the Cato Institute celebrates its 10th anniversary with a banquet at
the Willard Hotel. A latecomer by Washington standards, this uninhibited upstart
of a research group has managed to generate more activity and interest across a
wider political spectrum than some of its more sedate competitors with much
larger budgets.

In the half-dozen years since Cato moved from San Francisco to an elegant
Capitol Hill town house, it has, among other activities, provided impetus for:

* A serious re-examination of the nation's Social Security system that was
prompted by a proposal from a Cato adjunct scholar, Peter J. Ferrara, for
substitution of a private pension program. This radical idea has won the support
of the Heritage Foundation and the National Chamber Foundation of the United
States Chamber of Commerce, and it has attracted the interest of at least one
Republican Presidential contender, Pierre S. du Pont 4th, former Governor of
Delaware.

* A new approach to the longstanding debate over the role of the judiciary that
parts company with traditional conservative calls for ''strict construction''
and ''judicial restraint.'' Cato scholars argue that the Constitution protects
economic rights as well as civil rights, and they criticize Chief Justice
William H. Rehnquist as a preserver rather than an opponent of big government.

* One of the few attacks from an organization with conservative credentials on
the level of military spending at the Pentagon, an article of faith with most
conservative groups. Cato scholars maintain that United States participation in
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is so expensive that it threatens
prosperity at home, and they criticize President Reagan for expanding the
military establishment while he argues ineffectively for smaller government.

American voters who have never heard of Cato should not be surprised.

''Our audience is not the voting public,'' said William A. Niskanen, chairman of
the institute and a former member of President Reagan's Council of Economic
Advisers. ''We don't try to shape popular demand for political change. We hope
to shape the prospective of the policy-making community so that its members are
conscious of alternate solutions when the demand for change arises. Our audience
is the Washington community.''

The Cato Institute remains pretty small potatoes. Its budget for 1985 was less
than $2 million while comparable spending for Brookings was $14.5 million, the
Heritage Foundation $11.6 million and A.E.I. $12.5. (The last has since been cut
back considerably.) Mr. Crane says his institute is ''one of the most
cost-effective public policy groups in the nation'' in terms of its income and
output of books, policy studies, conferences and a scholarly journal.

Although it was not planned this way, the institute soon discovered that its
particular blend of economic conservatism and liberal social policy seemed to
appeal to younger people of the post-World War II ''baby boom'' generation.
David Boaz, vice president of Cato, attributes this to their disaffection with
the Vietnam War, suspicion of government and major political parties, personal
economic conservatism and dedication to civil liberties.

Mr. Crane chose the name Cato from the pseudonym of two British essayists who
circulated letters on parliamentary issues in the early 1700's in both England
and the colonies. The essayists had taken the name from Marcus Porcius Cato, the
Elder, the Roman statesman of the second century B.C. who is considered the
father of Latin prose.

The Cato founder and president was asked if any of the 1988 Presidential
aspirants other than Mr. du Pont interested him. Undoubtedly more influenced by
philosophy than his own basketball days at the University of California, Mr.
Crane replied: ''I'd like to see Bill Bradley get into it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 20, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: CONGRESS;
Fun on the Radio With Bob and Ted

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1257 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 19


It's the Bob and Ted show!

Bob: ''I do it for the money. I don't know why Kennedy does it.''

Ted: ''I do it for the suspense. I never know who's going to show up, Bob Dole
the moderate Republican, or Bob Dole the right-wing Republican.''

Five days a week in Washington and elsewhere around the nation over nearly 290
stations, Senators Bob Dole of Kansas and Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts
engage in a brief, funny and acerbic dialogue, ''Face Off,'' that ranges, not
too gently, from public issues to private ambition.

For 50 seconds each, Mr. Dole, the Republican leader who is a potential
Presidential candidate, and Mr. Kennedy, a Democrat who is a dominant liberal
force in the Senate, cheerfully insult each other about their careers,
ideologies, legislative records and -in some of their more memorable exchanges -
Jane Fonda, Presidential politics and nuclear safety.

''We may disagree on nuclear power, Bob, but can't we at least agree that it's
wrong to bend the safety rules?'' Mr. Kennedy said earnestly in a recent
broadcast. ''One Chernobyl is too many.''

Mr. Dole's response was characteristic. ''Ted, for a guy who thinks the 'China
Syndrome' is what you get after eating too much chop suey, I'm not about to
accept you as an expert on nuclear plant technology.''

In the same vein, there was ''the Jane Fonda debate,'' in which Mr. Kennedy
handily triumphed.

Shortly before last November's Congressional elections, Mr. Dole, who has been
struggling to curb his acid tongue as he prepares for a Presidential campaign,
denounced Harriet Woods, the Democratic Senate candidate in Missouri, for
accepting a campaign contribution from Miss Fonda. ''Vietnam veterans will never
forget the support 'Hollywood Jane' gave America's enemies during the tragic
Vietnam War,'' Mr. Dole said heatedly.

''Bob, you and the far right wing never know what to do about Jane Fonda,'' Mr.
Kennedy replied. ''You spend the morning refighting the Vietnam War and the
afternoon working out with her exercise book and her exercise video. Obviously,
your bodies are in better shape than your brains!''

Mr. Dole and Mr. Kennedy, who are actually friends, began sparring over the
radio in 1984. For both politicians, the broadcast was a device to draw national
attention to their views.

Although numerous stations in upstate New York broadcast the program, which is
distributed by the Mutual Broadcasting System, it has not been picked up by a
New York City radio station. In Washington the show is broadcast at 8:55 A.M.
over WTOP and is widely heard, and discussed, on Capitol Hill. It is also
popular in New Hampshire, Iowa and the South, prime sites of early Presidential
nominating contests next year.

Each candidate is paid $40,000 a year for the program. Mr. Dole uses the money
as income, and Mr. Kennedy allocates his to his staff members who work on the
program. The Senators actually tape the program separately in their offices once
a week, with each taking turns opening the segments.

'Fabulous Success Story'

''Whoever goes first picks the topic,'' said Pegge Goertzen, president of the
Broadcast Group, which produces the program. ''They send their script to the
responding Senator, who can use it for ammunition.''

'It's been a fabulous success story, and we have more stations now than ever
before,'' Ms. Goertzen said. ''Mario Cuomo and Howard Baker tried to do it. At
its high point, it had about 65 stations. Then it went off the air. We are going
into our fourth year and we have 290 stations. People like the personality side
of the series; they interact, they call each other Bob and Ted, they kid each
other -there's a personal side to it. That makes it more successful.''

''It's all done in good fun,'' said Jeff Smith, Mr. Kennedy's spokesman. Walt
Riker, Mr. Dole's press secretary, said: ''It's short, it's punchy, it's made
for radio. You can discuss the issues as if you were at home or in a bar.
Casual. It's a good old-fashioned political debate without the courtesies and
trappings and pomposity of the Senate.''

Mr. Riker acknowledged that the valuable publicity may end by the fall, when Mr.
Dole is formally expected to announce his Presidential candidacy and thus may
cause radio stations that carry the program to be subject to Federal
Communications Commission provisions for ''equal time'' to his rivals.

Meantime, both men seem to enjoy roasting each other, especially over
Presidential ambition.

''Ted, what gives?'' Mr. Dole asked. ''You're on record as saying you're not
running for the White House is 1988. But there are some suspicious signals from
the Kennedy camp. First my compliments - you've lost about 30 pounds, and you
look rested and fit. How about those newspaper articles on the new Ted Kennedy,
how you're more conservative. Then there are reports of massive staff defections
from your Capitol Hill office? Ted, I'll be happy to talk about a Dole-Kennedy
match-up in 1988, but are you running or running in place?''

''You misread the tea leaves again,'' said Mr. Kennedy, who sighed, then
promptly jabbed at Mr. Dole's organizational strains. ''I know you like to blow
your own horn, but you can't be a one-man band and run for President. If you do,
the Dole who becomes a serious Presidential contender will turn out to be
Elizabeth - which would be better for the country anyway.'' (One of Mr.
Kennedy's key tactics in parrying with Mr. Dole is favorably comparing Elizabeth
Dole, the Transportation Secretary, with her husband. ''I know it's hard for you
to get used to your new status as minority leader,'' Mr. Kennedy chortled
recently. ''Now you're the minority leader in two houses - at least that's what
Elizabeth Dole tells me.'') Although Mr. Dole enjoys portraying Mr. Kennedy as a
free-spending liberal who is out of touch and in a ''shrinking minority,'' and
Mr. Kennedy paints Mr. Dole as either an apologist for the Republican right-wing
or a secret moderate who panders to conservatives because of Presidential
ambition, both men are almost loath to admit that, on some domestic and social
welfare issues, they agree.

But, given the unwritten rule of ''Face Off,'' confrontation is almost crucial.

''Ted, I know you never met a defense system you liked, but the Army has a new
plan that even you might go for,'' Mr. Dole said gleefully on a broadcast.
''It's a 'perimeter alert system,' for our bases in West Germany. Before you
start whining about defense spending, listen to this: the Army is using geese -
that's right, geese! - to help alert our troops to trespassing. When geese get
agitated they can drown out an air raid siren - and they don't need coffee
breaks or uniforms. Now, before you get your gander up, how about supporting
this experiment?''

Senator Kennedy rose to the occasion: ''Bob, if you're serious about the idea,
you ought to be taking one of those urine tests that President Reagan is talking
about.'' After mocking the idea, Mr. Kennedy said:

''If Cap Weinberger's geese don't work in Germany, Bob, don't give up. He can
always try Republican senators - your right-wing colleagues know the goose step,
and they honk louder than any goose.''

The spirit of brotherhood even failed on Christmas Eve.

''Bob, I'll bet you wish Oliver North were at the North Pole right now instead
of center stage in the Iran scandal,'' Mr. Kennedy said happily. ''He should
never have tried to play Santa Claus for the contras.''

Mr. Dole responded with a heavy sigh. ''Ted, only you could turn Christmas Eve
into Halloween,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sen. Bob Dole and Edward Kennedy (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 20, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PRISON COUPLE FOUND GUILTY IN TRIAL ON HELICOPTER ESCAPE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 364 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, May 19


Two lovers who fled a Federal prison in a stolen helicopter last November were
convicted today of charges stemming from their escape.

The two, Ronald McIntosh and Samantha Dorinda Lopez, sat side by side as the
verdicts were read in Federal District Court here. Ms. Lopez placed her hands
over her mouth but both remained speechless.

Mr. McIntosh, a 42-year-old veteran of the Vietnam War, was found guilty of air
piracy and helping Ms. Lopez escape and could be sentenced to 25 years to life
in prison. He had been scheduled for release next year.

Ms. Lopez, 37, who would have been eligible for parole in about five years, was
convicted of escape. She had been serving a 50-year term for aiding and abetting
a Georgia bank robbery.

Prison Officials Blamed

She contended that she had uncovered irregularities in the way the prison was
run and said her life had been threatened by prison officials.

Mr. McIntosh, who served two years in Vietnam as a helicopter pilot and
mechanic, contended that he suffered from post-traumatic stress syndrome and
that this influenced his decision to assist the daring, daylight escape.

The jury deliberated for about two hours before reaching its decision.

Mr. McIntosh was serving a sentence for wire fraud when he met Ms. Lopez working
in the business office of the Federal prison in Dublin, about 30 miles east of
San Francisco.

He fled while making an unsupervised transfer to the Lompoc prison last Oct. 2.
On Nov. 5, wearing a white jacket and white baseball cap, he landed a stolen
helicopter in the medium-security compound and escaped with Ms. Lopez.

They were arrested by agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation 10 days
later when they went to a Sacramento shopping center to pick up wedding rings.

In closing arguments Monday, Mark Zanides, an assistant United States Attorney,
depicted the couple as manipulative criminals who planned to blend into
middle-class society.

Mr. Zanides dismissed their claim that they fled as because of the prison
authorities' threats and assaults.

But Geoffrey Hanson, the attorney for Ms. Lopez, said prison officials operated
with unbridled authority to punish prisoners.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Samantha Dorinda Lopez and Ronald McIntosh (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 20, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY;
A HUMBLE ROCKET ASPIRES FOR STARS

BYLINE: By RICHARD W. STEVENSON

SECTION: Section D; Page 8, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1096 words

DATELINE: CAMARILLO, Calif.


GEORGE A. KOOPMAN likes to think of his nascent commercial space launching
business not as a daring, high-technology endeavor but as the outer space
version of United Parcel Service.

''We want to build a business that transports packages to space just like they
deliver packages to your grandmother's doorstep,'' said Mr. Koopman, the founder
and president of the American Rocket Company.

Mr. Koopman makes it sound easy. But his young company, using a decades-old
rocket motor design and operating on a ground-level budget, is trying to enter a
business as fraught with technical and financial peril as it is rich with
space-age allure.

Mr. Koopman thinks the difficulties can be overcome. Having successfully
designed and ground-tested a rocket motor, in December, he is further along than
most of the space buffs, engineers and investors who are attempting to compete
with NASA, the Air Force and a handful of large military contractors.

Indeed, American Rocket, commonly known as Amroc, has emerged as one of only two
start-up concerns that space experts say have a chance to put a payload in orbit
in the next two years. The other is Space Services Inc., a Houston-based company
headed by Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, the former astronaut.

Compared with Mr. Slayton, who has two decades of NASA experience, the
42-year-old Mr. Koopman seems an unlikely space industrialist.

His varied career has included stints as an intelligence analyst during the
Vietnam War, a highly successful maker of military training films and the
coordinator of the spectacular stunts in the movie ''The Blues Brothers.''

He never worked at NASA and does not have a college degree. But he has been a
flying and space enthusiast since he took his first helicopter ride at age 4,
and since the mid-1970's he has been looking for an opportunity to enter the
space business.

He founded Amroc in May 1985 with Bevin McKinney, an aerospace engineer, and
James Bennett, a researcher who helped Congress draft the laws allowing
commercial launchings.

Their timing was good. Last year, after the Challenger disaster, President
Reagan ordered that the space agency yield its commercial launching activities
to the private sector. Even before the grounding of the shuttle fleet, the slow
pace of launchings had created a backlog of satellites, scientific packages and
other payloads that needed to be put in orbit.

Still, space experts say, it will be a long time before companies, especially
small start-ups like Amroc, are routinely sending their own vehicles into space.

Even with NASA out of the business, activity in the field today is limited
largely to the three huge aerospace companies - McDonnell Douglas, General
Dynamics and Martin Marietta - which already build military missiles and can
afford to adapt them to carry communications satellites and other heavy cargoes.

There is also a rush into the business by government-backed projects in Western
Europe, Japan, China and the Soviet Union.

That leaves little room for the thinly capitalized Amrocs of the world. So, Mr.
Koopman's strategy is to stick to a market niche.

The big missile makers are concentrating on launching heavy payloads -
typically, communications satellites weighing two tons or more -into
geosynchronous orbits 22,300 miles over the Equator.

Amroc is seeking government and commercial payloads of less than a ton that need
orbits of 600 miles or less. Examples are small satellites that would be used in
developing or carrying out a ''Star Wars'' missile defense, small scientific
experiments and materials processing packages.

Space Services is going after much the same market, according to Mr. Slayton,
and is planning its first launching for next year.

''People are waiting in line to do this stuff,'' Mr. Koopman asserted.

Other experts are not so sure. They think there will be enough business
launching heavy satellites into high orbits to keep one or two of the big
aerospace companies and foreign governments in the business. But they say the
market for smaller payloads may or may not materialize.

''Over all, at the lower end of launch capacity, the market remains unproved,''
said Brad Meslin, the director of CSP Associates, a Cambridge, Mass., consulting
firm.

Competition and market niches will be moot points, however, if the company
cannot raise the tens of millions of dollars Mr. Koopman said would be needed to
launch.

''The difficulty of obtaining financing is endemic to any early stage space
venture in the wake of the Challenger accident,'' Mr. Meslin said.

''The venture capital community wanted nothing to do with us,'' Mr. Koopman
said. Instead, he said, Amroc's financing so far, amounting to several million
dollars, has come from a number of wealthy families interested in space
transportation. To raise more, Mr. Koopman is now doing the rounds on Wall
Street, looking for a corporate or institutional partner.

One possibility, he said, is one of the three big missile companies, with which
Amroc has been holding discussions. He declined to identify it.

Amroc is planning to launch its first commercial payload next year, Mr. Koopman
said.

Ultimately, Amroc's success or failure will hinge on whether its rocket flies.

Most rocket engines are driven by solid fuel or liquid fuel. Amroc has chosen,
instead, to use hybrid motors.

A hybrid motor, according to Mr. Koopman, combines many of the best traits of
both designs. It works by spraying an oxidizer over solid fuel. This allows
thrust to be regulated by changing the flow of the oxidizer, and avoids the
instability of mixing two combustible liquids.

Engineers have tinkered with hybrids since the 1930's, but have largely rejected
them as inefficient. Martin Marietta's liquid Titan rocket, for example, can
place one pound of cargo in orbit for every 54 pounds of launching vehicle.
Amroc's hybrid, by contrast, requires 110 pounds of vehicle for every pound of
payload.

Mr. Koopman said, however, that the hybrid suits Amroc's space trucking concept
perfectly. Amroc's industrial launching vehicle, as it is called, is a
collection of 19 hybrid motors strapped around oxidizer tanks and the payload.

''It ain't efficient,'' Mr. Koopman conceded. ''It's a workhorse, it's a
clunker, it's low and slow, but it'll get you there.''

It is also designed to get you there inexpensively. Amroc plans to charge $8
million per launching, compared with an estimated $50 million for competitors.

''Everything out there today is an Indy race car,'' Mr. Koopman said. ''We want
to be a Toyota pickup truck.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing; photo of George A. Koopman (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 21, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Cambodia's Unpunished Genocide

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 408 words


In December 1948, the United Nations unanimously adopted a convention to prevent
and punish genocide, defined as attempting to destroy a national, ethnic, racial
or religious group. The fanatic Communists known as the Khmer Rouge seemed to
have committed such a crime, killing a million people in Cambodia from 1975 to
1979. So why not invoke the never-before-invoked convention and ask the World
Court to determine the truth about the alleged act of genocide? Why not indeed.

Several hundred Cambodian survivors in exile are appealing for a World Court
hearing. This can be requested by all states that are party to the convention.
They now include the United States (though unforgivably, Congress has still
failed to pass needed implementing legislation, 15 months after Senate
ratification).

Other death-camp survivors, like the Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel, support the
idea. A hearing at The Hague could focus the world's attention on extensive
evidence of a crazed regime's attempt to carve up a whole people on a butcher
block.

The Khmer Rouge term for liquidation was ''scatter them to the last one'';
cities were emptied as suspected class enemies were worked to death in
''purification'' camps. Of 60,000 Buddhist monks -denounced by the Khmer Rouge
as ''leeches and bloodsuckers'' - only a few thousand survive. Notable among
many ethnic minorities singled out for eradication were the Cham, a distinctive
Islamic river people. Whole villages were massacred or forced to assimilate so
that the regime could boast that ''Khmerization'' was complete.

All of this was largely passed over when Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1979,
deposed the infamous Pol Pot and installed its own puppets. The Khmer Rouge
withdrew into back country, then became the most powerful partner in a
resistance coalition that a U.N. majority - joined by the United States -
regards as the rightful Government of Cambodia. The painful result is that Khmer
Rouge mass murderers, Pol Pot included, are still said to be in leadership
posts, their crimes half-forgotten, even by a Reagan Administration that assails
the U.N. for ignoring Communist mass murder in Afghanistan and elsewhere.

The United States can help make a reality of the Genocide Convention by asking
the World Court to determine whether a Cambodian regime violated this landmark
convention, one that Cambodia itself approved in 1950. Doing so would begin to
honor the memory of Pol Pot's victims.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 21, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

What Hart's Fall Says About America

BYLINE: By Alan Brinkley: Alan Brinkley is associate professor of history at
Harvard University.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 825 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


Reports of Thomas Jefferson's supposed sexual relationship with a slave on his
plantation were a staple of the popular press in 1800. The Rev. Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr. faced recurrent rumors (subsequently confirmed) of infidelity.
Both these leaders survived with their political and historical reputations
largely intact. Why was Gary Hart unable to do the same?

Clearly, the intrusive tactics of the press played a major role in Mr. Hart's
demise. But it is hard to imagine that similarly vivid disclosures about
Jefferson or Dr. King would have resulted in equally devastating effects on
them.

Americans admired those men not just for their characters but because they all
seemed to stand for something larger than themselves. Mr. Hart, despite his
frequent claims to the contrary, did not. In creating doubts about his
character, he created doubts about the only thing he had offered the public.

On this one point, at least, Mr. Hart seemed little different from any other
candidate. It may be, therefore, that the collapse of his candidacy is less
important for what it tells us about his campaign or the press than for what it
reveals about the condition of American public life as a whole: the absence of
any meaningful public philosophy capable of mobilizing the electorate behind
something more substantive than ''character.''

Politics in the United States always has been afflicted with a certain
conceptual barrenness. Efforts to create meaningful ''values,'' to find a useful
''moral core'' for our public life have competed constantly and often
unsuccessfully against the belief in liberty, the commitment to personal rights
unconstrained by any larger conception of a common purpose.

Yet we have not always lived in a society in which the only shared value has
been the belief in rights and liberties. As recently as a generation ago,
American public life embraced as well another, seemingly powerful set of
beliefs: commitments to such things as the importance of middle-class values,
the beneficence of capitalism, the desirability and inevitability of progress,
the special moral qualities of American democracy. Politics appeared then to
have a ''vital center.'' America seemed to stand for something tangible, to have
- in phrases popular in the 1950's and 1960's - a ''national purpose'' and a
''national character.''

By the late 1960's, the political center had lost that sense of vitality. It had
come to be associated with the disastrous war in Vietnam. It had proved
incapable of dealing effectively with the problems of racism, sexism and
injustice. Its values had come to seem frail, obsolete, even fraudulent.

By the 1970's, Americans no longer talked very much about the ''national
purpose'' and the ''national character.'' To many, those concepts now seemed
dangerous mechanisms for serving the interests of some groups and violating the
rights of others. Yet as valid as those criticisms may have been, we have not
seemed ready in the years since to accept as the alternative a world in which
our only shared value is a commitment to maintaining an open intellectual
marketplace in which every group can make its claim, in which all ideas receive
equal credence, in which there is no commonly accepted conception of what is
good or right or just.

Evidence of our discontent lies in the enormous range of efforts across the
political spectrum to find again something transcendent in which to believe -
efforts to rise above the parochial interest of groups and discover some common
definition of America as a nation.

This search for a meaningful public philosophy is visible in the growth of
neo-conservatism - which is, among other things, an effort to rebuild the old
idea of a ''vital center'' and to re-establish its legitimacy and authority.

It is visible in what some now call neo-liberalism - which is, similarly, an
effort to find a workable definition of ''community'' that rises above the needs
of particular interest groups.

It is visible in the rhetoric (if seldom the substance) of Reaganism -the frank
and unembarrassed effort to recreate a sense of American righteousness and
virtue by referring back to various myths of earlier eras in our history.

And it was visible as well in Mr. Hart's attempt to substitute ''new ideas'' for
conventional interest-group politics.

Had Mr. Hart been able to articulate a new idea (a meaningful conception of
American public life as a whole) instead of simply new ideas (particular
positions on particular issues), it is at least conceivable that his candidacy
might have survived.

But he should not be judged too harshly for that failure: No one else has yet
found a secure or lasting solution to the sense of aimlessness and emptiness
that afflicts American public life. And until someone does, we are likely to
continue to judge our leaders by scrutinizing and at times repudiating them on
the basis of the one thing they offer us: themselves.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 21, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'A NARROW BED'

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 659 words


IN the 1960's, Common Green was a thriving experiment in communal living, but,
15 years later, the fictitious utopian farm in upstate New York is facing hard -
and changing - times. Almost all of the original members have dispersed, along
with the movement itself; the men have become lawyers and stockbrokers. Left
behind with their ideals in jeopardy but their memories intact are two women
(played by Beth Dixon and Debra Monk). They are held to the commune by
commitment as well as by habit - and they are increasingly faced by an economic
crisis.

Social awareness, political engagement, the viability of farm life are all
brought into question in ''A Narrow Bed,'' a new play by Ellen McLaughlin
(presented at the Perry Street Theater by the New York Theater Workshop).
Co-winner of this year's Susan Smith Blackburn Prize, Ms. McLaughlin's play is a
penetrating study of friendship and idealism under stress.

Ms. Dixon's husband, the original inspiration of the commune, has been missing
and presumed dead in Vietnam. Many years later, his wife still has the futile
hope that he is alive, at the same time that she and others continue to wonder
why such a supposed radical would have allowed himself to serve in the first
place. As the play begins, Ms. Monk's husband, the last man in the commune, is
in the hospital, dying as a result of his addiction to alcohol.

The author approaches her theme on several simultaneous levels. Within the story
of the women, there is the relationship of the two men -in flashback, Ms.
Dixon's husband is seen writing letters home from the front. Beneath both of
those stories there is an excavation into the cultural effects of archeology
(Ms. Dixon lectures on the subject). Those last levels are incomplete,
especially so in the case of the archeology, which Ms. McLaughlin raises as a
motif and then abandons.

The play, expanded from a one-act, has loose ends, but, at its compassionate
center, it focuses on the enduring alliance of the two women. The two characters
are portrayed with tenderness and humor by Ms. Dixon and Ms. Monk - the first
more inwardly troubled, the second seemingly able to deal with life's
emergencies.

An earlier play by Ms. McLaughlin, ''Days and Nights Within,'' presented several
seasons ago at the Humana New Play Festival at the Actors Theater of Louisville,
Ky., was an interesting though overly internalized study of political
imprisonment. Her new work is a definite advancement for the playwright.

However, she seems less revealing when it comes to her male characters. Missing
is a scene that would clarify the relationship between the husbands and that
would offer testimony to the soldier's supposed charisma. As we see him - in
Greg Germann's performance - it is difficult to accept him in a leadership role.
At the same time, Christopher McCann's character, bedridden, and filled with
thoughts about death, remains removed on a mystical plane. There is a fifth
character, a nurse, sweetly personified by Kate McKillip. Diligently, she
attends to the patient's needs while also communicating her own sincere regard
for his well-being.

Under the assured direction of Sarah Ream, the actresses retain a firm grasp on
the humanity of their characters, never stepping into sentimentality and moving
us with the story of the residual strength of the bond between two resilient
women, both emblematic of the 1960's.

TROUBLE IN UTOPIA - A NARROW BED, by Ellen McLaughlin; directed by Sarah Ream;
set design, Kate Edmunds; costume design, Michael Krass; lighting design, John
Gisondi; music composed and arranged by John Miller; production stage manager,
Virginia Addison. Presented by New York Theater Workshop, Jean Passanante,
artistic director; Nancy Kassak Diekmann, managing director. At the Perry Street
Theater, 31 Perry Street.
Willie...Christopher McCann
Lucy...Debra Monk
Megan...Beth Dixon
John...Greg Germann
Connie Tate...Kate McKillip

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

3 CONTRA DONORS CITE NORTH'S ROLE

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1401 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 21


Three wealthy supporters of conservative causes testified today that Lieut. Col.
Oliver L. North, as a member of the White House staff, had influenced them to
make large contributions to the Nicaraguan rebels after Congress cut off
official United States aid.

In one case, William J. Casey, then the Director of Central Intelligence. put a
donor, the beer magnate Joseph Coors, in touch with Colonel North.

In two other cases, according to the testimony before the Congressional
committees investigating the Iran-contra affair, Colonel North worked as a team
with Carl R. Channell. Mr. Channell pleaded guilty last month to a conspiracy in
connection with his fund-raising and named Colonel North as a co-conspirator.

This was the first direct testimony showing how Reagan Administration officials
helped raise private donations for the contras. [Excerpts, page A12.] Abrams
Role Cited Colonel North, who was on President Reagan's White House staff until
his dismissal last November, was the central figure in the arms sales to Iran
and the Administration's efforts on behalf of the contras. He is not scheduled
to testify before next month.

In testimony this afternoon, Maj. Gen. John K. Singlaub said Elliott Abrams, an
Assistant Secretary of State, had agreed to provide assurances to two Asian
governments that the Administration approved of General Singlaub's attempt to
raise funds for the contras from them. The account indicated that Mr. Abrams had
a larger role in raising money for the contras than he has acknowledged.

The early witnesses today were Ellen C. Garwood, 83 years old, who contributed
more than $2 million to Mr. Channell; William B. O'Boyle, 45, the head of an oil
and gas exploration company in New York, who gave $160,000 to Mr. Channell, and
Mr. Coors, 69, vice chairman of the Adolph Coors Company, who put $65,000 in a
Swiss bank account controlled by Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord.

They said they were committed to the cause of the contras and believed they were
supporting the policies of the Reagan Administration by contributing. They did
not seem to feel that they had been victimized.

'The Old One-Two Punch'

Mrs. Garwood and Mr. O'Boyle described how they were brought to Washington by
Mr. Channell and then were told by Colonel North about the needs of the contras.
Colonel North himself did not directly solicit donations, the witnesses said,
but Mr. Channell did so after Colonel North had made his pitch.

''Where I come from, we call that the old one-two punch,'' said Senator Warren
B. Rudman, Republican of New Hampshire.

''What do you mean by that?'' Mrs. Garwood asked.

Mr. Rudman explained: ''Colonel North was telling you of a terrible need,
knowing you were a person of some means, but obviously was precluded, or thought
he was precluded, from asking directly for money. But he brought to you this
dire situation, and moments later his friend coincidentally asked you for
money.''

Today Mr. Channell and his associate, Richard C. Miller, who has also pleaded
guilty to a conspiracy charge, were given immunity from further prosecution
based on their Congressional testimony. They are expected to testify next week.

A List of Weapons

Mrs. Garwood said Colonel North had shown her a list of weapons needed by the
contras.

Mr. O'Boyle said Colonel North had told him of an Administration plan to topple
the Government of Nicaragua and put the contras in power and had cautioned him
against telling anyone of the plan. He was reluctant to disclose it, but when
pressed he said the contras were to seize some Nicaraguan territory and declare
a provisional government, with support from the United States Navy, which would
blockade the country.

Mr. O'Boyle did not indicate whether any one in Government other than Colonel
North subscribed to this plan.

Promise of Reagan Meeting

Mr. O'Boyle also said Mr. Channell had told him that if he gave substantially
more money, at least $300,000, he could meet with the President. Such a meeting
never took place, he said.

Mr. Coors, a longtime friend and financial supporter of President Reagan, said
he had decided on his own to contribute to the contras and had approached Mr.
Casey, whom he knew from Reagan campaign activities. He testified that Mr. Casey
told him that ''Ollie North's the guy to see'' and arranged for him to meet with
Colonel North immediately.

According to Mr. Coors, Colonel North suggested that he give $65,000 to buy a
small Maule airplane for the contras and gave Mr. Coors the bank account number
for Lake Resources at Credit Suisse in Geneva. Lake Resources was the company
created by General Secord and his business partner, Albert Hakim, to handle
funds involved in the arms sales to Iran and the supply operations for the
contras.

Help Sought for North

Mrs. Garwood, the daughter of Will Clayton, Under Secretary of State in the
Truman Administration, and the widow of St. John Garwood, an Associate Justice
of the Texas Supreme Court, was asked for money by Mr. Channell several times in
1985 and 1986. Each time, she said, she contributed.

Late last year, she said, after the Iran-contra affair was disclosed and Colonel
North was dismissed, Mr. Channell called her and asked her for a $10,000
donation to help pay for Colonel North's legal expenses and for his children's
education.

Subsequently, she said, Andrew Messing Jr., a friend of Colonel North, asked her
for a donation for the same purpose. When she said she had already given to Mr.
Channell, Mrs. Garwood testified, Mr. Messing told her Mr. Channell was
withholding 35 percent of his receipts for overhead expenses.

Mrs. Garwood said that when Mr. Channell did not dispute he was taking a cut,
she asked him to return her donation, and she sent the money to Mr. Messing.

Singlaub Again Testifies

In his second day of testimony this afternoon, General Singlaub said he was
surprised to learn today that Mr. Abrams, the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs, had told the Tower Commission in February that he had
not helped him solicit aid from Taiwan and South Korea.

General Singlaub, a crew-cut veteran of World War II, the Korean War and the
Vietnam War, said one or two of Mr. Abrams's deputies had been present when they
discussed the subject last May. General Singlaub said he had gone to Mr. Abrams
because he was concerned that the Asian governments, Taiwan and South Korea,
would view him as ''an unguided missile'' unless his request for funds was
backed by a ''signal'' from Washington.

Government officials were not allowed to solicit military aid from foreign
countries from 1984 to 1986, but it was not clear what sort of aid was solicited
in these cases.

General Singlaub said Mr. Abrams later told him not to make the request,
explaining that it would be made instead ''at the highest level,'' which General
Singlaub said he believed meant from the White House.

Senator Paul S. Sarbanes, Democrat of Maryland, and Senator William S. Cohen,
Republican of Maine, also expressed concern over two plans General Singlaub had
offered to Colonel North and Mr. Casey for getting support to the contras. The
senators suggested they thought the plans might have served as a model for the
diversion of funds from the Iran arms sales to the contras.

Two Supply Plans

One plan, involving a donation by Taiwan to the contras, would have used a
secret bank account and diverted some commissions on arms sales to the contras.

The other plan called for a complex barter arrangement in which the United
States would provide high technology to Israel, which would in turn supply
technology to China. China would then sell Soviet-made arms to a trading company
that would then deal directly with insurgents in Nicaragua, Ethiopia, Cambodia,
Angola and Afghanistan. The plan was touted as a means of avoiding any
Congressional strictures on aid to the rebel forces.

Senator Cohen said there was no way to know if Colonel North had known of either
plan. But he noted that one of them, originally delivered to Mr. Casey, had been
found in Colonel North's safe.

The hearings are to resume Wednesday, after the Memorial Day weekend, with Mr.
Hakim, General Second's business partner, as the first witness. Mr. Hakim, an
Iranian-born arms dealer, may be able to say how the funds were diverted and
whether General Secord profited from the deals.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SHOWING THE FLAG;
When Trouble Strikes, the Doubts Multiply About Commitment of U.S. Forces Abroad

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 950 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 21


The Iraqi missile attack on the United States frigate Stark in the Persian Gulf,
which cost the lives of 37 American sailors and disabled the warship, has once
again raised a question that has bedeviled American foreign policy for a
quarter-century: Does Washington think through with sufficient rigor the
commitment of American forces and prestige to trouble spots around the globe?

Concerned that the answer is no, the two party leaders in the Senate, Robert C.
Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, and Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, today
jointly introduced an amendment requiring assurances from the Reagan
Administration that American ships in the gulf will be adequately protected and
their rules of engagement explicit.

Often the deployment of American troops or ships, or the provision of American
supplies and advisers, are explained by officials here with such murky phrases
as ''projecting American power'' or ''showing the flag.'' As long as things go
well, there are few objections. But when trouble strikes, as it did on Sunday
off Bahrain, doubts multiply.

Shifting Vietnam Goals

In Vietnam, what began as an effort to shore up the Government of Ngo Dinh Diem
in a protracted guerrilla struggle escalated into a conventional war with North
Vietnam that the South Vietnamese were unable to win after the United States
pulled out. Goals and tactics shifted rapidly, without much strategic
reassessment.

In Lebanon, the commitment of American marines as part of a poorly focused
''peacekeeping'' plan turned to ashes after United States naval bombardments in
the mountains around Beirut made the marines enemies, rather than peacekeepers,
in the eyes of some of the Lebanese combatants.

The marines - ''with our guns spiked,'' as one officer said at the time - found
themselves pinned into vulnerable enclaves, and eventually 241 American
servicemen were killed when a truck loaded with explosives rammed through a
defensive perimeter and was detonated.

In Nicaragua, President Reagan's efforts to help the rebels have been hindered
by many factors, not least a failure to make clear whether the American goal is
the overthrow of President Daniel Ortega Saavedra's Government or achieving
sufficient military successes to force him to negotiate with the rebels. It has
never been clear, furthermore, what result of any such negotiation the United
States would accept.

The situation in the Persian Gulf is equally ill defined. At first determined to
maintain an evenhanded attitude toward the long-running Iran-Iraq war, the
Reagan Administration then tilted publicly toward Iraq. Still later, it secretly
sold missiles to Iran, as part of a doomed attempt to woo Iranian ''moderates''
and win the release of American hostages held by terrorists friendly to the
Iranians.

A Symbolic Commitment

Amid signs of steady deterioration of the security situation in the gulf, with
hundreds of attacks on merchant vessels, United States Navy ships were
dispatched to that confined waterway. They were there, American officials
explained privately and occasionally publicly, to guarantee the safety of oil
tankers and other ships in the area.

But it has never been clear exactly what the Navy ships were ready to do to keep
the sealanes open. The commitment appeared to be largely a symbolic one, with
American aircraft carriers kept well out of the most dangerous zones.

Asked on Tuesday to define the Navy's mission in the area, Defense Secretary
Caspar W. Weinberger said much the same thing, asserting that ''they should be
there because these are international waters, and we cannot be driven out of
international waters by anyone.'' The Secretary also called the ships ''tangible
representatives of our Government's commitment to our friends in the region and
our concern over safe navigation in this critically important body of water.''

A Democratic policy analyst, who asked that he not be identified, said the ships
were in the gulf because ''not to have them there, the Administration thinks,
would tell the world that we're chicken.'' In other words, he said, ''the
question of what the ships do doesn't arise. What they do is be there and be
seen to be there.''

Iraqis the 'Friendlies'

The rules of engagement, as they have been explained since the attack on the
Stark, permitted the captains of ships to open fire to defend themselves. That
was the formal arrangement. But the informal understanding was that the Iraqis
were the ''friendlies'' and that only the Iranians needed be feared. In the
confusion endemic to combat zones, that proved a fatal assumption.

Mr. Reagan has since given even greater latitude to officers on the scene, but
he has also authorized Kuwaiti tankers entering the gulf to fly the United
States flag, which appears to increase the possibility of American hostilities
with Iran.

That led some officials, including Howard H. Baker Jr., the White House chief of
staff, to argue that Congress should be officially notified under the War Powers
Resolution, which is intended to make deployment of American forces in hostile
situations subject to Congressional approval. The President refused, on the
ground that current conditions in the gulf did not meet the resolution's
description of ''situations where imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly
indicated by the circumstances.''

The problem, of course, in this situation as in many others, is that nothing is
clear cut. An American ship in the gulf, said Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, retired, a
former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, faces ''a kind of quasi tension.''
But that can quickly turn into real violence, as the events of last Sunday
demonstrated so vividly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
Ronald Milhous Reagan

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 761 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


President Reagan has a new defense to the charge of lawlessness in soliciting
money for the contras and sending arms to them. He knew all about the arms
shipments, he now says; they were ''my idea to begin with.'' But the law against
them did not apply to him. Or if it did, it was unconstitutional.

Mr. Reagan's lawyers must be looking for legal authority to cite in support of
that defense. Here is a tip, gratis. A formidable source made the argument that
law cannot bind a President when he acts in what he says is the interest of
national security. As follows:

''When the President does it, that means that it is not illegal.'' Q. ''By
definition.'' A. ''Exactly. Exactly. If the President, for example, approves
something because of the national security . . . then the President's decision
in that instance is one that enables those who carry it out, to carry it out
without violating a law.''

Richard M. Nixon speaking. He was interviewed in 1977, three years after his
fall, by David Frost. They talked of the Huston plan, approved by Mr. Nixon, for
burglaries and other acts against opponents of the Vietnam War. Mr. Frost asked
whether a President could order illegalities. The answer, quoted above, was that
a burglary was not illegal if a President ordered it in the name of national
security.

The parallel with Watergate has been strenuously resisted since the Iran-contra
story broke last fall. The facts are different, it was said, and of course they
are. Even more so are the personalities: a genial soft-shoe figure instead of a
brooding hater.

But we know now that in their constitutional essence the two are the same.
Ronald Reagan relies in the end on the same proposition as Richard Nixon: that
he is above the law.

On the facts, Mr. Reagan's disavowal of responsibility for the contra arms
shipments had been exploded by the time he changed his defense. Testimony in the
Congressional hearings left no doubt that he wanted his subordinates to
circumvent the Boland Amendment, and that they acted on that understanding. The
facts also dispose of the point that the law does not apply to the President.
Numerous individuals involved in the arms shipments, including William Casey and
other C.I.A. employees, were undoubtedly covered by the Boland Amendment. In
laying down the policy that they carried out, Mr. Reagan was, at a minimum, part
of a conspiracy to violate the law.

A similar analysis applies to the solicitation of funds for the contras from
Saudi Arabia and other countries. The detailed dealing may have been done by
underlings. But the Saudis gave because they had interests pending with the
United States, and they understood that the President wanted them to give.

As in Watergate, there was cover-up: massive lying to Congress and the public.
Asked in late 1984 about solicitation of funds from foreign countries, a State
Department spokesman said: ''The United States has not done that.'' Congress was
repeatedly told by high officials that the Boland Amendment was being
punctiliously observed.

Underlying it all was an attitude. President Reagan and those around him
believed, as did President Nixon and his men, that Congress has no legitimate
role to play in foreign affairs. They do not accept the clauses of the
Constitution giving Congress a heavy share of responsibility, for example over
the raising of armies and the making of war. They do not respect the long
history of Congress exercising its role.

We have just had a chance to see a wonderful contrast: Gerald Ford's attitude to
these questions. The former President appeared in the Fred Friendly television
programs, ''The Presidency and the Constitution.'' Asked about hypothetical
crises abroad, with Congress blocking Presidential action, he said resolutely
that Congress had its part to play. I realized that I had not sufficiently
valued, in office, his understanding of our system of checks and balances.

Watching the Iran-contra hearings, one misses the gravity of the Nixon
impeachment inquiry - the members' sense that what was at stake was the
Constitution. They ended each article of impeachment with the statement that
''Richard M. Nixon has acted in a manner contrary to his trust as President and
subversive of constitutional government. . . .''

The constitutional gravity of the Iran-contra facts is far greater than
Watergate. What is involved is the delegation of American policy to private
contractors and foreign potentates. But we may not understand that until the
special prosecutor calls those involved to account in law.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 23, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

The Royal Game in Kabul

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 473 words


Mikhail Gorbachev hints at interesting things about Afghanistan. The Soviet
leader talks of a political solution and suggests an undefined role for the
former Afghan King, Mohammad Zahir Shah, in an interim reconciliation coalition.
Meanwhile, over in Kabul, Afghan Communists insist they must be the ''vanguard''
or dominant partner in any such coalition, an idea that the King properly
rejects. Meanwhile, over in the Afghan rebel camp, many Mujahedeen forswear all
compromises.

The message, often forgotten, rears inescapably: When and if Moscow is ready to
risk control of Afghanistan through negotiations, Afghans themselves could block
the way. But the first question for Washington remains: What, if anything, can
it do to help bring about the withdrawal of 115,000 Soviet troops?

One camp, recalling Moscow's refusal to lift a finger to help end the Vietnam
War, says no, let the Russians bleed. But most of the blood is Afghan; as many
as one million have been killed in an eight-year war that has driven five
million Afghans to refugee camps in Pakistan and Iran. There's something morally
repellent about refusing to help alleviate suffering as long as Afghan
guerrillas can keep Soviet troops trapped in a quagmire.

Nor is it obvious that the resistance will have time on its side. There is no
Soviet anti-war movement raging at Mr. Gorbachev, no shouting students here or
in Europe protesting the use of explosive toys to cripple Afghan children. Over
the years, as world interest wanes, crushing Soviet power may complete de facto
annexation of a poor and undeveloped neighbor. This is intimated in growing
numbers of young Afghans enrolled in Soviet schools, where they lose ethnic
loyalties that feed resistance.

Without breaking faith with anyone, the United States could explore Mr.
Gorbachev's hints. A good number of Afghans might support an interim regime
headed by the former King, but not if dominated by the Kabul Communists. In any
coalition, morever, non-Communists would have to control the police and Interior
Ministry; the dismal history of all power-sharing with Communists, from
Czechoslovakia to Laos, teaches that fundamental lesson. These may not be
concessions in Mr. Gorbachev's grasp; if not, better to smoke out the truth and
begin seeking different paths.

A broadly based interim regime might win the support of moderates in the Afghan
resistance; it would be rejected as an abomination by Islamic fundamentalists
who thirst to establish an Iranian-style theocracy. But America's interests
certainly do not lie in promoting resistance factions bent on installing a
clerical dictatorship. If a secular, nonaligned interim government would bring
about a total Soviet withdrawal, it would be worth the price. Saying as much
might shrink the long odds against an admittedly difficult outcome.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SIHANOUK QUITS CAMBODIA RESISTANCE FOR YEAR

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 662 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 23


Prince Norodom Sihanouk, a leader of the anti-Vietnamese Cambodian resistance,
has shaken the delicate balance of diplomacy in Indochina with a surprise
one-year resignation.

Western diplomats here say he may have made the move in order to clear the way
for the first known direct contact between the resistance and Vietnam or the
pro-Hanoi Government the Vietnamese set up after invading Cambodia in late
1978.w But officials from the Southeast Asian nations that support the
resistance say his break could reduce their leverage in a long-running
diplomatic tug-of-war with Hanoi.

Last week, in a move catching his supporters by surprise, the Prince announced
from his home in Beijing that he would ''perform no mission, make no journey,
engage in no activity'' on behalf of the resistance for a year.

Reason for Resignation

He said he acted because of continuing attacks on his guerrilla supporters by
fighters from another branch of the three-party coalition, the Khmer Rouge. The
latest, on April 26, reportedly killed 2 Sihanouk supporters and wounded 12.

The Khmer Rouge, with perhaps 40,000 fighters, are the remnants of the Communist
Pol Pot Government, which is accused of killing two million Cambodians in nearly
four years in power before being driven into the jungles by the Vietnamese.

Since 1982, they have formed an acrimonious alliance with non-Communist rebels
loyal to Prince Sihanouk and to the weaker Khmer Peoples National Liberation
Front led by Son Sann.

The Khmer Rouge has by far the strongest guerrilla army, which Western diplomats
say is capable of operating throughout the country. But Prince Sihanouk remains
the one leader acceptable to all sides in the conflict.

The coalition has won recognition by the United Nations and is supported by
China, the United States and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or
Asean, which opposed the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia.

Hanoi has said no negotiations with the resistance are possible so long as it is
associated with the Khmer Rouge.

Prince Sihanouk, who has threatened to resign several times in the past, has
said he believes that the Cambodia conflict can be settled only by negotiations.

The guerrilla war, in which the three resistance groups operate mostly
independently in combatting Vietnam's occupying force of about 140,000, has
remained at a stalemate.

Western diplomats said Prince Sihanouk had been stymied in a desire to talk with
the Vietnamese by the need to get agreement from his coalition partners. Now,
they said, he could be free to act on his own.

The Khmer Rouge stands to lose the most from his move. Though they are
militarily the strongest member of the coalition, they draw what international
respectability they may have from their association with the Prince.

Thai and other Asean officials have expressed concern that this shift in tactics
could shake the delicate alliance against Hanoi and complicate efforts to draw
Vietnamese into talks.

Foreign Minister Mochtar Kusumaatmadja has recently proposed a new formula for a
''cocktail party'' meeting between officials from the resistance and the Phnom
Penh Government.

Meetings with Phnom Penh officials have been ruled out in the past as implying
recognition of the Hanoi-backed Government.

A professor of political science at the University of Indonesia, Yuwono
Sudarsono, said Prince Sihanouk's move was ''a blow to Asean.''

''The coalition was set up to provide diplomatic leverage vis-a-vis Vietnam,''
he said. Unless it stands firm, ''it would be very difficult for the Vietnamese
to feel that they are under pressure diplomatically.''

The Bangkok Post, a conservative English-language daily, called Prince
Sihanouk's announcement ''very regrettable.''

It recalled what it said was a reference by former Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger, to ''suicidal madness'' among Cambodian leaders and their ''failure
to subordinate their personal egos'' to the national good.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

SOCIAL EVENTS;
On Land and Water

BYLINE: By Robert E. Tomasson

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 47, Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 863 words




HARBOR CRUISE

May 26 - Before Wind Song, a new French-built four-masted sailing cruiser,
begins its regular runs between Europe and the South Pacific, it will cruise New
York harbor for an evening benefit. Guests will board the luxury yacht at 7 P.M.
at Pier 81 (41st Street and the Hudson River). Cocktails and chamber music by a
group that includes piano, flute and harp will be followed by dinner and
dancing, with the ship returning at 11 P.M. The evening benefits Pro Musicis, a
group founded 20 years ago by a Capuchin priest to bring classical music to
institutionalized audiences, in both nursing homes and prisons. Dress is summer
whites. Tickets, $500, or $250 for those under 35; call 212-581-2571.

EDUCATIONAL BENEFIT

May 26 - Since 1950, the Educational Institute for Learning and Research has
operated as a private, nonprofit group treating people from 5 to 25 with
learning disabilities, often due to emotional problems. A cocktail party and
raffle of lunches, trips and other events will be held from 6 to 9 P.M. to
benefit the institute at its home at 1 East 85th Street. There is no admission
fee, but reservations are requested, and those who attend will be asked to buy a
$25 raffle book; call 212-724-9800.

WINE IN THE GARDEN

May 27 - More than 50 wines, all from New York State, will be served at a
wine-tasting benefit for and at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden from 4 to 7 P.M.
Matilda Cuomo, the Governor's wife, will offer brief praise of the wines and the
garden. Tickets, $20; call 212-536-8791.

VETERANS' SALUTE

May 27 - Mayor Koch, Donald Trump, Marine Commandant P.X. Kelly, Medal of Honor
winners and the West Point Glee Club, among others, will be on hand at the
Starlight Roof of the Waldorf-Astoria to honor the Vietnam Veterans' Ensemble
Theater. A 10-minute preview of ''Dear America,'' billed as a major new movie
about the Vietnam War, will be shown. Cocktails at 6:30 P.M., followed by
dinner. Dress is black tie, with decorations. Tickets, $200; call 212-512-1960.

FOLK ART BENEFIT

May 27 - A major fund-raising event for the Museum of American Folk Art and a
chance to buy some striking examples of Americana or an event like dinner for
four with Dr. Ruth Westheimer starts with 6 P.M. cocktails and an auction at
Christie's. A 9 P.M. black-tie dinner at F.A.O. Schwarz follows. Tickets, $150
for cocktails and auction, or $250 including dinner; call 212-481-3080.

BRIEFLY NOTED:

May 27 - From 6 to 9 P.M., there will be an auction of trips, vacations and
dinners at a reception at Regine's to benefit the Strang Clinic's breast cancer
prevention research. Tickets, $100; call 212-683-1934.

May 28 - The junior committee of the Union Settlement, a leading social-service
agency for 92 years, is holding a black-tie Boathouse Bash at the Loeb Boathouse
in Central Park. Tickets, $60 in advance, or $70 at the door; call 212-360-8817.

May 29 - A preview of the Carriage Museum in Stony Brook, L.I., with its
outstanding collection of vehicles, will open with a 7 P.M. black-tie cocktail
buffet to benefit the museum, which is to open June 7. For tickets ($75, or $125
a couple) and directions, call 516-751-0066.

May 30 - The United Negro College Fund will benefit from a 5:30 P.M. concert at
the Carnegie Recital Hall featuring lyric soprano Arden Shelton. A reception at
the Parker Meridien Hotel follows. Tickets, $50, or $20 for concert alone; call
212-326-1224 or 212-326-1217.

May 30 - A carnival atmosphere will prevail at the annual spring dinner-dance of
the women's division of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith at the New
York Hilton, starting with 7:30 P.M. cocktails. Tickets for the black-tie event,
$200; call 212-490-2525, extension 267.

May 30 - A marathon lunch with fashions, a raffle, a sports forum and awards,
not to mention food and drinks, will be held from noon to 4:30 P.M. at the Grand
Hyatt Hotel to benefit the National Foundation for Ileitis and Colitis. Tickets,
$70; call 212-679-1570.

LINCOLN CENTER HURRAH

June 1 - Milton Berle and the Radio City Music Hall Rockettes, the 100-voice
All-Star Broadway Gypsy Chorus and the Broadway Symphony Orchestra, Cleo Laine,
Bernadette Peters and scores of other entertainers are scheduled to perform at a
benefit for Lincoln Center and all its performing companies. The black-tie
evening starts with 6:30 P.M. cocktails in Avery Fisher Hall, followed by the 8
P.M. performance and then by a ''formal French picnic'' with the stars, and
dancing into the wee hours. Tickets, $500 and $1,000; $250 for the cocktail
party and performance; $25, $50 and $100 for the performance alone. Call
212-877-1800.

HELPING THE BLIND

June 2 - Founded in Brooklyn in 1893 as the Industrial Home for the Blind, the
Helen Keller Services for the Blind now reaches more than 14,000 people
annually, offering a wide range of social and rehabilitative services. The
organization's 12th annual black-tie Iris Ball will be held in one of the city's
most elegantly sedate surroundings, the Metropolitan Club, 1 East 60th Street,
starting with 7 P.M. cocktails. Tickets, $250; call 212-522-2122, extension 227.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 30, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
The Social Events column last Sunday gave an incorrect telephone number for
tickets to the Iris Ball on Tuesday to benefit Helen Keller Services for the
Blind. The correct number is (718) 522-2122, extension 227.

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WILL OLD MACHINES KILL NEW IDEAS?

BYLINE: By STEVEN SOLOMON; Steve Solomon is the author of Small Business U.S.A.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2302 words


THROUGHOUT the scientific establishment, inside the halls of Congress and in
corporate suites across America, concern is mounting about the inadequacy of
laboratory equipment and facilities in the nation's universities.

The scope of the problem is not precisely known, but by all accounts it is
acute. Surveys by the National Science Foundation indicate that less than
one-fifth of laboratory instrumentation may be state-of-the-art, while half may
be inadequate for research purposes. One instrument system in four in
engineering and physical sciences is inoperable.

This comes at a time of heightened concern over America's competitiveness. It is
widely accepted that science and technology are critical for a nation to hold
its own in world markets; yet the nation's scientific teaching facilities - a
basic component in the development of scientists and engineers - are being
allowed to deteriorate.

Academics and other technology experts say the facilities shortfall is hindering
research, discouraging leading researchers to remain in academia, and
threatening the quality of education of America's future engineers and
scientists. ''In many universities the buildings are literally beginning to fall
down around the ears of the people doing the work; the equipment is often older
than the students, and sometimes the faculty,'' said D. Allan Bromley, a Yale
physics professor who served as vice chairman to David Packard of the
Hewlett-Packard Company on the l986 White House Science Council Panel on the
Health of U.S. Colleges and Universities. He added: ''The time has come when
this will impact our international competitiveness.''

It may already be happening. Some schools concede they are selecting projects on
the basis of available equipment. Others are shying away altogether from
high-risk exploratory projects. And several schools that are continuing
sophisticated research say it is not as thorough as it might be with better
equipment:

* Colorado State's Atmospheric Science department has started to buy remote
sensing equipment costing from $50,000 to $200,000 a unit, but it does not have
the funds to buy as many such machines as it says it needs. Thus, the university
finds itself in the ironic situation of being able to build highly sophisticated
atmospheric models, but not being able to test and verify them.

* Research and instruction in microelectronics at Case Western Reserve
University, which owns a lot of new equipment, is impeded because the university
cannot yet afford the million for a dust-free ''clean room.''

* The University of Illinois at Chicago recently had to turn down a $250,000
contract from a company wanting to underwrite research at the university's
Center for Genetics because it lacked laboratory space.

* Andrew Frank, professor of mechanical engineering at the University of
California at Davis, cannot teach a basic course in sound and vibration because
the school does not own a $30,000 Fast Fourier Analyzer. EVEN universities with
generous alumni are feeling the pinch.

''Bricks and mortar money is the hardest to raise,'' said Donald Kennedy,
president of Stanford University. Stanford is now trying to raise $250 million
for facilities and $25 million for instrumentation, but Mr. Kennedy is not
optimistic about reaching that goal. ''If you look at the success rates
nationally, universities reach only 65 percent of their facilities goals,'' he
said.

The pace of technology itself is compounding the equipment problems. Instruments
often become outmoded within three or four years, and computers can become
obsolete in less than half that time. Yet experts say that modern science
increasingly depends on advances in instrumentation and computers for analysis.

''In so many fields the breakthroughs have been due to a new instrument with a
different kind of approach, and tied to computers,'' said Frank Press, president
of the National Academy of Sciences. ''So we have to make sure the universities
have state-of-the-art equipment to back up the intellectual talent we know is
there.''

That insurance carries a formidable price tag. The Packard-Bromley panel
concluded that it would take an infusion of $10 billion of Government money over
the next decade to make a dent in the facilities problem. IF buying new
equipment were a one-time cost, the problem would be more easily tackled. But
costs of maintaining sensitive scientific equipment have also soared. Much of
the new equipment requires special environments to precisely control temperature
and humidity, or extensive rewiring, replumbing or new floor support. The
Packard-Bromley panel found repeated instances in which state-of-the-art
equipment had fallen into disuse after only a couple of years because
universities could not afford the technicians to maintain it, or the proper
facilities to house it.

Even if the money were available, many universities do not have the space to
build modern laboratories. At the University of Wisconsin, for example, a
shortage of building space has made it impossible to set up enough properly
equipped engineering labs. Waiting lists for classes are so long that many
engineering students are taking five years to get four-year undergraduate
degrees. Some students spend all night in the hallways to be sure to get seats
in class the next day.

''The research enterprise has become much more capital-intensive over the past
decade,'' said Roland W. Schmitt, senior vice president and chief scientist at
General Electric and chairman of the National Science Board. ''The fraction of
the research dollar for both instrumentation and facilities has gone up.''

The facilities crisis at American universities is unlikely to cause a dearth of
new products soon. Universities performed only $10.6 billion of the total $118
billion spent on research and development in the United States last year.

But it is the universities that perform over half of the nation's basic
research, which industry eventually develops into commercial technology. And it
is the universities that must train future engineers and scientists. ''You
cannot train researchers without having state-of-the-art equipment,'' said John
McTague, vice president of research at the Ford Motor Company and a former
science adviser to President Reagan.

Industry has been forced to pick up a large share of the education process, by
retraining students taught on outdated equipment. But promising faculty are also
moving to industry, leaving gaps in the teaching ranks. About 8.5 percent of
funded engineering faculty positions are unfilled, and there are growing
shortages in computer science and mathematics.

''The superiority of the instrumentation in a forefront industry laboratory is
one reason why a lot of faculty and students are dropping out of the
universities and going to industry,'' said Erich Bloch, director of the National
Science Foundation. Although companies traditionally have been able to afford
better equipment than schools, the discrepancy keeps growing. ''When progess
moved slowly it didn't matter a whole lot if you were trained on old equipment,
but today the technology is changing so rapidly that the principles are often
very different,'' said David V. Ragone, president of Case Western Reserve.

Of course, one solution could be for companies to provide universities with
equipment, or at least the money to buy it. And, in fact, industrial support for
universities has more than doubled since l980, in part due to Federal programs
that require university researchers to come up with matching non-Federal funds.

But industry still provides only about 6 percent of total university research
funding, and companies generally expect professors to have access to necessary
equipment. Moreover, there is a paradox at the core of the industry-university
research relationship that makes companies reluctant to increase the amount:
University research is supposed to augment universal scientific knowledge, not
to benefit one company. Normally, breakthroughs made at universities go into the
public domain, and for most companies, funding research that could ultimately
benefit a competitor is not an appealing idea.

Some professors have grown adept at getting companies to fund their efforts.
''Each professor is like a little company with a group of grad students who make
up his staff and do the research he's interested in, but the professor has got
to beat the bushes to get the greens,'' said Andrew Frank, professor of
mechanical engineering at the University of California at Davis. He has
occasionally had to borrow equipment from colleagues. But he has also gotten a
Japanese company to sponsor some of his automotive research.

The equipment and facilities problem did not come about overnight. It is the
result of a long period of underfunding that began in the late l960's, as the
Vietnam War grew and Federal largesse from the Sputnik era dried up.

Federal funding for university research, which had grown an average of 22
percent annually in constant dollars between l958 and l964, virtually flattened
until the late l970's. Also, an ever-higher percentage of Federal funds went to
salaries and materials.

The result was that the portion ofFederal funding devoted to instrumentation
fell to about 6 percent from close to 12 percent; facility funding dropped to
under $20 million in l98l from $212 million in l966 in constant l972 terms.
''The Government often deletes the equipment portion of the research grant and
says it expects the university to provide it,'' said Roger Boom, professor of
nuclear and metallurgical engineering at the University of Wisconsin.

Universities aggravated the problem by failing to compensate from their own
limited funds. Instead, they continued to spend unearmarked funds for research
personnel and other items the faculty wanted, while pressing Washington for a
bailout as the equipment problem grew.

For some, the states have come to the rescue. Believing that high technology is
a boon to the local economy, some states have sharply increased support of state
universities through high-tech incubators, industrial parks and research
centers, and have given additional funding for instrumentation and facilities.

But for most universities, particularly those with less-than-stellar research
reputations, Government help has fallen far short of need. And some are trying
somewhat unorthodox tactics to get infusions of cash. For one thing, they are
trying to circumvent the traditional peer review for awarding research projects.
Instead, they are asking state officials, or hiring lobbyists, to appeal to
Congress to earmark appropriations for research centers on their campuses. New
York's Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, for example, helped Syracuse University get
$12 million from the Department of Defense for computer research facilities and
equipment. Witchita State University got $5 million for an aviation research
center, while Atlanta University received $4.5 million for a science and
technology center. Such appropriations have grown from nearly nothing a decade
ago to $200 million a year. cried throughout the scientific establishment -
loudest by the traditional research universities that get the most funding under
the peer review process. Last week, more than 40 leading research universities
agreed not to accept direct Congressional grants for scientific facilities for
projects whose merits have not been evaluated through competitive review. But
Paul G. Huray, senior policy analyst in the White House Office of Science and
Technology Policy, insists that direct grants are''obviously meeting a real need
for equipment and facilities funding.'' PRIVATE-SECTOR support is getting
stronger, too. Despite worries about competitors gaining access to
university-spawned knowledge, industry and universities are already increasing
their cooperation. Last year, industry gave $600 million in funds for academic
research. Philanthropists, both corporate and private, provided $1.7 billion,
about $400 million of it in equipment such as computers donated by computer
companies. Such corporations as DEC, Rockwell International and Monsanto
annually contribute more than $50 million, $14 million, and $15 million to $20
million to university coffers, respectively. Smaller companies have donated
instruments, albeit generally older models.

Still, although university-industry ties are likely to grow even stronger, few
expect corporate support ever to become more than a small portion of university
research support. ''The need to equip the major university laboratories is just
so enormous that there is no conceivable way that industry can pick up the
tab,'' says S. Allen Heininger, vice president of resource planning at Monsanto.
''It virtually has to be Federal funds.''

Universities already depend on the Government for two-thirds of their research
support. The National Science Foundation under Erich Bloch has taken the lead in
raising the portion of its funding earmarked for instrumentation to about 20
percent. He would like to raise it to 25 percent, but said even that would
''only be good enough to keep up, not catch up.''

Any Federal solution, of course, is constrained by the budget deficit. Ever
present is the concern that money spent on instrumentation or facilities may
simply be subtracted from research support.

Although some in industry think the deficiencies in the university labs may
already be showing up, most view the gravest threat as in the future. ''Our
university research, even with the less than adequate instrumentation, is still
the best in the world,'' said Mr. McTague of Ford. ''But you're starting to see
more things coming out of Europe. That's not going to hurt us next year. But l0
years from now it will hurt us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph of money spent on university research in billions of dollars,
1965-1986 (Source: National Science Foundation); drawings

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORPORATE RAIDER: PAUL BILZERIAN;
A SCRAPPY TAKEOVER ARTIST RISES TO THE TOP

BYLINE: By ALISON LEIGH COWAN

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2674 words


CLASSMATES vividly remember their first glimpse of Paul A. Bilzerian at Harvard
Business School's opening session in 1975. ''Everybody was wearing jackets and
ties,'' said Mark Filippell, an investment banker and former classmate. ''It was
the first day and no one knew what to expect, and this guy sticks his head in
five minutes late. He's wearing blue jeans that look like he's been mining coal
in them and a Stanford sweatshirt with holes in the elbow. He needs a shave. I
thought he was lost or something.''

Even Mr. Bilzerian quickly began to wonder whether he had done the right thing
by accepting Harvard's offer of admission. He called several law schools he had
previously turned down to see if he could reapply, but was told he was too late.
''He was sick about it, so convinced he took the wrong course,'' recalled Mr.
Filippell, still a close friend.

Mr. Bilzerian, a takeover artist, can laugh about all that now. Today, he has
made at least $40 million - more money than most of his Harvard classmates.
Several of them, Robert M. Haft, president of the Dart Group Corporation, for
one, have also made names for themselves as corporate raiders. But the fact that
Mr. Bilzerian made his millions without a family name or fortune only adds to
the admiration - and envy - of his peers.

''I'm probably worth $25 million myself, but nothing like Haft and Bilzerian,''
said John D. Kuhns, a classmate who recently completed a billion-dollar hostile
takeover as president of the Catalyst Energy Development Corporation.

Mr. Bilzerian's burst into the business elite has not been without risk.
Takeovers are nothing if not a game of bluff, and takeover artists have provoked
much wrath for treating companies like so many chess pieces. Those like Mr.
Bilzerian, who end up losing companies to higher bidders and still making tens
of millions of dollars, are especially resented for their ability to make huge
profits from a few quick financial transactions. In fact, Mr. Bilzerian's skills
in ac cumulating huge blocks of stock in takeover candidates without roiling the
markets have thrust him under the scrutiny of the Securities and Exchange
Commission. Mr. Bilzerian has acknowledged he received an S.E.C. subpoena in
March regarding four of his public deals.

The S.E.C. investigation raises questions about the way in which Mr. Bilzerian,
and corporate raiders in general, amass their initial stakes in target
companies. There is nothing wrong in buying big blocks of shares, but there are
safeguards aimed at preventing people from quietly scooping up sizable holdings
of shares without disclosing their intentions. Investors, for example, acting
alone or in concert, must notify the S.E.C. within 10 days when they have bought
5 percent or more of a public company.

Mr. Bilzerian has dazzled Wall Street by amassing stakes that typically exceed 5
percent in target companies, often without much of a signal to anyone. Of
course, it is possible to amass more than 5 percent of a company legally before
the 10-day deadline passes for filing with the S.E.C. But usually that involves
furious buying, which alerts the Street and drives up prices. Documents provided
by Mr. Bilzerian suggest that the S.E.C. may be looking at whether he might have
been acting with brokers to purchase stock in a way that was not adequately
disclosed. THE S.E.C. is also studying the $125,000 paid by Mr. Bilzerian
-purportedly for investment banking services - to Jefferies & Company, the West
Coast stock broker that settled charges relating to the Wall Street scandal
earlier this year. Boyd Jefferies, the firm's former chairman, has pleaded
guilty to two felonies that involved the use of phony invoices. ''Thanks to
Boesky and Jefferies, invoice has become a dirty word,'' said Mr. Bilzerian, who
insists his bill is legitimate.

Even if the investigation turns up no wrongdoing, it could crimp Mr. Bilzerian's
ability to raise the huge antes needed to play in the acquisition game, stunting
his career as a takeover specialist. Already people who once spoke freely about
their liaisons with Mr. Bilzerian have grown cautious about linking themselves
to him.

Mr. Bilzerian, a slim 36-year-old, denies any wrongdoing, and dismisses the
notion that the subpoena will hurt him. ''In fact, I'm meeting with a bank as
soon as we get off the phone; not only won't the subpoena put an end to my
career, I'd like to think it won't even affect it,'' he said, in his usual
confident tone.

Mr. Bilzerian has been in the spotlight before, when he went after Cluett,
Peabody & Company in mid-1985, the Hammermill Paper Company in July 1986 and the
Allied Stores Corporation a few months later. This year, his sights have been
set on Ramada Inc. and Pay N Pak Stores Inc., among others.

But for all that, he has remained something of a mystery: He is capable of
making a multimillion dollar offer for a public company, yet until recently, his
Florida base of operations consisted of a rented phone in the rear of a hardware
store in one of his shopping centers. (His company, the Bicoastal Financial
Corporation, now has a staff of 50 and is based in a Tampa office building.) He
is also a man who likes to be difficult. For instance, he has taken some legal
correspondence courses and is quick to sue just about anyone, even his own
lawyers. Several attorneys said these suits arose over his refusal to pay fees
for legal work.

His frequent romanticizing about his past has also fed some of the confusion
about his background. He reminisces about his hard-luck days at school when he
and his wife, Terri, also a Stanford graduate, would borrow a bicycle to do the
chores: She would ride on the handlebars balancing the laundry and he would
pedal, his story goes. But a a classmate recalls that Mr. Bilzerian owned a
''big, old Cadillac'' at the time. (Mr. Bilzerian says he didn't.) Mr. Bilzerian
has also said, more than once, that he has lived in the same modest home since
1978, but neglects mentioning, until pressed, that he actually owns a ''few''
homes in St. Petersburg, and that his own home overlooks the beach.

Mr. Bilzerian does not even talk like a corporate raider. Where others, such as
T. Boone Pickens, cast themselves as champions of the little guy, Mr. Bilzerian,
will have none of that.

Consider his comments about Hammermill's fight to stay free of him: ''It's
impossible to criticize what they did whether they like me or not.'' Or his
exoneration of a Forbes reporter who wrote harshly about him: ''If I were
writing an article about myself,'' he said, ''I'm not sure I'd write a positive
story.'' MR. Filippell says that Mr. Bilzerian's interest in acquiring companies
is real. ''He's not just going through the motions. When he lost Cluett, it
killed him.''

His critics, mostly those who have opposed him on the takeover warpath, have a
different view. To them, Paul Bilzerian's desire to own a company is an act.
They concede he sounded sincere when he told a Pennsylvania reporter covering
the Hammermill battle, for instance, that he would consider moving to Erie, Pa.,
if he won. But, they argue, his record shows that Mr. Bilzerian - like all
raiders - really wants someone else to top his bid.

Mr. Bilzerian may be a bit ambivalent himself. On the one hand, he defends the
$53 million he earned in ''breakup'' fees, the consolation prize that he and his
partners received from Campeau Corporation for dropping their fight over Allied
Stores. He says he earned the money because he created $400 million in value for
all shareholders. On the other hand, Mr. Bilzerian has little interest in
running a company, and prefers to let professional managers do the job. He said
he learned early on that he ''didn't like managing people.''

So who is the real Bilzerian? Paul Bilzerian has not exactly helped clear up the
questions that have dogged his career ever since Cluett, in a lawsuit, called
him ''an obscure individual of indeterminate means.'' He has always been
tight-lipped about his backers and his net worth. The $40 million he made in
several well-publicized raids may only be a sliver of his wealth, which he and
his investment banker, Daniel J. Good of Shearson Lehman Brothers, suggest
includes sizable profits made earlier in real estate and in the stock market.

One fact about his past is clear: Mr. Bilzerian was practically born to be a
corporate raider. Even in his youth, he displayed a fondness for challenging
authority. He dropped out of school in Worcester, Mass., one day in September,
1968, when he was sent to the principal's office for wearing blue jeans, in
breach of the school dress code.

For a brief period, he rode his motorcycle, worked the cash register at a
fast-food restaurant and loaded trucks. He soon grew bored, and joined the Army,
where he was decorated for his service in Vietnam. Still, his Army friends
teased him about his clear distaste for the salute.

The Army helped him get on a professional track. He took the high school
equivalency test so he could attend officer's school, and ascended to the rank
of first lieutenant. After his discharge, he enrolled at Stanford University,
intent on a career in politics. He graduated in 1975 - with honors.

Harvard Business School was a poorer fit, however. He cut classes, railed
against the school's teaching method and, when he did attend, classmates and
professors remember they could always count on him to challenge the case's
assumptions. Said Mr. Kuhns of Catalyst Energy: ''He wasn't uncomfortable making
outlandish comments in class.'' Added Dan Shypula, a Harvard friend, ''He's sort
of a maverick.'' UPON graduation, Mr. Bilzerian landed a job in the treasurer's
office of the Crown Zellerbach Corporation, where he evaluated merger
opportunities. But he was more interested in making his own deals, and, on the
side, went shopping for a radio station he could buy with two other Vietnam
veterans, both with broadcast experience.

The three finally found a prime candidate, WPLP in Seminole, Fla., and Mr.
Bilzerian, acting without an attorney, convinced Dan L. Johnson, the owner, to
sell the property to his group instead of several other bidders. ''The guy is a
tireless negotiator,'' said Mr. Johnson. ''He's not shrewd. He just wears you
out to the point you give him anything to get him off your phone.''

Mr. Bilzerian moved from San Francisco to the St. Petersburg area to handle the
finances; his friends ran programming and sales.

But the partners began to bicker over expenditures, and tensions mounted when a
change in the station's format backfired. The station, which had been breaking
even when the three took over in 1978, lost $1.4 million in their first year,
according to Mr. Johnson, who later bought the station back.

Mr. Bilzerian's departure from the station was no lovefest. His partners claimed
in lawsuits that he put up only half of the $100,000 he had pledged, and that
after he was discharged from the board, he wrote a $50,000 check on the
company's checkbook to his father-in-law, Harry Steffen, a former real estate
developer who had supplied his portion of the money. Within a year, the station
tumbled into Chapter 11.

When the name calling ended, Mr. Bilzerian, in an out-of-court settlement, not
only recovered his father-in-law's investment, but also secured a $300,000
promissary note to drop all claims to the station's assets. Mr. Steffen,
grateful to have been bailed out, began including his astute son-in-law in his
real estate deals.

Mr. Bilzerian has said that he amassed $100 million in real estate holdings
during that period, and disposed of them when Florida property values vaulted in
the early 1980's. He could not resist turning the properties over, except for
''a few little distractions.''

One such distraction is a video rental store in his South Bay Fashion Center, in
Sarasota. A friend who knows that Mr. Bilzerian is a movie buff says the Florida
investor had an angle: He wanted access to the video library for his personal
use, and the tax benefits of depreciating the films.

Looking for a place to park the proceeds from his dismantled real estate empire,
Mr. Bilzerian says, he turned to stocks in 1982, just catching the start of a
major bull market. But he is secretive about the size of the gains he made.

Finally two years ago, he began toying with the idea of waging takeovers, as a
way of focusing on a limited number of companies. Suddenly, he saw in the
iconoclasm of his youth a way to make a living.

And what a living. So far, he has earned $40 million stalking public companies,
even though he has yet to nab one. His financial success has also attracted the
attention of more established players, such as William and Earle Mack of New
Jersey, and Edward J. deBartolo Sr. These days, Mr. Bilzerian says he is
fighting ''a losing battle'' not to let his success change his way of life, and
he expects to move with his wife and two sons into ''Taj Mahal,'' as he calls
the home he is building in Tampa, complete with lake, water skiing, tennis
courts, basketball. ''All the fun things I never had as a kid,'' he said. HE
does not want anyone to think he has not earned his riches the hard way. As he
is the first to relate, he rarely sleeps (''It's a waste; I can't accomplish
great things; if I could remember my dreams, maybe.'') has no time to return the
60 phone calls he gets a day and and is so busy ''that I eat only when I have
meetings.''

He did not quite get the hang of the takeover business right away, he says. His
first try, a small holding in the Syntex Corporation in early 1984, backfired
when he made his plans known to too many people, and the stock ran up before he
bought much of it.

But he learns fast. Mr. Bilzerian's subsequent raids have proved more
satisfying. His attempted takeovers of Cluett, Hammermill and Allied all ended
with the companies being bought by an industry rival. Those deals, nevertheless,
enhanced the novice raider's net worth and reputation.

They also led him to Boyd Jefferies, the stockbroker. The two met for the first
time in the summer of 1985, shortly after Mr. Bilzerian's interest in Cluett
became known. The broker wanted to sell this up-and-coming financier some
investment banking services, and while the pitch did not work as intended, Mr.
Bilzerian said he later steered about one-fifth of all his trades to Jefferies &
Company.

If Mr. Bilzerian's luck holds, of course, he may be able to put the current
controversy behind him and continue to build his fortune.

Charles W. Knapp, chairman of Trafalgar Holdings Ltd., which invested in Cluett,
thinks Mr. Bilzerian has a promising future. ''He has been a totally
responsible, sophisticated member of the community, and I think he's a man whose
career is just starting.''

For a three-time loser who has at least $40 million to show for himself, Paul
Bilzerian has been treated pretty well by the takeover business.

A SNAPSHOT OF SELECTED BILZERIAN DEALS
$
Target                                Bilzerian Stake      Final Acquirer
Company                           (% held by partner)              (date)
Cluett, Peabody & Co.        1.1 million shares, plus         West Point-
                                options on additional      Pepperell Inc.
                                 800,000 (1% owned by              (1986)
                                   William Brodovsky)
Hammermill Paper Co.          3.3 million shares (50%       International
                                owned by Mack family)    Paper Co. (1986)
Allied Stores Corp.               No shares purchased       Campeau Corp.
                               (90% of fees to Edward              (1987)
                                   J. de Bartolo Sr.)
Pay N Pak Stores Inc.                1 million shares       N.A. (Parties
                                                           have agreed to
                                                              a temporary
                                                              standstill)
                                                               Annualized
Target                                   Net Partner-           Return on
Company                                   ship Profit          Investment
Cluett, Peabody & Co.                    $7.5 million                 70%
Hammermill Paper Co.                    $48.0 million                260%
Allied Stores Corp.                     $53.0 million                N.A.
                                              in fees
Pay N Pak Stores Inc.                    $6.9 million                330%
                                        (paper profit
                                             based on
                                       current market
                                              prices)

 *N.A. Not Applicable

Source: Paul Bilzerian;
Company Reports; The
New York Times


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Paul Bilzerian (NYT/Cliff McBride)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              192 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 268 words



THE PERFECT WAR: Technowar in Vietnam. By James William Gibson. (Atlantic
Monthly, $24.95.) Early in this argumentative book, the author writes: ''If you
are setting up an ambush, you must first pick a place where men are likely to
walk. . . . You then position your mines and grenades and automatic weapons to
achieve overlapping or intersecting 'fields of fire.' '' In a literary sense,
that is what James William Gibson, a sociologist at Southern Methodist
University, has done. Then he shoots with abandon at liberals and conservatives,
hawks and doves, soldiers and scholars alike for their analyses of how America
got into Vietnam, the way the war was fought and why the United States lost. Few
escape his criticism for practicing ''mechanistic anticommunism'' and
''Technowar,'' which he calls the ''production model of war,'' in that combat is
managed like an automobile assembly line. Moreover, Mr. Gibson fears that the ''
Vietnam syndrome,'' which curtailed the application of American military power
after Vietnam, has really evaporated; thus, he says, the United States is
preparing for a war in Central America in which the ''redeployment of Technowar
can only result in another massive defeat.'' With all that, the book leaves one
unsatisfied. The reader knows what the author is against but not much about what
he advocates, beyond a plea that Americans understand how they became
''entrapped'' in Vietnam. ''And with such understanding,'' he concludes,
''changing the war system and mythology, and creating a more complex, humane,
vision of the world, become compelling obligations.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              193 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEIGHBORS RISE IN VETERANS' GROUPS

BYLINE: By Robert A. Hamilton

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 12, Column 4; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 836 words


THREE residents of Windham are gaining prominence as leaders of the largest
veterans' groups in the state.

''I think this will be the first time in state history that all three of the
major veterans' organizations will be represented by men from the same
hometown,'' said Earl H. Dunton.

Next month, Mr. Dunton is to become state commander of the Veterans of Foreign
Wars.

The three men will be in the Memorial Day observances in the town tomorrow. The
ceremonies begin at 7:30 A.M. with visits to the seven cemeteries in town to
place wreaths on the graves of veterans. The tribute to war dead culminates with
a parade beginning at 10:30 at Jillson Square and moving down Main Street to the
V.F.W. Hall.

Towns throughout the state will have similiar observances today and tomorrow.

In addition to the three leaders of the veterans' groups leaders, a Windham
native will become the State Commissioner of Veterans' Affairs. Lary Salavka,
who will retire next month as vice principal at Windham High School, ending a
career that began as an elementary school teacher 35 years ago, was named by
Governor O'Neill this month.

Although he was born and grew up in Windham, he has lived 35 years in East
Hampton, Mr. O'Neill's hometown. Mr. Salavka is on the Democratic Town Committee
and has been on the Boards of Education and Selectmen.

Mr. Salavka said he had he had already been inundated with calls for help in
obtaining veterans benefits.

''I don't even formally have the position yet,'' Mr. Salavka said, ''and people
are already bombarding me with requests.''

Mr. Dunton, senior vice commander of the state V.F.W., and will follow the
traditional route to advance to commander next month.

''It's kind of locked in,'' Mr. Dunton said. ''If you've done your job as senior
vice commander, you advance to commander.''

Mr. Dunton said the last commander from Windham was Col. James J. Lee, in
1932-33. Mr. Dunton said he would ask Mr. Lee, who still lives in Windham, to
become his state historian.

Mr. Dunton said he planned no great changes for the organization during his
term, because it has been doing very well in recent years.

''The objective of every state commanddr is to keep the objectives of the
Veterans of Foreign Wars, and that is to have veterans helping veterans,'' Mr.
Dunton said.

Mr. Dunton, a veteran of the Korean War, said he intended to encourage more
Vietnam veterans to become active with the V.F.W.

Mr. Dunton said the V.F.W., which was organized 89 years ago, 32,000 members in
the state. Although he was not sure how many were Vietnam veterans, he said he
did not believe the proportion was as high as at the Windham post, where 25
percent of the 800 members are Vietnam veterans, including several who have been
elected post commander.

Another resident of Windham, Raymond Bigelow, a member of the American Legion
since 1954, when he returned from Korea, is senior vice commander of the state
chapter and will advance in July to commander.

Mr. Bigelow said that the legion, founded in 1919, had 28,500 members in
Connecticut and that he expected to top 29,000 after completing a membership
drive. The organization has 2.8 million members nationwide.

''Our main concern is community work,'' Mr. Bigelow said, ''and not just taking
care of veterans, but operating youth programs and other programs.''

The legion sponsors Boys State, a summer program to teach high school students
how the government functions, and American Legion Baseball. The women's
auxiliary is the host for Girls State, which teaches young women about
government.

In addition, Mr. Bigelow said, the legion works with drug-prevention programs
for teen-agers.

Mr. Bigelow will be the third state commander from the Windham post. The past
commanders were Howard Jacobs and Leroy Butler.

An Amvet from Windham, Charles Kelley, will have to wait a bit longer to lead
his state chapter. But he and others are confident he will advance from his vice
commander to senior vice commander next month, and commander next year.

''I have to run for office just like anyone else,'' Mr. Kelley said. ''If the
members don't think I've done a good job, they can elect someone else.''

Mr. Kelley added that he had been promised enough delegate support to become
senior vice commander seat next month.

Mr. Kelley said his group, as with the others, was growing, a phenomenon he he
attributed, in part, to the fact that many World War II and Korean veterans were
reaching the age where they needed some of their G.I. benefits and did not know
much about applying for them.

Amvets has begun an educational campaign.

''A lot of veterans have things coming to them that they're not aware of, and
we're going to try to bring them to their attention,'' Mr. Kelley said.

Mr. Kelley said he did not plan other major changes, because the 1,500 members
seemed to be functioning well.

''I've always subscribed to the theory that if it's working, don't fix it,'' Mr.
Kelley said. ''And right now it's working just fine.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              194 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET, IN A SHIFT, EXPANDS CONTACT WITH THIRD WORLD

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1341 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 24


The Soviet Union, in what some diplomats view as a major shift in foreign
policy, is seeking increased leverage in developing regions by courting
influential non-Marxist nations.

Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, Egypt, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Indonesia, Thailand and
other countries that once received scant attention from top Soviet officials are
now being aggressively wooed with high-level visitors, economic concessions,
cultural exchanges and effusive treatment in the Soviet press.

Diplomats say this is a striking turnaround for a country that once saw the
third world primarily as an opportunity to expand its influence with guns and
Marxist dogma.

A Pragmatic Approach

The courtship, deliberately nonideological, stresses peaceful cooperation of
different political and economic systems and public statements about reduced
tensions Like so much of the foreign policy under Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the
Soviet leader, it is a pragmatic rather than a dogmatic approach, said an
admiring Asian diplomat.

Without abandoning any of his older clients, diplomats say, Mr. Gorbachev has
set out to improve his image worldwide, to integrate the Soviet Union more into
the world economy and to exert influence in regional conflicts.

Cultivating warmer relations with nonaligned developing nations offers him
influence, image and potential markets without the high cost and uncertainty
that come with underwriting Moscow's friends like Libya.

Snub to a Traditional Client

At times, the Russians' new-found enthusiasm even seems to overshadow allegiance
to their traditional clients.

Early this month, for example, the Mexican Foreign Minister, Bernardo Sepulveda
Amor, arrived in Moscow to a royal reception, including a meeting with Mr.
Gorbachev and the sort of press coverage once reserved for intimate friends.

On the same two days, Foreign Minister Gaballah Azouz Talhi of Libya, a country
long allied with the Soviet Union, passed through Moscow. There was little
fanfare and he did not meet with Mr. Gorbachev.

Revolutionary Goal Disclaimed

Latin American diplomats were also struck by the tone of Mr. Gorbachev's remarks
to the Mexican Foreign Minister, published in the official press, in which he
disclaimed any Soviet interest in encouraging ''Socialist revolutions'' in Latin
America and took pains to say he did not want to meddle in Latin relations with
the United States.

To help reassure nations in the Middle East, Mr. Gorbachev has taken a tougher
line with another client, Syria, pressing President Hafez al-Assad toward peace
negotiations and refusing to endorse the Syrian leaders' demand for military
''parity'' with Israel.

Some diplomats say they expect a dramatic demonstration of the shift in Soviet
priorities later this year, when Mr. Gorbachev is expected to travel to Latin
America. Soviet officials indicate Mr. Gorbachev will almost certainly visit
Mexico, which among the Latin American moderates has the most cordial relations
with Moscow. Mr. Gorbachev quite possibly will also visit Argentina, Brazil and
Uruguay.

Many believe that, unless relations with the United States have soured badly by
then, Mr. Gorbachev will bypass the Soviet Union's two dependents in the region,
Cuba and Nicaragua.

Drain on Soviet Resources

''In the 1960's and 1970's, the Soviets acquired all these problem cases -Libya,
Mozambique, Afghanistan, Angola, Nicaragua, Vietnam, Syria,'' said a diplomat
from a developing region, reflecting on the new emphasis in Soviet diplomacy.

''All were a drain on Soviet resources, and because of their relations with
their neighbors, they assured that the Soviet role would be marginal. And none,
except Vietnam, has made a definite, permanent shift to socialism. They were bad
investments.'' A Western diplomat remarked, ''The Soviets want to trade up
without risking their traditional friendships.''

Mr. Gorbachev's most visible successes have been in the Middle East and the
Persian Gulf, where the Russians have raised their profile and enhanced their
stature by currying favor with non-client countries and showing signs of greater
willingness to rein in troublesome clients.

Soviet tankers now carry Kuwaiti oil through the Persian Gulf. A Soviet plan for
a peace conference to resolve Arab-Israeli differences is taken seriously, even
in Israel. Egypt's old military debts have been rescheduled, resulting in a
marked warming of relations.

''The Soviets seem to realize for the first time that their policy of focusing
on Syria and Libya was perpetuating a marginal role for the Soviet Union,'' said
a Middle East diplomat. ''They're trying to break out of this marginal role.''

Rewards Are Still Potential

In other regions, the Gorbachev drive has excited a great deal of curiosity, but
the political payoff is still only potential.

Indonesia, where Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Minister, made a
fence-mending visit in March, is an influential member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations and could become a broker in settling the military
conflict in Cambodia.

But so far Mr. Gorbachev has shown no inclination to risk his close alliance
with Vietnam, although Soviet support for Vietnamese forces in Cambodia has been
a major obstacle to improving relations with China and other Asian countries.

Soviet diplomacy has produced few tangible results in Latin America, except that
Mexico and Argentina are often in the chorus of nonaligned nations cheering
Soviet arms control initiatives.

Diplomats say the Russians may be able to exploit anti-Washington stirrings
brought on by United States reluctance to bail out Latin debtor nations, its
continued support of the anti-Sandinista rebels in Nicaragua and new
restrictions on immigration.

Soviet attempts to warm relations with a wider range of countries are
constrained by Moscow's role in several regional conflicts, diplomats say.

Uneasiness Over Soviet Action

In the Middle East, potential friends are made uneasy by the Soviet military
forces in Moslem Afghanistan. In Latin America, Soviet support for Cuba and
Nicaragua still makes some leaders uneasy. And the Soviet support for Vietnam's
war in Cambodia causes similar mistrust in Asia.

Soviet attempts to strengthen economic ties with non-Marxist countries have been
hampered by the poor condition of the Soviet economy. Moscow has little help to
offer debt-ridden countries in Latin America, for example, and Soviet foreign
trade has declined sharply because the drop in oil prices has eaten into the
Kremlin's income.

Although one Soviet objective in developing regions is to open new markets for
their manufactured goods, the Russians' reputation for poor quality and their
inexperience as salesmen has hampered them.

The new interest in third-world moderates is part of a general broadening of the
Soviet focus, after years of seeing the world as primarily a competition between
the two superpowers.

''The U.S.-Soviet relationship is still at the center of their thinking, but it
doesn't dominate it the way it used to,'' said an Asian diplomat.

'Spheres of Influence'

The Soviet line that has gradually emerged under Mr. Gorbachev is that neither
superpower is entitled to claim ''spheres of influence'' in the developing world
and that political diversity is to be tolerated.

This more expansive outlook has brought a steady parade of foreign leaders to
Moscow. It has engaged not only Mr. Shevardnadze but also other Politburo
members in the most vigorous kind of peripatetic diplomacy since Mr.
Shevardnadze took over the Foreign Ministry from Andrei A. Gromyko, the longtime
Foreign Minister who now holds the largely ceremonial post of President but is
still a member of the policy-making Politburo.

Mr. Gorbachev himself remarked recently that he had held about 100 meetings with
foreign dignitaries during his two years in office.

''Shevardnadze has set foot in countries that Gromyko did not even know were on
the globe,'' said a diplomat from a country friendly to Moscow.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              195 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Remembering the Fallen

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 54 words


Ismael Vincenty honoring Americans who died in Southeast Asia during a visit to
the Vietnam War Memorial in lower Manhattan. Today, the city will mark Memorial
Day with a parade starting at 10 A.M. at 72d Street and Broadway and ending at
the Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument in Riverside Park. (NYT/Chester Higgins Jr.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              196 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Books of The Times;
A Sailor's Journal

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 891 words


RACING THROUGH PARADISE: A Pacific Passage. By William F. Buckley Jr.
Photographs by Christopher Little. 344 pages. Random House. $25.

One approaches ''Racing Through Paradise: A Pacific Passage,'' with a twinge of
apprehension. It is, after all - following ''Airborne: A Sentimental Journey''
(1976) and ''Atlantic High: A Celebration'' (1982) - the third book William F.
Buckley Jr. has written about his sailing experiences in general and his ocean
cruises in particular.

As he himself observes in the present volume: ''Sailing is a continuous
experience as, I suppose, other avocational sports are - a skier more or less
keeps on skiing, and though one episode (a week in Alta? a summer ski in Chile?)
may stand out, you tend to think of it as in some way seamless.''

Which is precisely the source of one's anxiety as one begins this colorful
account of a 4,000-mile Pacific cruise that he, his son, five friends and a crew
undertook in June 1985 aboard the chartered 71-foot ketch Sealestial. How much
of this seamless experience can he continue to make diverting? How many sunsets
can he write about? How much weather?

Not to worry, though. Yes, there is a lyrical paragraph or two: ''Time loses its
meaning. You just sail, and sail, and watch the moon descend ever so slowly . .
. creating that comfortable, cozy companionship, you and the waves, traveling in
the same direction. We were off.'' And yes, there is a sunset. ''It gave the
impression of an artist returning to a huge canvas time after time, with great
swaths of paint, trying out different colors, comparing them.'' (A glorious
two-page photograph demonstrates that the description is not exaggerated.) But
in every other respect, Mr. Buckley achieves variety. To begin with, there is
the background for the trip, which takes up nearly a third of the book. Here the
author discovers new places to cruise, considers ways that less affluent sailors
than he might be able to enjoy them, and recalls some of his less routine
outings - most amusingly, one that involved an encounter with a rude Canadian he
dubs the Angel of Craig's Point, his description of which constitutes his sweet,
if more or less harmless, revenge.

Even under way on his Pacific crossing, when his narrative grows more vulnerable
to the monotony of wind and water, he manages to include enough in the way of
jokes, digressions, gadgets, tips on celestial navigation and meditation on the
relative appeals of power and sail to keep the reader wide awake and involved.
And lest we weary of his occasionally arch prose style, he offers us excerpts
from the journals of his fellow sailors, principally those of his son,
Christopher, and his journalist-friend, the less than seaworthy Dick Clurman.

Yet it's not variety alone that keeps us reading ''Paradise.'' Even more
absorbing is the curious mix of personalities aboard the Sealestial, living,
laboring, playing, sleeping (fitfully) in close quarters under often trying
circumstances. The seven principals differed in age, temperament, humor, manual
skill, neatness, taste, politics. There was disagreement over Vietnam,
insufficient ventilation in the sleeping quarters, anxiety about whether
Ambassador Evan G. Galbraith would get back to Paris in time to receive Vice
President Bush, and Mr. Clurman's habit of absent-mindedly putting out his
cigarettes in other people's desserts.

Yet no fistfights occur in the month of cruising. The travelers vent their
hostilities through jokes, teasing and hyperbolic tirades written down in their
journals. Good cheer prevails. The arms of camaraderie seem to reach out and
embrace the reader in friendship.

But then, of course, it is William F. Buckley Jr. who handpicked his companions
aboard the Sealestial, and it is mostly through his eyes that we observe them
interacting. If there was actually any bruising tension or hard feelings, it
never stood a chance against the mix of tact, humor, charm, self-deprecation and
sense of the absurd that the author brings to his account of the trip.

At one point, almost as if anticipating his readers' possible envy and
resentment that only an elite can afford the time and money for such a venture,
Mr. Buckley cites a magazine article someone has sent him that begins: ''There
are two words that explain why the general public thinks of boat owners as the
idle, indolent, insolent rich. One word is William. The other is Buckley.''

In a self-defense that is slightly beside the point of boat ownership, he
proceeds to make a case for yacht-chartering, arguing that such an indulgence
costs no more than the price of a berth on a cruise ship or a room in a
Caribbean resort hotel. Eventually he wends his way to the question of why
people are somehow afraid to undertake such a venture. Why this fear, when the
danger is minimal and the expense per couple no greater than that of a room at
Little Dix Bay?

He doesn't know the answer, but I think I do. Given the ambiance of yacht travel
as he depicts it, one is bound to feel that one needs a scoutmaster of Mr.
Buckley's talents to lead and lend his spirit to the routine. Bluntly, why more
people don't charter yachts may be because they can't have William F. Buckley
Jr. along for the ride. Better to sit at home and read his books. Less risk of
drowning. Less risk of murdering one's friends.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of William F. Buckley Jr. (Christopher Little)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              197 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

JAMES J. DELANEY, 86, A DEMOCRAT AND FORMER QUEENS CONGRESSMAN

BYLINE: By WINSTON WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 37, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 541 words


James J. Delaney, the former Queens Congressman whose three decades in
Washington catapulted him into the chairmanship of the powerful House Rules
Committee, died yesterday at his son's home in Tenafly, N.J. He was 86 years old
and had been a resident of Key Biscayne, Fla., since his retirement in 1978.

Colleagues said the Delaney Amendment - a clause in a 1957 food-safety bill that
outlawed cancer-causing additives in food - was the capstone of his long and
controversial political career. As chairman of the New York City Congressional
delegation in the mid-1970's, he also played a key role in shaping the Federal
legislation that helped rescue the city from its financial crisis.

First elected to the House of Representatives in 1944 as a Democrat from Long
Island City, Mr. Delaney arrived in Washington as Franklin D. Roosevelt was
preparing to go to Yalta. He retired a few months before the signing of the Camp
David accords. His politics mirrored the turbulence of those times.

Starting out as a liberal with close ties to the labor movement, he became
increasingly conservative, as the ninth Congressional district - encompassing
Long Island City, Jackson Heights, Glendale, Ridgewood and Forest Hills -
evolved from a blue-collar enclave into a solid haven of the middle classes.

Disputes With Other Democrats

Votes against Federal aid to education and his support of public aid to
parochial schools often placed him at odds with other local Democratic leaders.
In the 1960's those differences intensified over the issue of school busing and
Mr. Delaney's support of the Vietnam War. The leadership of the Queens
Democratic organization split with him in 1970 over his support of James
Buckley, who was elected to the Senate on the Conservative Party slate.

But Mr. Delaney, who was defeated once in 1946 and afterward won 15 consecutive
elections, survived several redrawings of his district's map and a number of
fiercely fought elections. In 1972 he turned back a strong challenge from Thomas
J. Manton, a City Councilman who had the political blessing of Matthew J. Troy
Jr., who was then county leader.

Mr. Delaney later boasted that his conservatism had served New York City well.
He was able, he said, to call on his conservative friends in Congress to support
the $2.3 billion low-interest loan that saved the city from bankruptcy. After he
retired in 1978, Geraldine Ferraro, the 1984 Democratic candidate for Vice
President, was chosen to represent the district.

Mr. Delaney was born in New York City and attended public schools in Long Island
City. In 1932 he received a law degree from St. John's University. From 1936
until he went to Congress eight years later, Mr. Delaney was an assistant in the
Queens District Attorney's office.

He was married in 1939 to the former Lola Mathis of Houston, who died in 1972.

In addition to his son, Patrick J., survivors include a sister, Maude Ryan, of
Scottsdale, Ariz., and three grandchildren.

A wake is scheduled for Tuesday afternoon and evening at Barrett Funeral Home in
Tenafly. A Roman Catholic funeral mass will be said at 10 A.M. Wednesday in Our
Lady of Mount Carmel Church in Tenafly. Burial will follow at Calvary Cemetery
in Woodside, Queens.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              198 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TV: CHANNEL 13 SHOWS 'HOUSE OF BLUE LEAVES'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 38, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 703 words


Television has been doing exceptionally well by stage plays recently. There have
been first-rate adaptations of Hugh Whitemore's ''Pack of Lies'' and Simon
Gray's ''Quartermaine's Terms.'' Now, at 9 o'clock tonight on Channel 13, there
is John Guare's ''House of Blue Leaves'' in the Lincoln Center Theater
production that won several Tony Awards last year and moved to Broadway. This
television version, directed by Kirk Browning, was taped in January at a regular
performance in the Plymouth Theater.

The ''live-on-tape'' approach, always tricky, is remarkably effective in this
instance. The brilliant stage production, directed by Jerry Zaks and produced by
Gregory Mosher of the Lincoln Center Theater, has the actors talking directly to
the audience at many points. The reactions of the audience have their own
rhythms, which in turn directly affect the play's pacing. The production needs
an audience to bounce off, and Mr. Browning wisely retains that essential
element, occasionally pulling the camera away from the proscenium to show us the
backs of heads in the front rows and to remind us that we are, after all, in a
theater, not some television set for a bizarre sitcom.

''The House of Blue Leaves'' is, you see, decidedly whacky, providing an
antidote to the more idealized and comforting views of the average American
family that can be found on every sitcom from ''The Cosby Show'' to ''Growing
Pains.'' The title refers to a mental institution, where the trees are covered
with so many birds that they are mistaken for blue leaves. The action takes
place in Sunnyside, Queens, in an apartment crammed with dreams of making it in
the big time of Manhattan, its skyline visible in the distance.

Commenting on his play, Mr. Guare says: ''Everyone is constantly being
humiliated by their dreams, by their loves, their wants, their best parts. I'm
not interested so much in how people survive as in how they avoid humiliation.''
The play opens with Artie Shaughnessy (John Mahoney), a zoo keeper, coming out
alone and sitting down at a piano to play, with a friendly twinkle, some of his
own songs. His old buddy Billy has become a movie mogul, and Artie dreams of his
own fame and fortune in Hollywood. For the moment, though, he can't even get
satisfaction from the lighting man. ''You promised me a blue spotlight,'' he
cries.

Moving behind the curtain, to a wonderful set designed by Tony Walton, we
discover that the date is Oct. 4, 1965, the date the Pope is visiting New York
to speak out against the war in Vietnam. Bunny (Christine Baranski) is insisting
that Artie join her in watching the motorcade that will pass through their
neighborhood. Bring the songs, she insists, maybe the Pope will bless them.
Bunny is a downstairs neighbor, eager to flee to California with Artie. There is
one complication. Artie is married. His wife is the gently deranged, wickedly
shrewd Bananas (Swoozie Kurtz). Artie would like dearly to ship her off to ''the
house of blue leaves'' but Bananas has other ideas.

Thus does Mr. Guare set his odd theatrical top spinning. Loud and brassy Bunny
chatters on breezily about Modern Screen magazine articles entitled ''Sandra
Dee's Night of Hell.'' Mousey and determined Bananas describes dreams in which,
disguised as a gypsy-cab owner, she offers a lift on Times Square to Cardinal
Spellman, Bob Hope, Jackie Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson. In time, this core group
is joined by Artie's weird son Ronnie (Ben Stiller), who is plotting to kill the
Pope; Corrinna Stroller (Julie Hagerty), a movie star trying to hide the fact
that she has gone deaf; Billy the movie producer (Richard Portnow), and three
celebrity-crazy nuns from Ridgewood. In a remarkably sustained tour de force,
the play is by turns loony and menacing, hilarious and terribly touching.

Perhaps the best compliment that can be paid this television version -produced
by Iris Merlis - is that it captures with remarkable accuracy the tone and
spirit of the stage production. The performances of Ms. Kurtz, Ms. Baranski, Ms.
Hagerty and Mr. Mahoney splendidly survive the rigors of the television
close-up. In the end, viewers will appreciate fully what all the shouts of
''bravo'' were about.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              199 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, MAY 26, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1002 words




International    A3-13



Soviet jamming of U.S. broadcasts from the Voice of America have stopped for the
first time in seven years, officials said. The jamming equipment is now being
directed at other Western radio services, they said.    Page A1



A Moslem Israeli officer was framed by the Shin Beth domestic intelligence
service and unjustly sentenced to 18 years in prison, the Israeli Supreme Court
has ruled. President Chaim Herzog praised the decision.     A1



Hearings on the Iran-contra affair have presented Republican members of the
Congressional committees with a quandary. Some feel it is politically wise to
press ahead, while others believe their first obligation is to defend the
President.    A1



Iranians in Turkey seek refuge through the American diplomatic missions. They
are fleeing the Islamic Revolution, but their plight presents a problem without
apparent solution.    A1

The 'Baker Plan' is dead, analysts said, citing Citicorp's decision to admit to
$3 billion in potential losses on foreign loans. They called the move the coup
de grace for the Administration's plan to deal with developing countries' debts.

    D1



Klaus Barbie may appear in court to confront witnesses who say he tortured them,
a prosecutor said. The judge will order Mr. Barbie returned to see whether the
witnesses recognize him as the Lyons Gestapo chief.     A3



News analysis: U.S. military policy in the Persian Gulf will be discussed this
week by the President and his senior advisers, and he must decide if the United
States is prepared to bomb Iran to protect Kuwait's ships.    A5



The South Korean cabinet resigned. President Chun Doo Hwan replaced his Prime
Minister and seven senior Cabinet members in an attempt to defuse a crisis over
scandals involving police torture and corruption charges.    A10

Fiji coup leader gets key post

    A3



Chirac attacks rightist 'demogogy'

    A3



For Gorbachev, 3 kisses in Rumania

    A3



Gomoa Lome journal

    A4



U.S. investigators arrive in Iraq

    A6



Mao's home province proves stubborn

    A12



Norway says Israel resists nuclear check

    A13



National    A14-21



At the Constitution Bicentennial in Philadelphia, a ceremony commemorating the
first session of the Constitutional Convention was held. There was pageantry and
happy pride, but also subdued reflection.    A1

The Constitution has been successful in achieving the bulk of its aims, most
Americans believe. A New York Times/CBS News Poll shows that a majority also
believe it has done a poor job of treating all people equally.     A20



A semiconductor industry rebound has begun in the United States, experts say.
But many fear that the recovery could mask the need for fundamental changes in
the way America designs and produces electronic components.    A1

Crowds on the Golden Gate Bridge for its 50th anniversary party worried
engineers because of the large numbers of people. The engineers did rapid
calculations to make sure the span could support the weight, officials said.
A18



In Kentucky's gubernatorial race, campaign tactics, not the issues, have become
the issue in the Democratic primary. The race has become ''a festival of
consultants,'' one political consultant said.    A14

State legislatures have more women in them. The number of women in the
legislatures has grown in every election over the past 18 years to 15.5 percent
of all legislators, a recent study shows.    A14

The killing of a Dallas man by police has renewed concerns in the city about
police procedures just two weeks after a Congressional hearing there on the use
of deadly force by police officers.    A14



A larger American rocket that some expect to carry the nation into its next
phase of space exploration would be able to deliver a heavier payload into orbit
than the space shuttle and at a lower cost.    C1



Puerto Rico hit by explosions

    A16



Service for tornado victims

    A17



TV ministry falls short of goal

    A19



Parolee shifted after protest

    A21



Washington Talk    B4



Congress's special favors

Politics isn't topic A at a convention of booksellers

Regional    B1-3, B6, D18



Raymond J. Donovan was acquitted along with seven other construction executives
of state charges of fraud and grand larceny after an eight-month trial in the
Bronx. The jury deliberated barely 10 hours over two days.    A1



Jurors cited insufficient evidence as the factor that led them to their verdict
in the case against the former Secretary of Labor and seven others. ''The
indictment should never have been brought,'' the jury forewoman said.    A1



Two new AIDS testing sites will open this summer and testing will be extended to
some hospitals, a health official said. The moves would more than double the
city's capacity to offer testing for the AIDS virus.    B1



Accusations of Nazi collaboration by the Government against Jacob Tannenbaum, a
Jewish man from Brooklyn, involve complex issues and raise difficult questions.
The Justice Department has moved to rescind his citizenship.    B1

In Oneonta, N.Y., the first monument in New York State to the American marines
killed in a terrorist attack in Beirut was unveiled. The city also unveiled a
memorial to men of Otsego County who died in the Vietnam War.     B1



A dress code in Southampton, L.I., will be strictly enforced, officials have
decided. The 33-year-old dress code draws the line on casual attire: No bathing
suits, unless they are covered, in the downtown business district.    B1



The moods of Memorial Day

    B3



Careless smoking caused fire

    D18


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              200 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

C.I.A. ACCUSED OF MANILA ROLE

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 191 words

DATELINE: MANILA, May 25


An American fact-finding mission led by Ramsey Clark, the former Attorney
General, charged today that the Central Intelligence Agency was behind the rise
of vigilante groups opposed to the Communist insurgency in the Philippines.

Mr. Clark said at a news conference that involvement of the C.I.A. was evident
in the emergence of right-wing vigilante groups and increased military
operations in the countryside.

''Our concern is the role of the United States,'' Mr. Clark said, adding that
the group would attempt to gather ''evidence clearly establishing the
implementation of a low-intensity campaign here.''

''Low-intensity conflict'' is a term used in Washington to describe a method of
fighting insurgencies by using an array of unconventional tactics and fighting
forces.

Ralph McGehee, a former C.I.A. agent who has written critically about the agency
and is now working with Mr. Clark, said Manila's counter-insurgency operations
were similar to C.I.A. operations in Nicaragua and Vietnam.

''I see very clearly the parallels here,'' he said, ''the search-and-destroy
missions, the creation of the anti-Communist vigilante groups.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              201 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A MONUMENT OF GRIEF FOR DEAD MARINES

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 913 words

DATELINE: ONEONTA, N.Y., May 25


For decades, this small city on the Susquehanna River has celebrated Memorial
Day with a seemingly timeless ritual. It would begin with a slightly ragged
parade down Main Street and end with solemn speeches before a worn monument
bearing the names of fallen servicemen from World War I, World War II and the
Korean War.

Today, however, Oneonta, which is about 70 miles southwest of Albany, became
home to the first monument in New York State honoring the American marines who
died in a terrorist attack on their Beirut compound four years ago.

At the same time, this city of 16,000 people unveiled its memorial to the men of
Otsego County who died in the Vietnam War.

With that, Oneonta took a bold and obviously painful step toward bringing
Memorial Day into the late 1980's - a time when, to many Americans, soldiers die
not for freedom and honor, but for dubious policy decisions, and when the line
between a military hero and a victim has become indistinct.

In a letter that was read aloud at today's ceremony, Oneonta's Congressman,
Sherwood Boehlert, dwelt upon the difficulties of honoring soldiers whose death
seems marked by a sense of waste.

'An Angry Determination'

''For all of us your commemoration means recalling events of great sadness,
events that touched some in Otsego County and in New York State with a special
pain,'' he wrote. ''Indeed, some of us recall these events with anger, in an
angry determination that such things shall not happen again.''

But beyond the pain, and even beyond the anger, it would be wrong not to also
feel proud, Mr. Boehlert wrote. ''If our pride is mixed with sadness and even
anger, then so be it. Maybe the mixture will make us wiser in the future.''

Today's commemoration, many of the several hundred people who gathered in the
hazy sunshine this morning in Neahwa Park agreed, was particularly poignant in
light of the recent bombing of an American frigate in the Persian Gulf. In the
attack on the Stark by an Iraqi aircraft, 37 sailors were killed after the
ship's defense system was turned off.

Summoning so many conflicting emotions, today's commemoration was not easy to
arrange, said Mayor David Brenner, who served as a mediator among the different
groups.

The more traditional veterans' groups, such as the Veterans of Foreign Wars and
the American Legion, the Mayor said, were mistrustful of the Vietnam veterans'
group, which has generally spurned the Memorial Day ceremonies. In addition, he
said, some of the older veterans viewed the more than 250 marines who died in
terrorist attacks in Beirut as not really veterans at all.

'I Got Bigger Problems'

''It's been quite a juggling act,'' said Mr. Brenner, who himself served in the
Korean War. It has also consumed a great deal of time.

''I got bigger problems,'' the Mayor said, such as finding space to dispose of
Oneonta's garbage. ''But this, for whatever reason, caught the public's
attention. I'm really proud that the community has done this.''

Much of the credit for getting the commemoration off the ground, the mayor said,
belongs to Lorraine Coulman, whose 27-year-old son Kevin was killed Beirut in
October 1983. Mrs. Coulman and many of the other parents, as well as many
government officials, blame her son's death on inadequate security at the
Marines' compound, which was destroyed when a suicide bomber drove a truck of
explosives into it.

For almost three years, Mrs. Coulman, who lives in nearby Hartwick Seminary, has
been struggling to raise more than $6,000 to buy a monument bearing the names of
the 24 New York State servicemen who died as members of the international
peacekeeping force in Beirut. Subtly, but insistently, Mrs. Coulman was
determined to erect a new kind of monument - not a war memorial, but a peace
memorial. Unveiled today, the granite monument reads ''Let Peace Take Root.''

'Peace Isn't Cheap'

''Here I lost my son in peacetime, does it make any sense?'' Mrs. Coulman mused.
''We don't want anyone to forget that peace isn't cheap. There's always a
price.'' The families of 15 of the 24 servicemen listed on the monument were
present at the unveiling, according to Mrs. Coulman, along with families of
other servicemen who were killed from Virginia, Pennsylvania and New Jersey.

The crowd that gathered for the ceremony was a diverse one, ranging from bikers
in black leather to Girl Scouts dressed in green. There were about 20 Vietnam
veterans wearing uniforms and fatigues, a few of them in wheelchairs or on
crutches. One wore a jacket with the slogan, ''When I die I'll go to heaven,
I've served my time in hell. Bien Hoa, Vietnam, 1968.''

Everyone listened politely through the benedictions and traditional recitation
of the Gettysburg Address, but clearly they had come to watch the unveiling of
the new monuments and, despite the warm sunshine, to feel the chill of a lonely
soldier's death.

After taps and a muffled drum roll, after a pair of bagpipers had played
''Amazing Grace'' and schoolchildren had laid 24 red roses tied with 24 yellow
ribbons before the Beirut memorial, eyes grew damp and faces grief-stricken.

As they turned to leave, some of the mothers of the men who died in Beirut
exchanged stories. One woman's son was supposed to have left for Egypt the day
before the attack, but for some reason she would never know, had not. Another
son was not supposed to be on duty at the time, but had been. Not, they agreed,
that that really mattered now.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of monument to servicemen killed in 1983 Beirut bombing
(NYT/Matthew Mendelsohn); photo of Richard and Carol Menkins (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              202 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PARADES, PICNICS AND PARKS ATTRACT MANY ON COOL, BLEAK MEMORIAL DAY

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 888 words


Straining for a bit of sun, some New Yorkers watched veterans marching in
parades yesterday, some went bicycling in parks, and some shivered in sweatshirt
weather that felt more like a prelude to fall than summer.

Usually Memorial Day is the unofficial beginning of summer, the first long, lazy
weekend of the season. Yesterday the skies were sunless, but the focus for many
people was still on frisbees, fishing and food.

At Washington's Crossing State Park, N.J., Paul French tried to explain to his
8-year-old son how important it was that George Washington and the Continental
Army were able to cross the Delaware at this point on Christmas Day in 1776.

''It's part of why we have Memorial Day,'' Mr. French said.

''When are we going to eat?'' asked Paul Jr. Perfect Weather for Kites The same
question was on the minds of Sandy Reich and Susan Kaplan of Little Neck,
Queens. They took their picnic basket to Central Park for a late lunch of tuna
and egg salad sandwiches, pickles and cake.

''I wish the weather were the reverse of what it's been,'' Ms. Kaplan said.

But Les Weitzner, a motion picture story editor, said in Central Park that the
weather was perfect - for kite-flying. As he spoke, he reeled in a delta-winged
kite.

Under skies that stayed overcast for much of the weekend, other New Yorkers
scattered to outer territories. Past Memorial Days have seen cars on clogged
parkways crawling toward crowded parking lots at beaches, but only diehard sun
worshipers mingled with optimists last weekend.

Tranquility in City

Those who stayed behind relished the relative tranquility of the city, where
empty parking spaces and empty park benches were easy to find, where beach
umbrellas lay unopened in the closet. From Manhattan to Montauk, lawn chairs
were unfilled.

At a hardware store on Broadway between 83d and 84th Streets, where half a dozen
lawn chairs sat on the sidewalk unsold, a clerk, Robin Payton, said customers
were not interested in being outdoors.

''Mostly everybody's cleaning the carpet,'' she said. ''They don't feel like
going to the park, they don't feel like having a picnic, so they're fixing up
where they live.''

The city's streets were dotted with tourists and window-shoppers. On Eighth
Avenue, Ricky Singh bought an Italian ice as a treat for two cousins newly
arrived from India.

''We went around the Empire State Building a few times,'' Mr. Singh said, adding
that his cousins did not know the significance of Memorial Day. ''They didn't
ask. I'll tell them later.'' Far-Off Wars Recalled This official time of
remembrance is for far-off wars. The Memorial Day holiday was inspired after the
Civil War as a way of honoring those killed in battle.

''It's a day to remember,'' said Eli Dagmy, a clerk in an Army surplus store at
721 Eighth Avenue, between 45th and 46th Streets. ''It's not a day to shop.''

There were few customers in the store. ''We don't do much business,'' Mr. Dagmy
said. ''We just open to survive.''

Jan Saint, an actor, sat on the doorstoop of his apartment building at 360 West
46th Street, near Ninth Avenue, and said he planned nothing special for the day.
''I'm not doing anything,'' he said. ''I'm just relaxing.'' But like many
veterans, he recalled his own combat experience.

Mr. Saint said he was a Marine in World War II and saw action in the Pacific.
''Although I was in the service, I'm somewhat of a pacifist,'' he said. '' I
contemplated being a conscientious objector. But then I thought, 'Why should I
exclude myself when so many poor children are enlisting?' So I enlisted.''

Some Go to a Parade

For others who enlisted or were drafted, it was a day to march in the New York
County American Legion's annual parade to the Soldiers and Sailors Monument on
Riverside Drive at 89th Street. Vincent McGowan, vice commander of the legion,
said 1,000 veterans from 12 units had marched, three of them World War I
soldiers.

''The first time I was here was when I was 6,'' said Kathleen Scofield of
Clinton, N.Y., whose daughter and 8-year-old grandson stood beside her on
Broadway, watching the parade. ''Everyone was very patriotic. I don't think that
has trickled down. I think it's great to have a feeling of zest for the spirit
of the country.''

But if flags were any indication, there was not much zest on the sidelines; few
flags appeared to be displayed in the city. One small one was attached to the
collar of a cat named Pichi.

Pichi was perched on Pablo Giraldez's shoulder as they stood on Broadway just
north of 72d Street.

'They Forget the Men Who Died'

''People forget too fast,'' Mr. Giraldez said. ''I know - I'm a veteran
myself.'' He said he had served as a master sergeant in World War II and in the
Korean War. ''They remember the bombings, but they forget the men who died in
them,'' he said.

At the Soldiers and Sailors Monument, Arthur Hyans, who served in Vietnam
beginning in 1965, talked about why he had taken part in the parade. ''I come
mainly to see the guys I know,'' he said.

Mr. Hyans was asked if this Memorial Day seemed any different because of the
film ''Platoon,'' which has given some civilians a new perspective on the
soldiers who fought in the Vietnam War.

''Ten years ago nobody paid attention to us,'' Mr. Hyans said. ''It's
interesting to be the in thing now.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of visitors at the Soldiers and Sailors Monument in Riverside
Park (NYT/Dith Pran and Chester Higgins Jr.)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              203 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: BOOKSELLERS;
Where Politics Isn't Topic A

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 586 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 25


A full-page advertisement in the publishers' catalogue calls it the book of ''a
new breed of politician.'' But ''One Man's Luck,'' the Gary Hart campaign
biography that was set for publication in September, has been canceled by
William Morrow & Company.

''It could have been a lot worse,'' said a Morrow official attending the
convention here of the American Booksellers Association. ''If the Hart publicity
had broken a couple of months later we would have had to remainder the book,
rather than just cancel the contract.''

Mr. Hart's withdrawal from the race for the 1988 Democratic Presidential
nomination after disclosures about a relationship with a Miami model has been
the subject of occasional jokes at the convention, which concludes its four-day
trade show on Tuesday. But, otherwise, politics has been low on the agenda of
many of the 20,000 publishers and bookstore owners who gathered in this city
that lives and breathes politics.

Gone for the Holiday

''I came here for books, not politics or politicians,'' said Edward Morrow Jr.,
owner of Northshire Bookstore in Manchester Center, Vt., echoing a widely held
sentiment.

It is probably just as well, since almost every politician who could do so left
town for the holiday weekend.

Practically alone in holding down the fort was Representative Claude Pepper, a
Florida Democrat whose biography, ''Pepper: Eyewitness to a Century,'' written
with Hays Gorey, will be published this fall. At a reception Sunday night, Mr.
Pepper sang the praises of his publisher, Hartcourt Brace Jovanovich.

''It's the most agreeable relationship I've ever had,'' he said. ''I wish
Congress and the Rules Committee worked as smoothly.''

Former Representative Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. was also in town, pressing the flesh
for almost two hours Sunday night at the Cannon Caucus Room in the Capitol on
behalf of his forthcoming memoir, ''Man of the House'' with William Novak.

When Patricia Abe of San Francisco said she used to live in his district in
Massachusetts, he replied, ''Well, did you vote for me, honey?''

When Irma Heldman of Lyle Stuart publishers pleaded with him to run for
President, the 74-year-old Mr. O'Neill shook his head and replied, ''I saw what
age did to the man in the White House.''

And when a man from Oregon told him that in 1974 he painted Mr. O'Neill's house
on Cape Cod, the guest of honor summoned his wife. ''Mom,'' he said, ''this is
the guy who forgot to paint our shutters.''

The Republicans also had their innings. At a publisher's party for Art Buchwald
and Tom Clancy - a party where the incoming Director of Central Intelligence,
William H. Webster, arrived accompanied by at least four security officers with
two-way radios and headphones - Mr. Clancy greeted the slightly abashed Robert
S. Strauss, former chairman of the Democratic National Committee, with the news,
''I'm a Republican.''

The relative absence of political books for publication this fall may have to do
with a publishing maxim that such books are risky if released so close to a
major political campaign, when there is saturation news coverage of the
candidates.

There are other risks as well. In the 1960's, W. W. Norton published a book by
George Romney, the former Governor of Michigan who was seeking the Republican
nomination.

''One week before publication,'' recalled Donald S. Lamm, Norton's chairman,
''Romney came back from Vietnam and said he had been brainwashed. From that
moment on the book was absolutely dead in the water.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of American Booksellers Assoc. convention in Washington (NYT/Ken
Heinen)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              204 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING;
The Police Memorial

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 131 words


A proposal to dedicate a prime piece of Washington real estate, the Ellipse area
behind the White House, as a memorial to slain police officers is running into
resistance.

Project sponsors say some Federal officials apparently think the Ellipse is a
bit grand as a memorial to one group, even police officers who died while
protecting the public. These critics are said to fear that dedicating the entire
area as a law enforcement memorial would foreclose other memorials - perhaps to
future Presidents - in the same space.

But the director of the project, Jan Scruggs, who was the driving force behind
the Vietnam Veterans' Memorial, says he thinks the plan will prevail. No one, he
observes, likes to argue that police officers are not important enough to
deserve the Ellipse.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              205 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 26, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HENRIK BEER, 71, OF THE RED CROSS

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 224 words


Henrik Beer, former Secretary General of the League of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies, died Saturday at his Geneva home, the league announced
yesterday. He was 71 years old.

The league, based in Geneva, said in a statement that Mr. Beer died after a long
illness. It gave no cause of death.

Mr. Beer, a Swedish national, headed the league from 1960 until his retirement
in 1981, overseeing an increase in membership in the humanitarian organization
from 86 to 126.

Born in Stockholm in 1915, his first contact with the Red Cross was during World
War II when he was put in charge of coordinating neutral Sweden's relief efforts
for war victims. He was Secretary General of the Swedish Red Cross until his
appointment to the Geneva post.

As head of the League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, Mr. Beer's
principal task was to organize international help in times of natural disaster.
He traveled to more than 80 countries in fulfillment of that assignment.

He also ventured into war zones in Africa and Asia, making headlines in 1969
when he enlisted Unicef, the United Nations children's relief agency, in a joint
aid program in North Vietnam at the height of the Vietnam War.

Mr. Beer is survived by his wife and three sons. A memorial service is to be be
held at the Protestant St. Pierre Cathedral in Geneva today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              206 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, MAY 28, 1987

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1081 words


International    A3-13



Iranian military sites may be targets of American fire if Teheran fired
land-based missiles at American ships in the Persian Gulf, President Reagan
indicated in an interview with foreign journalists.    Page A1



Europe seemed to rebuff the U.S. in its appeal for military help in protecting
oil tankers in the Persian Gulf. A communique from NATO ministers did not
mention the region.    A13



An ex-colonel described in detail how Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North ran the secret
aerial resupply operation for the Nicaraguan rebels at a time when the program
was dogged by almost comical problems.    A1



President Reagan blamed the press for creating a false impression that he had
been involved in illegal acts in the Iran-contra affair. Mr. Reagan acknowledged
that his credibility had been damaged.    A12

News analysis: An openness drive in the Soviet Union pressed by Mikhail S.
Gorbachev has been blunted as emboldened opponents have moved to limit the
spread of unconventional information and artistic works.    A1

The worst charge on Klaus Barbie, the arrest and death of 44 Jewish children,
was the focus at his trial in Lyons for the first time. He has contended he was
not linked to the Nazi genocide of Jews.    A6



Fiji's future looks troubled after the recent attacks on prosperous Indians and
a period of military rule. New investment has collapsed, no one is harvesting
the sugar cane and beach resorts are empty.    A3



Closing a wound in Canada

    A3



Smelters' price: jungle in ashes

    A4



Politics and the Outer Hebrides

    A8



Israel takes blame for Pollard

    A10



Little threat seen from gulf oil

  A13



National    A14-20, B5, D23



A special prosecutor accused Ottawa of duplicity designed to block the
prosecution of Michael K. Deaver, a former senior White House aide, on perjury
charges related to the Canadian Government.    A1



The F.A.A. rejected safety plans by Government experts to limit peak-hour air
traffic in congested areas this summer to reduce the risk of collisions. The
agency said adequate safeguards were in place.    A14



Black legislators closed ranks and pledged to raise $250,000 to help an indicted
colleague, Representative Harold E. Ford of Tennessee, amid concerns that the
charges were racially and politically motivated.

    A20



The D.C. administration is the focus of a new Federal investigation of asserted
bribery, fraud and racketeering in the awarding of millions of dollars in
municipal and Federal contracts.    A15

The Kentuckian who won the Democratic gubernatorial primary, Wallace Wilkinson,
a millionaire, spent more than $4 million to become known and campaigned on
calls for change and youthful energy.    A16



Increased testing for the AIDS virus for some groups, such as prisoners and
hospital patients, will be recommended by President Reagan's chief domestic
policy advisers, according to Administration officials.    B5



The successful test firing of a Morton-Thiokol booster rocket for the space
shuttle was watched intently by residents of Brigham City, Utah, where the
manufacturer is the major employer.    A17



A confident Seattle Archbishop, Raymond G. Hunthausen, who is in command for the
first time in more than a year, said he still did not understand why the Vatican
had limited his authority.    A19



Street life used up a girl, 17, in Columbus, Ohio, and killed her. Child abuse
experts say thousands of American children are increasingly being beckoned,
manipulated and discarded by sexual exploiters.    A14

Pay for teachers rises to $26,704

    A14



Wheaton coed plan called final

    A14



News Analysis: pretrial jailing

    A15



Conflict seen on space photos

    A17



Officials puzzled by false drug data

    A18



TV ministers air new accusations

    A19



Organ transplant drug praised

    D23



Washington Talk    B6



Vietnam veterans in Congress

Regional    B1-5, B24



Companies would get new tax breaks for relocating to new or rehabilitated
quarters north of 96th Street in Manhattan or to the four other boroughs, under
proposals by Mayor Koch.    A1



New York City has lost 51,000 jobs in manufacturing - almost 12 percent of its
manufacturing base - in the last three years despite the city's overall economic
improvement, according to a Federal study.    B2



The first hospital to treat only AIDS and AIDS-related illnesses in New York
City would be St. Clare's Hospital in Manhattan under a new agreement, state and
Federal health officials said.    A1



Wedtech paid a consultant more than $100,000 when he said he needed money to
meet expenses while representing, without pay, Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d
at his confirmation hearings, according to accounts provided to investigators.
    A1

A warning was ignored when a New York State Thruway bridge that collapsed last
month was built in 1953. An engineer said that narrowing the creekbed could
endanger the bridge during floods. The bridge's collapse killed 10 motorists.
    B1



The Bronx prosecutor has lost two major cases after years of preparation -
acquittals in the Eleanor Bumpurs and Raymond J. Donovan cases. The prosecutor,
Mario Merola, has to use outside accountants.    B1



Chase Manhattan conceded, as Citicorp did last week, that many of its third
world loans are uncollectible. Chase said it would set aside $1.6 billion in the
second quarter for losses on its troubled loans.    D1



Many artists do construction jobs in New York City to support themselves,
several contractors said. One said that nearly 50 percent of small-scale
residential building in Manhattan was being done by artists.    C1

Test begin at A-plant

    B1



More homeless people expected

    B2



Goetz trial witness admits lie

    B3



Officer and guards held in shootout

    B3



3 indicted in murder attempt

    B3



First step taken in plan for new Madison Sq. Garden

    B3



Ex-policeman slain execution style

    B5



Newark blasts public houses

    B24


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              207 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

The Witness File

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 246 words


Name: Robert C. Dutton

Age: 50

Position: Retired Air Force colonel. Executive with Stanford Technology Trading
Group International, the company owned by Maj.

Gen. Richard V. Secord and Albert Hakim.

Role: Colonel Dutton managed the resupply operation for the Nicaraguan contras.
Crew members who worked in El Salvador have identified Colonel Dutton as their
chief contact at Stanford Technology. Colonel Dutton also aided in the shipment
of 500 TOW anti-tank missiles from Israel to Iran last October. He reported to
both General Secord and Lieut. Col.

Oliver L. North. Colonel

Dutton has been granted limited immunity from prosecution that may result from
information he provides at the hearings.



Name: Felix Rodriguez

Age: 45

Position: Former officer of the Central Intelligence Agency in Latin America and
Vietnam. Cuban-American and a Bay of Pigs veteran, he is an expert on guerrilla
warfare. Known in El Salvador as Max Gomez.

Role: Mr. Rodriguez went to El Salvador in 1984 to train Salvadoran helicopter
crews in aerial ambush of Salvadoran guerrillas. He became the leader in the
airlift operation for the contras from El Salvador and acted as the liaison
between the American crewmen who were part of the operation and the senior
Salvadoran military officers. Mr. Rodriguez met with Vice President Bush, but
discussed only Mr. Rodriguez's work with the Salvadoran Army, according to Mr.
Bush's office.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              208 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: CONGRESS;
The Vietnam Experience and the Congressman of the 1980's

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2233 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 27


John McCain, a former Navy pilot who spent five and a half years as a prisoner
of war in North Vietnam, is now a Senator. So is Tom Harkin, another Navy pilot
from that era who later discovered the infamous ''tiger cages'' in a prison in
South Vietnam.

John Kerry and Jim Kolbe, who took high-speed gunboats through the treacherous
waterways of the Mekong Delta, are now in the Senate and the House,
respectively. David E. Skaggs, a former Marine Corps lawyer who coordinated
investigations of reported atrocities against Vietnamese villagers by marines,
is a member of the House as well, as are Tom Ridge, who fought with the Americal
Division in I Corps; Hank Brown, who flew as a navigator in a spotter plane;
Denny Smith, an Air Force pilot; Duncan Hunter, an infantryman who fought in the
Central Highlands in 1970-71, and others.

Fourteen years after the last United States combat units left Vietnam, at least
15 men who were there have made their way into Congress.

Each Draws His Own Lesson

Some are Republicans, like Representative David O'B. Martin of upstate New York;
some are Democrats, like Representatives H. Martin Lancaster of North Carolina
and John P. Murtha of Pennsylvania; some are conservatives, and some are
liberals. Each has drawn his own lesson from having participated in the war, and
each applies the experience in his own way to the issues of foreign policy he
confronts as a legislator.

Some support military aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, some oppose it. A few
favored sending the Marine contingent to Beirut in 1982, though most say they
had grave reservations. Some see the Soviet threat in larger terms than others.

But the Vietnam experience has given almost all of them a sense of seasoned
caution about using American military power without having the broad support of
the American people. And this translates into some sober views on the
limitations of force, especially in impoverished countries torn by internal
strife.

''Whether or not people were for or against Vietnam,'' said Senator Kerry, a
Massachusetts Democrat who led a veterans' antiwar movement after his Navy
service, ''I'm sure we have very similar views about how America ought to make
judgments about putting soldiers into places of risk.''

''I think a universal theme for all of us would be: Don't ever put soldiers in
that position again,'' he said, ''asking them to make those sacrifices without
guaranteeing that you're going to follow through and give them the capacity to
win.''

Senator Albert Gore Jr., a Democrat from Tennessee who served as a military
journalist with an engineer brigade in 1970-71, says he ''carried an M-16 and a
pencil,'' and discovered that the situation was more complicated than he had
supposed before he went. The experience ''creates a strong determination to pick
conflicts carefully and not get into a situation that is a no-win proposition,''
he said. ''I think the country as a whole looks at Nicaragua a little
differently because of our experience in Vietnam.''

Representative Skaggs, a Colorado Democrat who served as a Marine Corps lawyer
near Da Nang in 1969, said: ''The experience confirmed my sense that we
fundamentally didn't understand what that culture was about, how to deal with a
civil conflict that carried much more subtle and complicated variables and
implications than the simplistic confrontation between East and West.''

Furthermore, he said, ''You can't expect this country to be able to carry out
effectively a military policy that hasn't been thoroughly tested in terms of our
domestic politics.''

That theme - the need for consensus and commitment - runs through many of the
veterans' comments, as they sit now in their offices on Capitol Hill, show a
visitor photographs of themselves and their buddies in Vietnam and talk of the
present in terms of the past. Inevitably, without prompting, the conflict over
aiding the contras, the Nicaraguan rebels, comes up.

''The general lesson is that conflict to resolve a dispute is a last resort,''
said Representative Ridge, a Pennsylvania Republican who was drafted and served
from 1969-70 as a staff sergeant. Attempts at negotiatiion should be exhausted
''before you commit your troops,'' he said.

''In Central America, I have never been satisfied that we exhausted all the
diplomatic, political and economic means at our disposal to reach an accord with
the Sandinista Government. And that is one of the reasons that I have chosen to
vote in opposition to contra aid.'' ''Had we won the war,'' Senator Larry
Pressler, a Republican of South Dakota, said of Vietnam, ''guys like me might
want to get down in Nicaragua with military teams.'' As an Army officer, Senator
Pressler spent 18 months trying to keep roads open and overseeing food
distribution to Vietnamese.

''But guys like me are just skeptical of it,'' he continued. ''I voted for aid
to the contras, but I'm a little uncomfortable with that vote. It's a close
question for me.''

In a more conservative part of the political spectrum, a somewhat different
calculation emerges from the Vietnam experience.

For Senator McCain, an Arizona Republican, his years of imprisonment after being
shot down over North Vietnam seem to have caused no bitterness, only ''a
profound appreciation,'' as he puts it, ''for the enormous risks we take when we
send troops into combat.''

Avoiding direct American involvement is one reason he has supported aid to the
Nicaraguan rebels, ''not because that policy itself is so wonderful,'' he said,
''but because I don't know of a viable alternative.''

Senator McCain sees only two alternatives in counteracting Nicaragua. ''One is
the expenditure of enormous amounts of money to beef up the economic and
military capabilities of its neighbors,'' he said. ''The other is to wait until
the situation becomes so bad that we send U.S. combat troops, which I find
appalling. That's the one thing we want to avoid.''

Worried About Another Retreat

But others worry about another American retreat. Representative Kolbe, also a
Republican of Arizona, takes from his 1968-69 experience on Navy ''swift boats''
in the Mekong Delta the view that, as he put it, ''you need to stick by
commitments that you make.''

''What is going to happen in Central America, for example, when we - as we're
going to do - abandon the contras?'' he asked. ''What kind of signal are we
sending to people? What signal did we send with what happened in South Vietnam
after we left there?''

Similarly, Representative Smith, a Republican from Oregon, worries about
insufficient United States resolve to contain what he sees as spreading Soviet
influence in Central America. He was a combat pilot in Vietnam from 1965 to
1966, based in Cam Ranh Bay, which is now being used by the Russians as a base.

''I'm wary of a direct American involvement if we don't have a commitment to
win,'' he said. ''We have a lot of things to do before we get our own people
into combat there. But on the other hand, we don't just want to let the Soviets
continue to support these people. They foment revolution throughout the area.
And I think there will come a time, after all is said and done, when we will
have to get involved militarily there.''

''What is important is that the Russians want Mexico, because Mexico is right
next to the United States,'' Mr. Smith said. ''So, I think if it is important to
us to keep Mexico free, then we need to do something in Central America
militarily, and by doing it with the Boy Scouts, we're going to be less able to
do anything. If we're going to put in a little bit of military force at a time,
as we did in Vietnam, we're never going to win because the enemy will match like
amounts.''

These men do not seem to be obsessed by their trials in Vietnam. But the war
causes many of them to find the parallels and differences between Indochina and
Central America, to embrace or reject the East-West dimension of the
confrontations.

''When we find a people who would rather fight on their feet than live on their
knees,'' said Representative Hunter, a conservative Republican from California,
''the argument is that they're mercenaries. And then if we send American
soldiers, as we did in Vietnam, then we're helping an undeserved and implicitly
lazy people to defend their freedom. So the American left tries to frame the
argument in a way that you can't win.''

''One thing you have to have in this democracy is consensus for taking military
action,'' Mr. Hunter said. But he cautioned against expecting unanimity.
''You'll never have the perfect commitment. The Soviets are in the game, and
they play for the long run. Their game plan is going to span many American
administrations. You have to sustain, sustain, sustain. And the problem with
democracies is, it's very difficult to build an endurance in difficult foreign
policies.''

He criticizes the Reagan Administration for doing too little to educate the
American public about the dangers he sees in Central America.

Senator Harkin, an Iowa Democrat, sees strong parallels between the contra
leadership and what he considers to have been the corrupt, anti-democratic
leaders of South Vietnam. As a Navy pilot, he flew battle-damaged planes from
Vietnam and the Philippines to Japan for repair, so he did not see combat.

But he caught a closer glimpse of Vietnam as an aide to a Congressional
committee on a visit to the South Vietnamese prison island of Con Son in 1970.
He and Don Luce, an official of the World Council of Churches, had interviewed a
former prisoner who drew them a map showing the location of the ''tiger cages''
in which some political prisoners were being kept. Once at the prison with the
Congressional delegation, they found the small cells, which Mr. Harkin
photographed. The pictures were published in Life magazine.

Referring to the contras, Mr. Harkin said: ''Our friends are our worst enemies,
like Vietnam. Look at that whole string of bandits we supported over there -
just bandits. They had no concern about the country or democracy or anything
else - the same as the contras.''

In the view of Representative Thomas R. Carper, a Delaware Democrat who flew as
a navigator and tactical coordinator on Navy P-3 Orion aircraft conducting ocean
surveillance, the United States ought to try to improve living standards and
oppose right-wing dictators rather than throw military force at such complex
issues.

''The problem isn't just military,'' he said. ''The problem's poverty. People
need health care, medicine, food. To the extent that we promote the status quo,
we almost unwittingly help the extremists on the left. We make their case for
them.''

Sending the marines to Beirut, Lebanon, as a peacekeeping force after the
Israeli invasion of 1982 proved widely unpopular among those who had served in
Vietnam, mainly because they felt the mission was too vaguely defined.

''When we had a vote for sending troops to Lebanon,'' said Representative Brown,
the Colorado Republican who flew spotter missions in Vietnam, ''most of the
Vietnam veterans in the House voted against it. It bears directly on Vietnam. It
was a willingness to commit U.S. troops without a willingness to defend them.''

The issue cuts across ideological and party lines.

''I was so upset about that and concerned about that,'' said Senator McCain. ''I
think if I'd not had my Vietnam experience, I would have gone along with the
majority on both sides of the aisle and a President I admire and respect a great
deal. But I knew that 1,500 marines at the airport were not going to affect the
outcome of events in Lebanon and, unfortunately, that some young Americans were
going to die needlessly.''

Representative Lane Evans, a Democrat of Illinois who is now chairman of the
Congressional caucus of Vietnam-era veterans, recalls an anguished phone call
from his brother, Steve, after a truck laden with explosives made it to the
Marine barracks in Beirut in October 1983 and killed 241 servicemen. Both
brothers had served in the Marine Corps, and Lane had been within days of being
sent to Vietnam when his orders were canceled because his brother had already
received orders to go.

Mr. Evans picked up the phone and heard his brother say: ''Look, we elected you.
What the hell are you going to do about it?'' So he became a sponsor of a
resolution urging withdrawal of the marines from Lebanon.

When the Vietnam veterans in Congress are asked if they think the United States
should establish diplomatic relations with Vietnam, there is usually a long
silence. Almost all then say no, because of what they perceive as a lack of
Vietnamese cooperation in helping account for Americans still listed as missing
in action. A few believe there may be prisoners of war still alive.

But Senator McCain, having been a prisoner himself, has a different view. He
believes that interest sections - a precursor to full-scale diplomatic ties -
should be established to ease the way to an accounting. ''I'm not in favor of
full-blown diplomatic relations, but an interest section,'' he said. ''Then if
our dialogue with the Vietnamese leads to the resolution of some of these
issues, then I think we can incrementally increase that relationship.''

''But I don't see how we're going to address these problems adequately unless
there is a constant dialogue. We can't do that with no relations whatsoever.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of members of Congress who served in the Vietnam War (NYT, AP,
UPI, Stan Barouh, David Conklin and Paul Conklin)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              209 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SARTRE AND FRIENDS IN TWO-PART SERIES

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 661 words


SHOULDERS hunched, hands on knees, cigarette at the ready, Jean-Paul Sartre
seems about to pounce as he delivers what amounts to a monologue about his
youth, his education, his life as writer, philosopher and political activist. It
is 1976, four years before his death, and he is in his Montparnasse study
surrounded by books, papers, visitors and television gear. Beside him, tossing
in an apercu now and then in fast-forward fashion, is Simone de Beauvoir. Such
is the setting of ''Sartre by Himself,'' the first 90 minutes of which can be
seen on Channel 13 tonight at 11. Sartre takes Sartre up to the German
occupation of France during World War II. The second half will be shown next
Thursday at the same hour.

The programs, which resemble an evening at Sartre's table at the Left Bank cafe
where he and Miss de Beauvoir presided in the late 1940's, can be demanding. The
interlocutors brought together by the directors, Alexandre Astruc and Michel
Contat, bear no resemblance to those interviewers on American television who
have never opened the books they pretend to discuss with their ''guests.'' Not
only have the half- dozen participants here read their Sartre, they've thought
about his work, and their questions and comments assume some knowledge on the
part of the audience. Sartre flings forth names as though he were lecturing at
the Sorbonne - Hegel and Husserl, Bergson and Giraudoux, Aron and Lukacs. Unless
your French is sharper than mine, you'll have to keep your eyes on the swiftly
changing titles.

Those who have read Sartre's moving autobiography, ''The Words,'' will recognize
the material on his bookish boyhood. At the age of 11, he recalls, he said to
himself: ''God doesn't exist. And that was that.'' As he speaks, we see
photographs of the boy and the young man, his friends and his schools, as well
as pictures of newspapers and newsmakers of the time. There, too, is the
beautiful young Miss de Beauvoir, a half century before, when the two met and
began their lifelong attachment. She refers to him as ''Sartre.'' He says she
once told him, ''All your books are full of lies.''

Gradually, a theme develops - the intellectual's obligations to society. ''A
writer must have a political commitment,'' says Sartre, whose own commitment
leaned left. He returns continually to his relations with the Communist Party.
Although not a member and periodically at odds with it, he found himself
especially close to the party during his work with the wartime Resistance and he
says he later became ''a fellow traveler.''

From his comments here, as well as from his record, it is plain that in the
East-West conflict, he reserved his most severe criticisms for the West. He was
harder on de Gaulle than on Stalin, harder on America's actions in Vietnam and
France's actions in Algeria than on the Soviet Union's actions in Eastern
Europe. At one point, he recalls, he helped to found a political party that he
hoped would be ''a socialist area'' between the United States and the Soviet
Union. He does not mention his famous split with Albert Camus, a tougher critic
of Soviet totalitarianism.

There is surprisingly little discussion of existentialism, once the rage, and
Sartre's explanations of his conviction that the writer should act as a
representative of the masses is more murky than deep. The gist of it, presented
with cafe-talk flourishes, is simply that writers have a duty to support ''the
revolution,'' at least until it turns sour. As he goes on about this, Sartre
seems to be chewing more than he has bitten off. His rejection of the Nobel
Prize and the Legion of Honor told more about his anti-establishment credo than
he tells here.

In the course of criticizing the ''elitism'' of intellectuals and their
separation from the masses, Sartre says, ''I've tried to rid myself of the
intellectual in me.'' These three hours, part of Channel 13's ''Vive La France''
series, serve as evidence that he did not succeed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jean-Paul Sartre

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              210 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 28, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Bank Reform

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 58 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 27


Vietnam, which has severe economic problems, says its banking system must be
overhauled if the state is to control the economy. The Communist Party newspaper
Nhan Dan said the banking system was inadequate for the issuance and management
of the nation's money. Vietnam is suffering triple-digit inflation, large
unemployment and food shortages.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              211 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NIXON DATA SHOW A WATERGATE HINT

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 785 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 28


Newly released papers of President Nixon showed today that the seed of the
Watergate scandals may have been a memorandum dated Jan. 14, 1971, from Mr.
Nixon to his White House chief of staff, H. R. Haldeman.

''It would seem that the time is approaching when Larry O'Brien is held
accountable for his retainer with Hughes,'' Mr. Nixon dictated in a note from
Air Force One. ''Perhaps Colson should make a check on this.''

Mr. O'Brien, who was then the Democratic national chairman, had once done some
public relation work for Howard R. Hughes, the reclusive billionaire. Many
believe that Mr. Nixon's desire for information about Mr. O'Brien was behind the
break-in and burglary of the Democratic Party headquarters in the Watergate
office and apartment complex on June 17, 1972.

Mr. O'Brien could not be reached by telephone for comment today.

Charles W. Colson, then special counsel to the President, later pleaded guilty
to a charge of obstructing justice and served six months in prison. #267,500
Pages of Documents The memorandum was among 267,500 pages of documents released
to public view today by the National Archives, which has had custody of them
since Aug. 9, 1974, when Mr. Nixon resigned the Presidency before the House
could act on three articles of impeachment against him.

On May 16, 1973, two weeks after he dismissed Mr. Haldeman and John D.
Ehrlichman, the President's chief domestic affairs adviser, Mr. Nixon received a
memorandum from Patrick J. Buchanan, then a White House speechwriter,
recommending that Mr. Nixon cut his ties with associates who were involved in
the Watergate scandals.

''If they are to survive, they have to do it on their own,'' Mr. Buchanan wrote.
''The only question extant now, it seems, is whether we are going down as
well.''

Mr. Nixon appended his own critique of the memorandum: ''A very good analysis.''

Other papers showed Mr. Nixon once suggested that the Internal Revenue Service
audit the tax returns of every member of Congress and that Cabinet members and
White House aides be audited, too, to deflect criticism.

A Bitter Legal Battle

Mr. Nixon sent the suggestion to Mr. Haldeman with a cover note saying: ''This,
incidentally, is highly confidential. You should make no copies except one for
my private file.''

Only reporters were at the National Archives' warehouse in Alexandria, Va., when
the Nixon collection was opened. The seizure of the papers by Congress and their
release to the public involved a bitter legal battle that went to the Supreme
Court twice.

Five percent of the pages in today's release were withheld at the former
President's request, pending further review, but his attorneys said none of them
were directly related to Watergate. The archives withheld an additional 6
percent of the papers because they involved national security, foreign affairs
or personal privacy.

The files offered some revealing glimpses into the way Mr. Nixon operated,
including these:

* He received a series of memorandums listing reporters, columnists and
television commentators who were personal friends and ''who should receive
special treatment.'' Another document listed ''top 10'' reporters and ''a backup
20.'' Conversely, there were lists of reporters to be avoided, and Mr. Nixon
frequently noted his contempt for the news media.

* He read his daily news summaries carefully, scrawling remarks and orders in
the margin. To an item in 1972 that the Environmental Protection Agency had
banned virtually all uses of DDT, Mr. Nixon appended: ''I totally disagree with
this decision. I want plenty of effort put in to get it reversed on appeal.''

Contempt for Some Republicans

Mr. Nixon's handwriting on notes showed that he also held some members of his
own party in contempt. One note in 1973 from George Bush, then the Republican
national chairman, reported favorable poll ratings for Richard S. Schweicker,
then a Republican Senator from Pennsylvania.

Mr. Nixon wrote in the margin: ''It shows the benefit of being a nothing in the
Senate. He votes against us but makes little noise about it.''

Folders that the former President left behind in his desk showed a preoccupation
with public opinion polls. There were copies of numerous surveys by Gallup and
Harris tracking his own standing, ratings of his conduct of the Vietnam War and
polls of the Eisenhower Administration, in which he served as Vice President.

Among the papers was a proposed plan for a state funeral if Mr. Nixon should die
in office. It included a list of possible pallbearers, the location for his
burial in Whittier, Calif., and a list of eight hymns to be sung at the funeral.
The last hymn listed was ''California, Here I Come.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              212 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: IRAN-CONTRA AFFAIR;
The Patriotism Defense: Sometimes It Works, Sometimes It Doesn't

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1232 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 28


When Government officials in Washington are accused of a crime, history shows
that they often wrap themselves tightly in the American flag. Often with good
reason.

It has been called the patriotism defense. Criminal suspects say they were only
acting in the best interests of their country and at the behest of superiors.

In the Iran-contra affair, it appears to be the defense strategy of choice. ''I
have no doubt that we'll be seeing the greatest possible use of it,'' said
Charles F. C. Ruff, a former United States Attorney in Washington.

Although no Government officials have yet been charged with crimes in the
Iran-contra affair, one former National Security Council aide, Lieut. Col.
Oliver L. North, has been named an unindicted co-conspirator in a tax conspiracy
case related to the raising of funds for the Nicaraguan rebels, the contras.

Colonel North has said almost nothing publicly since the Iran arms sales were
exposed last November. But when a television reporter caught up with him at a
horse show in Virginia earlier this month, Colonel North agreed to appear on
camera and gave a glimpse of what appears to be his defense strategy.

''I can tell you this,'' he said in a firm voice. ''Everything that I did was
done in the best interests of the United States of America.'' He added, ''This
marine is never going to plead guilty to anything, ever.''

Before this, the broadest recent use of the patriotism defense occurred in the
Watergate scandals. There, the defense flopped; almost everyone who was charged
with a crime was convicted, and many went to prison. But the Iran-contra case is
different, in part because a number of suspects are military officers with
distinguished records. Lawyers say the patriotism defense, used properly, could
help keep some suspects out of court and others out of prison.

Prosecutors are supposed to act as the conscience of a community, and they have
broad discretion in bringing criminal charges. Suspects who demonstrate that
they acted selflessly and carried out a crime because they thought it would help
the country may persuade a prosecutor not to seek an indictment or persuade him
to seek only minor charges.

'Huge Amount of Discretion'

''It happens all the time,'' said William W. Greenhalgh, a professor of law at
Georgetown University who specializes in criminal law procedures. ''Prosecutors
have a huge amount of discretion. They're not going to go after marginal cases,
and the patriotism defense can tip the scales.''

That is what happened with Richard Helms, a former Director of Central
Intelligence who admitted in 1977 that he had not told Congress the full truth
about the Central Intelligence Agency's covert involvement in Chile. Mr. Helms
argued that he did not have authority to disclose details of the operation in
Chile.

Mr. Helms could have faced perjury charges, a crime that can carry a harsh
prison term. Instead the Justice Department and a Federal judge allowed him to
plead no contest to two misdemeanor charges; the judge fined him $2,000 and
suspended a two-year prison term.

'Outstanding Public Service'

At the time of the plea, the Justice Department praised Mr. Helms for a ''most
distinguished career'' and ''outstanding public service to the United States.''
In 1983 President Reagan presented him with the National Security Medal.

Once criminal charges have been filed and a case goes to trial, the patriotism
defense is trickier to use. The law is the law, and someone who commits a crime
out of love of country is usually held to be no less guilty than someone with
selfish intentions. But luckily for defendants, trial juries are seldom
predictable.

''A jury is always going to look at the worth of a defendant's character,'' said
Michael Tigar, a professor of law at the University of Texas. ''Jurors can, and
do, acquit a defendant regardless of a court's instructions.''

Appearances are important, and during trial, defendants are advised to appear
confident but humbled, loyal but not zealous. A uniform almost always helps;
since the Iran-contra affair became news, Colonel North has made his court
appearances in full uniform, complete with a chestful of ribbons for valor.

A parade of well-known character witnesses is also of use, especially if they
can testify about a defendant's past heroism under fire.

In arguing the defense case, lawyers try to portray a client who did not
personally profit from the crime. (Colonel North may have already lost on this
point; Congressional investigators introduced evidence last week that he had
cashed traveler's checks drawn on contra funds to buy such things as snow
tires.) And, if possible, the defendant is portrayed as a scapegoat who was
following the orders of senior officials.

''I predict you'll see a lot of people arguing they were scapegoats, and I won't
deny that it can be a fine defense,'' said a Washington lawyer who is
representing a key figure in the Iran-contra affair. ''Juries never like to
punish a defendant if they think he's a scapegoat.''

No one is comparing the crimes of the Iran-contra affair with the horrors of the
My Lai massacre of the Vietnam War, but the case that arose from that incident
is instructive in showing how the patriotism defense may be instrumental in
blocking criminal charges.

The Army originally charged 25 officers and enlisted men with offenses,
including murder, linked to the massacre, in which at least 22 Vietnamese
citizens were killed in a three-hour raid by United States troops in 1968.

A common defense offered in the court proceedings was that the defendants were
loyal soldiers who had followed the orders of military superiors.

In the end, of all those charged, only one, William L. Calley Jr., a first
lieutenant, was convicted of a crime, and his punishment was limited. Mr. Calley
argued that he had been trained by his superiors to ''seek out and destroy human
beings.''

Mr. Calley was originally sentenced to life in prison at hard labor. That was
cut to 20 years, then 10 years, and he eventually served three years of house
arrest.

A more recent example of the effectiveness of the patriotism defense concerned
two former senior officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, W. Mark Felt
and Edward S. Miller, who were convicted in 1980 of conspiring to violate the
constitutional rights of American citizens by authorizing illegal break-ins.

The break-ins occurred at homes in New York and New Jersey in the search for
members of a militant antiwar group, the Weather Organization.

Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller acknowledged that they had not sought warrants for the
searches but insisted that the break-ins were a patriotic act - the Underground,
they said, posed a threat to national security - and that they had the approval
of their superiors.

Pardoned by Reagan

The defense strategy apparently had its effect on the judge on the case, who
agreed not to sentence the two men to prison and imposed relatively small fines.

President Reagan was clearly moved by their argument as well. In 1981 he granted
them pardons, saying that the two men ''acted on high principle to bring an end
to the terrorism that was threatening our nation.''

Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller, the President said, ''acted not with criminal intent,
but in the belief that they had grants of authority reaching to the highest
levels of Government.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of some of those whose questionable actions are to have been
patriotically motivated, including Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, W. Mark Felt and
Edward S. Miller (NYT; AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              213 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POP/JAZZ;
FRAGILE TRADITIONS OF MUSIC SURVIVE FOR CITY LISTENERS

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1244 words


ON the surface, New York may seem like no place for musical traditions to make
themselves heard. The rate of change is high; overnight, the corner bookstore
turns into a boutique, or a dependable radio station switches to a new format.
But New Yorkers, buffeted by trendiness, are happy to take refuge in music that
looks back decades or centuries. Carried forward by an aural tradition, musical
traditions are fragile; even recordings or, lately, film and video can't quite
capture the way performers and audiences interact. But traditions do survive,
and in New York this weekend, listeners can sample a half-dozen traditions,
imported and homegrown.

One worthy modern tradition is the music of Charles Mingus, the jazz composer
and bassist who died in 1979, but whose influence has grown ever stronger in the
past decade. With a career that began in the be-bop era, Mingus was a
forward-looking jazz musician who refused to abandon roots. His compositions
wail the blues and shout like a gospel revival, but they are also likely to use
contrasting themes and changes of key and tempo. The pieces are daunting to
learn yet galvanizing when played well.

The composer's widow, Susan Graham Mingus, came up with the idea of a band that
specializes in the Mingus repertory; the current edition of that band, Mingus
Dynasty, is appearing through Sunday at the Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue
South, below 11th Street (255-4037). The lineup includes Jimmy Knepper on
trombone and John Handy on alto saxophone, who were mainstays of Mingus's
late-1950's bands, along with Craig Handy (no relation) on tenor saxophone; Hugh
Lawson, another Mingus alumnus, on piano; Reggie Johnson on bass, Billy Hart on
drums and, for this engagement only, James Newton on flute. Mr. Newton's most
recent album, ''Romance and Revolution,'' features Mingus's suitelike
''Meditations on Integration.''

''Mingus had a kind of genius for putting things together that are very
disparate,'' said Mr. Knepper, who has been with Mingus Dynasty since 1979.
''And if you listen to all of his work, you can hear it develop - he continued
to rework ideas, so that what starts out in the background of one piece turns
into the melody of a later one.'' In other words, Mingus eventually created his
own tradition. At the Vanguard, sets begin at 10 and 11:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.;
there is a $12 cover and a $6 minimum.

A cornerstone of Mingus's music, and of jazz itself, is the music of Duke
Ellington, whose tradition is celebrated just about everywhere people play jazz.
On Sunday afternoon, the Duke Ellington Society - the combination fan club and
scholarly research group - is holding its annual spring concert, and the
17-piece Loren Schoenberg Big Band will be playing faithful reconstructions of
Ellington band arrangements and rarely heard pieces by Ellington and his
longtime partner, Billy Strayhorn. The concert will feature the trombonist Britt
Woodman, an Ellington alumnus, and the cornetist Ruby Braff. It will be held at
2:30 P.M. at Schimmel Center at Pace University, Spruce Street (between Nassau
and Gold Streets); tickets are $10 and $12. Information: 718-375-0327.

Blues and Zydeco

Two American regional traditions - Chicago blues and bayou zydeco -will be
imported to New York this weekend. At Tramps, 125 East 15th Street (777-5077),
the weekend festival of Chicago blues continues with Eddy Clearwater, a
Mississippi-born guitarist and singer who has been playing blues since the
1950's in and around Chicago, where the tradition evolves nightly at clubs on
the city's North and South Sides. There's some Chuck Berry rock-and-roll and a
hint of 1960's soul in Mr. Clearwater's music, alongside long-suffering slow
blues and rollicking party tunes. As in Tramps' other festival dates, Mr.
Clearwater will bring his working band with him, so New Yorkers can hear the
tradition in purer form. Sets begin tonight and tomorrow at 9:30 and midnight;
there is a $10 cover and a two-drink minimum.

Zydeco, the Gulf Coast blend of Acadian (Cajun) songs with blues,
rhythm-and-blues and Creole Caribbean music, has gradually been winning fans in
New York City. But one zydeco mainstay, Alton Jay Rubin, the button accordionist
and singer known since the 1950's as Good Rockin' Dopsie (pronounced DOOP-see),
has only made occasional forays away from the Louisiana dance halls. To record
with Good Rockin' Dopsie on the album ''Graceland,'' Paul Simon had to visit
Lafayette, La. Good Rockin' Dopsie and the Cajun Twisters play Cajun waltzes and
two-steps alongside 1950's-style rhythm-and-blues; the tradition doesn't need
any updating to keep dancers happy. The group will perform Saturday at the Lone
Star Cafe, 61 Fifth Avenue at 13th Street (242-1664). Shows are scheduled for
9:15 and 11:30 P.M., with G. C. Dangerous opening; tickets are $10.

An emissary from yet another 1950's tradition, rockabilly, will be in town
tomorrow at the Rodeo Bar at Albuquerque, 375 Third Avenue at 27th Street
(683-6500). Otis Blackwell is one of rock's godfathers; he wrote ''Don't Be
Cruel,'' ''All Shook Up,'' ''Great Balls of Fire,'' ''Breathless'' and other
cornerstones of rock-and-roll, and his singing is echoed in Elvis Presley's
phrasing. Mr. Blackwell will perform tomorrow at 10 P.M.; there is no cover or
minimum.

Vintage Musical Traditions

Older traditions, too, can be heard in New York this weekend, including an
improvisational tradition that dates back centuries: the music of Vietnam, which
will be heard tonight at the Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street
(206-1050). History has irrevocably altered Vietnam's music, but ancient styles
have survived. Like other Southeast Asian music, Vietnam's folk songs show the
influence of both Indian and Chinese music, with intricately ornamented vocal
lines and piquant, plucked-string counterpoint. Tonight's concert, by Phong
Nguyen with Hoang Oanh and Nguyen Kim Oanh, will present recited poetry and folk
songs for voices and dan-tranh (zither, related to the Japanese koto) and
dan-nguyet (moon-shaped lute); even with exotic scales and microtonal
inflections, the melodies are immediately accessible to Western listeners.
Tonight at 8 P.M.; tickets are $10. Finally, there is a Cuban tradition that's
fast becoming a New York tradition. For the last two years, the Caribbean
Cultural Center has sponsored ''El Baile del Traje Blanco'' (''the dance of the
white dress''), a celebration of spring in which all the participants dress in
white.

This year's dance will feature Graciela, who sang for many years with Machito's
Latin-jazz orchestra, the Afro-Cubans. She will be reclaiming some of salsa's
roots, singing with Son de la Loma, a group that plays the gentle, infectious
Cuban son, a folk-song style that carries news, history and legends. The program
also includes a group led by the Panamanian flutist Mauricio Smith, and an
all-female merengue band, Las Chicas de Nueva York. The dance should be a visual
treat as well as an aural one. ''Just to see a thousand people all dressed in
white, even the children and the elders, is a spectacular sight,'' said the
Caribbean Cultural Center's executive director, Marta Moreno Vega. ''The Dance
of the White Dress'' will take place Sunday at 4 P.M. at the Synod House of the
Cathedral of St. John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 110th Street; admission is
$10, $4 for students and the elderly. The number for more information is
307-7420.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of James Newton (NYT/Larry C. Morris); Photo of the Mingus
Dynasty (NYT/Larry C. Morris); Photo of Phong Nguyen

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              214 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT THE MOVIES

BYLINE: By Nina Darnton

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1083 words


ELIOT NESS, the strait-laced United States Treasury officer whose group of
hand-picked officers finally felled the mighty Al Capone, is more than the stuff
of history and legend. Through television, which from 1959 to 1963 projected
Ness's stiff incorruptible image into American homes as a symbol of good against
evil, he also became a fantasy.

Al Capone was wily, smart, flamboyant, excessive and vengeful. Eliot Ness, as
portrayed by the square-jawed Robert Stack, was tough but fair, in control,
street smart. Brian de Palma's film ''The Untouchables,'' using a script by
Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright David Mamet, shows another Eliot Ness and
tells another story - deeper and more complicated, although probably no closer
to the real Ness. The film, which opens Wednesday, stars Kevin Costner as the
29-year-old Eliot Ness, Robert De Niro as Capone and Sean Connery as Jimmy
Malone.

''I saw the TV series in reruns'' Mr. Costner said in a telephone interview the
other day. ''And I liked it. But I wanted to do the film because it was so
different. I played a less knowing, seemingly less strong character. He's not on
top of things - though he eventually gets on top of them. David Mamet created
the Jimmy Malone character, and in this film it's really Malone who forms the
Untouchables.'' The Untouchables are the group of officers who are recruited
outside the system. They couldn't be corrupted - even in Chicago.

''Ness is just the opposite of street-smart,'' Mr. Costner said. ''He has to ask
for help. It's the more modern notion that a smart man takes a step back
sometimes - that to be a hero you don't have to be Rambo. Mamet structured the
script so that it's really about the relationship between this young guy with
high ideals and this older, streetwise cop who teaches him. By the end, when
Malone is gone, the student becomes stronger than the teacher.''

In ''The Untouchables,'' the Ness character develops into more than a good
student and a fast learner. A rigid, controlled and civilized man who believes
in following the letter of the law exactly, he becomes so obsessed with
defeating Capone that he is willing to tap the wellsprings of violence in his
own character in order to stop him. ''In Mamet's script Ness has a family,''
said Mr. Costner. ''That's a liberty, because the real Ness didn't have one, and
that colored my performance. He becomes a really interesting man. He's not a
joke teller or charismatic like Capone. If he ever said a profanity someone
would laugh. He doesn't even know how to get angry. He's fresh-faced and
innocent. But by the end he's willing to lie, to manipulate, to kill. He learns
that the law takes time, that the only way to get these people is to hunt them
down. He sees that and it sickens him, but he's able to do it. That's a
different character than the one that began.''

The script supports that conclusion. In a rage, trying to convince a judge to
rule in his favor, the Ness character says ''I have forsworn myself. I have
broken every law I swore to defend. I've become what I've beheld and I'm content
that I have done right.'' The sentiment, and the poetic style in which it is
expressed, is far from the television-series hero most of us remember. ''It's
real Shakespearean, in a way,'' said Mr. Costner. ''He's probably the hardest
character I've ever had to play. Who is Eliot Ness? He's an enigmatic guy.''

Lumet to Begin 'Empty,' With Lahti and Hirsch

Sidney Lumet will start filming his next movie in New York City and New Jersey
this summer. It's called ''Running on Empty'' and will star Christine Lahti and
Judd Hirsch as two 60's radicals who bombed a building in a protest over the
Vietnam War and then went underground for 20 years. They believed the building
would be empty, but a janitor was inside, and he was paralyzed. The couple made
the FBI's 10 Most Wanted List, and were forced to change their names, hair color
and identities every few years when they thought someone recognized or suspected
them. The story is not based on an actual bombing, although it is reminiscent of
one at the University of Wisconsin.

The film will also star River Phoenix as the couple's 17-year-old son who
decides he is tired of running and wants to make his own life above ground. The
couple's other son, a 10-year old, is not yet cast.

''This is a hard film to classify'' said Mr. Lumet. ''It's not exactly a
coming-of-age story - the boy is already mature and knowledgeable. It's about
the consequences of our actions, and the dynamic of what makes a family. These
people's lives are a mess. The children are the only success they've got. It's
about their inability to break up this family.''

Ms. Lahti, who was nominated for an Academy Award for her role in ''Swing
Shift'' in 1984, is now in her late 30's. She was a student at the University of
Michigan during the 1960's. ''I went to demonstrations and did whatever I could
to help end the war, but I avoided violence,'' she said. ''I didn't think that
was the way to go.'' She thinks the film, from the mother's point of view, is
about letting go,'' about giving our son a chance to make his own mistakes
rather than suffer for ours,'' she said.

The film is produced by Griffin Dunne and Amy Robinson and is financed by
Lorimar. It has a relatively low budget of $6.75 million. It is another movie
that looks at a period of American history that filmmakers have largely avoided
until recently -the tortured era of the Vietnam war. Films like ''Platoon'' took
a hard, more realistic look at life in the trenches and this film attempts to
look at the casualties at home.

Premiere Magazine Set to Premiere Tuesday

Premiere, a new mass-market, high-gloss magazine devoted to movie making, hits
the newsstands Tuesday. It is a publication of Rupert Murdoch's group, Murdoch
Magazines, which owns New York, European Travel and Life, Elle, Star Magazine,
New Woman and Auto magazines.

The magazine, in a large 10-by-12 inch format, will cost $1.95 and is edited by
37-year-old Susan Lyne, a former movie executive and managing editor of The
Village Voice from 1978 to 1981. It is designed by Robert Best, design director
of New York Magazine.

Freelance contributors will include David Denby and David Blum of New York,
Sheila Benson of The Los Angeles Times and David Edelstein from The Village
Voice.

The cover of the first issue of Premiere features Dan Aykroyd and Tom Hanks as
Joe Friday and his partner Pep Streebeck in ''Dragnet.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Kevin Costner (Zade Rosenthal)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              215 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Thai Border Clash

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 30 words


A Thai Ranger on patrol in the Chong Bok region where fighting has raged to
dislodge Vietnamese from entrenched positions just inside Thai territory. Page
4. (The Bangkok Post)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              216 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY SATURDAY, MAY 30, 1987

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1143 words


INTERNATIONAL      2-7

 2,,q>A West German pilot flew to Moscow from Helsinki, crossing the heavily
defended Soviet-Finnish border and landing his Cessna unimpeded next to the
Kremlin wall.Page      1



 Matthias Rust, the pilot of the plane, was described by his mother as ''a quiet
young man of wonderful character with a passion for flying.'' She discounted any
political motive for his flight.      1

 The U.S. and Iraq agreed on steps to prevent further Iraqi attacks on American
naval vessels operating in the Persian Gulf, the American team investigating the
missile attack on the United States Navy frigate Stark said.      1

 The U.S. will protect oil shipping and the freedom of navigation in the Persian
Gulf, President Reagan said. But Mr. Reagan left unclear how and when the Navy
will escort Kuwaiti tankers through the gulf.      1

 Thailand and Vietnam are fighting where the borders of Thailand, Cambodia and
Laos intersect. The battles have reportedly been going on since January and are
described as the most intense in eight years.      4

 Japan's defense chief went to China on a fence-mending mission, but analysts
said he had only a limited chance for success. Japan's decision to raise
military spending has been criticized by Chinese leaders.      4

 Japan asked its trading partners to trust that its measures to stimulatethe
economy and promote imports would produce results. ''I have completely put my
promises to foreign countries into action,'' the Prime Minister said.      39

 former C.I.A. officer testified that he was ordered to help the contras by
Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, the American Ambassador to Costa Rica and perhaps
others in Washington, officials said. The testimony was given in closed session.

     7

 Trials of Argentine military officers on human-rights grounds will be cut back
following the passage of legislation by the Argentine Senate. The vote took
place in an atmosphere of growing tension and assertiveness within the armed
forces.      2

 Cuban defector ''significant''      2
 Ex-SS man quits U.S. for Austria      2
 Milan is political trendsetter      3
 Deaver case angers Canadians      3
 Srinagar journal      4
 Bill to increase Indochinese resettlement in U.S.      4
 Communist leaders end talks      6

 National     8-11, 32, 49

 2,4.5,q>AIDS will cost at least $10 billion to $15 billion a year by 1991,
Federal officials and health economists say. They warn that it may require major
changes in the financing of health care.     1

 An appeal for blacks about AIDS was issued by the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference. The group urged prominent blacks and blacks in general to accept a
larger responsibility in containing the deadly disease.    49

 Some airlines will adjust schedules at five airports to reduce flight delays
this summer, the Transportation Secretary announced. The adjusted schedules of
the 18 airlines will be effective beginning Monday.      1

 Insurance companies are liable for paying the claims of victims of
asbestos-related diseases, a California judge ruled. The decision could increase
the amount of money available for such victims.      1

 The first Presidential debate between two of the Republican and Democratic
Presidential candidates of the 1988 campaign was held in Iowa. Former Gov. Bruce
Babbitt of Arizona debated former Gov. Pierre S. du Pont 4th of Delaware.     11


 John Landis was acquitted along with four associates of all charges in
connection with the deaths of three actors in the filming of ''Twilight Zone:
The Movie.'' It took the jury nine days to reach a decision.      8

 A Government economic index fell six-tenths of 1 percent in April, the biggest
decline in two years, the Commerce Department reported. Most of the fall in the
leading-indicators index was related to a holiday-shortened workweek.      37

 A study of shuttle rockets will seek to determine whether to switch from
solid-fuel boosters to liquid-fuel ones in light of the Challenger disaster. The
move rekindles an old debate within the space agency.      10

 By cutting down trees, an actor has created an uproar in a Chicago suburb. Mr.
T, the gruff television actor, reportedly suffering from allergies, cut down
more than a hundred of the ancient oak trees on his estate.      8

 New S.M.U. president named      8
 A lesson for truant Democrats      8
 Jackson statement underscores Democrats' dilemma      11
 Suit seeks to ban defoliant      32
 Chemical Bank gets Fed clearance      37
 Debate over use of medical tests      49
   Regional      33-36, 49, 54

 2,,q>Donald Trump offered to share 25 percent of his profits with the New York
City government for 40 years in return for a 20-year tax abatement on his
proposed multimillion-dollar Television City complex in Manhattan, Mr. Trump
said.      33

 The prosecutor in the Goetz trial is arguably the best trial lawyer on the
Manhattan District Attorney's staff. Gregory L. Waples is known as an excellent
investigator and a master at explaining complicated facts.     33

 The jury in the Goetz trial rode a specially assembled subway train. The
defense requested the trip as a way to make vivid the situation in which
Bernhard H. Goetz found himself when he shot four youths.      35

 St. Clare's medical staff prepared an emergency meeting to consider a state
plan to make it the first hospital in New York City that would treat only AIDS
and related illnesses.      49

 Woman in the News: Donna Shalala, the president of Hunter College who will be
Chancellor of the University of Wisconsin, was praised as a ''dynamic, vigorous
educational leader'' by the university president.     33

 Sewage washed onto some beaches along 25 miles of the New Jersey shoreline this
week. But officials said that water quality had not been affected and that the
beaches would be open this weekend.      34

 Social barriers in Greenwich, Conn., are falling. As the owners of 45 rarefied
properties prepare to give benefit dinners for guests who may be perfect
strangers, the mood in select enclaves is one of social abandon.      33

 A former court clerk pleaded guilty to charges that she had passed confidential
information about organized-crime cases to members of the Gambino crime family
while working in the United States Court House in Manhattan.      35

 Bus driver to go to Harvard      34
 Report on Brooklyn zoo security      35
 Family thrives in politics      35
 Two wounded in Chinatown      36

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              217 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THAIS AND VIETNAMESE IN BITTER BATLE

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 901 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 29


In a largely hidden conflict in a mountainous border region, Thai and Vietnamese
forces are locked in what appears to be their most intense engagement since
Vietnam invaded Cambodia more than eight years ago.

Fighting in the remote Chong Bok area, where the borders of Thailand, Cambodia
and Laos intersect, has reportedly continued since January, as Thai soldiers try
to dislodge the Vietnamese from entrenched positions just inside Thai territory.

Despite reports of high casualties from Vietnamese artillery and mines, the Thai
regional commander announced this week that the offensive would continue until
security was restored.

Last week, the United States joined Thailand's Southeast Asian allies in
condemning Vietnam's ''clear violation of international law'' and in calling on
Hanoi to withdraw its forces.

A spokesman for the Thai Second Army, commanded by Lieut. Gen. Isarapong
Noonpakdi, said a road was being built several miles into the rugged area to
make it easier to resupply troops and evacuate the wounded.

Anti-Guerrilla Goal Seen

The Vietnamese occupation of several hills on an important infiltration route
from Thailand into Cambodia appears to be part of a largely unsuccessful
two-year attempt to seal the border against forces fighting the
Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government.

Since Vietnam invaded Cambodia at the end of 1978, its occupying force, now
numbering about 140,000 men, has been harassed by guerrillas fielded by a
three-party coalition operating from camps along the Thai border.

Vietnamese troops have often intruded into Thailand. The Thais have fought many
small and a few brief larger battles with the intruders. But previous Thai
policy has usually been to ignore Vietnamese incursions into uninhabited areas
like Chong Bok.

Diplomats said this was the first time that Thailand had committed itself to a
protracted engagement against entrenched intruders.

Last March 21, the army commander, Gen. Chavalit Yongchaiyudh, broke Thai
secrecy over the conflict in a visit to the area during which, a diplomat said,
''he nailed the flag to the map'' and vowed to clear the Vietnamese from Chong
Bok.

Reports of Casualties Vary

Thai military officials have since released sketchy and conflicting details
about the fighting. Their reports of Thai casualties have ranged from 45 to 72
dead. Western diplomats said the death toll could be in the hundreds.

''There have been battles before in the passes, but this one stands apart for
the depth and permanence of the Vietnamese penetration and for the Thais'
willingness to make a public issue of something that is so costly for them,'' a
diplomat said. ''The Thais are being very tough about it, going in again and
again despite heavy casualties.''

He said the Vietnamese held the tactical advantage, with trenches and apparently
tunnels along the rocky ridges and with well-prepared fields of artillery fire
that can saturate the hillsides whenever they are attacked.

A Thai military official estimated that the area had been seeded with more than
100,000 mines.

The Thais have reportedly attacked with artillery and air strikes as well as
infantry. The effect on the entrenched Vietnamese is not clear.

Border Issue Raised

In a radio broadcast last weekend, Hanoi said the Chong Bok area was in fact
inside Cambodia, and it accused Thailand of carrying out air and ground attacks
across the border.

A diplomat said some Vietnamese officers had been captured carrying American
maps that show the area to be inside Thailand.

In recent days, Bangkok newspapers have reported that the two armies had engaged
in a duel by loudspeaker, each side accusing the other of border intrusions and
calling on it to withdraw.

The fighting is taking place in the Nam Yuen district of Ubon Ratchathani
province in eastern Thailand.

The two sides are battling for control of a strategic group of hills, the most
important of which, known by their elevations, are Hill 500, Hill 408 and Hill
382.

Villagers Evacuated

Thai villagers living in scattered settlements within three miles of the
conflict have been evacuated, according to a local newspaper account.

''The people in Nam Yuen can hear the shelling, and they are afraid,'' said an
international relief official working on the Thai-Cambodian border.

The Thai military, after initially making public little information about the
fighting, has begun issuing almost daily reports, but correspondents have not
been permitted into the battle area.

One recent report told of a visit to Nam Yuen by a group of entertainers who
invited soldiers to dance with them on stage under a banner reading, ''Born for
No Other Reason Than for the Good of Thailand.''

The leader of the opposition Prachakorn Thai Party, Samak Sundaravej, recently
questioned the official casualty count and called on military officials to
explain why soldiers were being sent to Chong Bok ''only to be slaughtered.''

A Thai reporter told of talking with an officer who complained of being ordered
to ''lead men into battle only to die.''

Since early 1985, the Vietnamese have sought to seal off the 750-mile
Thai-Cambodian border with a barrier of cleared land, barbed wire and mines.

But the guerrillas from the anti-Vietnamese coalition have in that period
succeeded in penetrating into Cambodia more deeply and for longer periods than
before, diplomats said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Thailand

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              218 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS GETS BILL TO EXTEND INDOCHINESE RESETTLEMENT PLAN IN U.S.

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 694 words


With the Thai Government threatening to dismantle its refugee asylum program by
the end of June, legislation has been introduced in Congress to insure that the
United States extends its resettlement program for Indochinese refugees by at
least three years.

At issue, officials say, is the degree to which the United States still feels an
obligation to thousands of people uprooted by continuing upheaval in Southeast
Asia, or whether most of those people are merely hoping for a better life in
this country.

The sponsor of the legislation, Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon,
said recently that ''country after country tightens their asylum policies'' in
the region ''because the United States appears to be throwing in the towel'' on
refugee resettlement.

Thailand has already closed the primary first-asylum camp in Southeast Asia,
Khao I Dang, to new refugees and threatened to eliminate all support programs by
June 30.

Commissioner Opposes Bill

The Commissioner of the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service,
Alan C. Nelson, said he opposes the bill ''because we've got a refugee act
that's worked well.''

The Refugee Act of 1980 requires annual consultations between Congress and the
State Department to establish quotas for different regions of the world, but
Senator Hatfield's bill would firmly establish the Indochinese quota at about
30,000 refugees for each of the next three years.

Mr. Nelson said Senator Hatfield ''has false premises in the bill - that there
have been problems in processing.''

''That's not true,'' the commissioner said.

This year, he said, ''we will meet the numbers that were proposed, which is
32,000 for Southeast Asia.''

'Bordering on Genocide'

Senator Hatfield has included a provision to shift processing of Indochinese
refugees from the immigration agency to the State Department.

''We know what's going on in Laos is bordering on genocide,'' the Senator said,
''and, yet, I.N.S. has a 60 percent rejection rate for lowland Lao.''

Since Communists took over Laos in 1975, said Al Santoli, the author of two
books on Indochina, they have continually launched military campaigns against
lowland Lao and hill tribes -particularly the Hmong- who had allied themselves
with the United States.

Others in the region have also been persecuted. After North Vietnam took Saigon
in 1975, hundreds of thousands of people were interned in so-called re-education
camps. To avoid persecution, about 500,000 ''boat people'' fled. At the same
time, in Cambodia, Khmer Rouge repression was taking at least a million lives.

As a result, according to a 1986 report by the State Department's Indochinese
Refugee Panel, close to two million people ''have left those countries in a
sustained flight from persecution.'' Of those, just under 800,000 have been
received into the United States, the others dispersed to other countries.

'Job Is Not Over'

Still, ''the job is not over,'' the report said. ''Some 154,000 refugees remain
in camps in Southeast Asia, in addition to 250,000 on the Thai-Cambodian
border,'' it said.

According to international law, a refugee - as opposed to an immigrant - is
defined as someone who has fled because of ''a well-founded fear of persecution,
based on race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group,
or political opinion.''

Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming, the ranking minority member of
the Senate Subcommittee on Immigration and Refugee Policy, said: ''We've found
that these are people who don't like their government, who may not want to be in
the draft, have had some of their property confiscated, have had neighbors
killed. But none of that qualifies a person to be a refugee. I know that
startles people, but that's the law. Either meet the test of refugee, or don't
gimmick the system.''

But the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Claiborne Pell,
Democrat of Rhode Island, said, ''I believe, as a nation symbolizing freedom and
compassion, we have a real responsibility to help these refugees, particularly
because much of their misery was caused by our intervention in Indochina.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              219 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Round of U.S.-Vietnam Talks About Missing G.I.'s Is Over

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 81 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 29


A team of United States officials ended a round of talks in Hanoi on the issue
of missing American servicemen but failed to reach agreement on a visit to
Vietnam by a Presidential envoy, the State Department said Friday.

The United States delegation, headed by Richard Childress, a National Security
Council staff member, returned to Bangkok, Thailand, Thursday after three days
of talks in the Vietnamese capital, according to Charles E. Redman, the State
Department spokesman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              220 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
After Vietnam

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 913 words


INDIAN COUNTRY. By Philip Caputo. 419 pages. Bantam Books. $18.95.

The years immediately after the Vietnam war witnessed the publication of dozens
of novels recounting the combat experience: many of them were fairly traditional
coming-of-age stories in which a young soldier loses his boyish innocence and is
initiated into the complexities of the modern world; others attempted, through
disjunctive, stream-of-consciousness narratives, to capture the hallucinatory,
almost surreal feel of that specific war.

As Vietnam has receded in time and been absorbed into our national
consciousness, writers have begun to move away from minutely detailed
descriptions of combat - such novels as Jayne Anne Phillips's ''Machine Dreams''
and Bobbie Ann Mason's ''In Country'' were less concerned with the war itself
than with its consequences for families and communities back home. Philip
Caputo's ''Indian Country'' is such a novel. The story of a troubled Vietnam
veteran, it is, at once, an earnest case study of someone suffering from
post-traumatic stress disorder and an engaging fictional examination of the
war's impact on an individual psyche.

Mr. Caputo - the author of a fierce and uncompromising memoir titled ''A Rumor
of War'' (1977) - possesses a journalist's eagerness to convey information, and
in the course of reading ''Indian Country,'' we learn a fair amount about the
social and psychological difficulties many veterans experienced on returning
home. In addition to a hostile or at best indifferent reception, many had to
contend with their own feelings of guilt (over surviving, over killing) and
shame (over losing the war, over taking part in morally questionable actions,
over discovering a darker, more violent self). Some had delayed reactions to the
horror they'd witnessed, while others found themselves reliving the awful events
in vivid flashbacks.

Much of this, of course, is familiar from news reports, and there are portions
of ''Indian Country'' where Mr. Caputo's hero, Christian Starkmann, seems more
like a representative man - a neatly packaged set of problems - than like a
character with a psychology and history of his own. The people in his past -
including the cold, judgmental father he defied by going off to war and the best
friend he joined by signing up - are too sketchily defined to ever become more
than broad, Freudian symbols, and the people in his present can seem similarly
opaque.

His wife, June, for instance, initially strikes us as a stereotyped collection
of male fantasies - she's a wide-hipped earth mother with a past, one of those
strong, capable women who have had a lot of affairs and who have learned in the
process to survive. She has dreams about being raped by bear, and later shoots
and kills one - an act that makes her feel guilty and unfeminine. ''A good meal
and a good night of love,'' writes Mr. Caputo, ''were all she needed to feel
whole and harmonious.''

As ''Indian Country'' progresses, however, June slowly evolves into a more and
more sympathetic human being. Having worked hard to set his story in motion, Mr.
Caputo seems to gain confidence, and he begins to invest his people - especially
June -with a depth and complexity of emotion. We are made to appreciate June's
devotion to Chris - and also to understand the pain she suffers as she watches
him grow increasingly distant. Always a man of few words (one friend calls him
''the reincarnation of Gary Cooper''), he rapidly becomes monosyllabic as well
as short-tempered, defensive and paranoid.

Years after returning from Vietnam, Chris now finds that ordinary things can
trigger war memories in his mind: the sound of water beating against the shower
curtain reminds him of flying shrapnel, a Billy Joel song on the jukebox
(''Goodnight Saigon'') serves to blur ''the distinction between remembered
experience and immediate event.'' He begins driving a ridiculously circuitous
route to work to avoid passing a Vietnam memorial, and he starts referring to
certain fast-food joints (Burger King, McDonald's, Wendy's, etc.) as ''neutral
territory.'' He takes to carrying a loaded gun around with him, surrounds the
house with barbed wire and builds a small fort.

Just what is Chris afraid of? For one thing, he's begun to suspect that a
colleague in the lumber business has been scheming to have him fired -his offer
of a possible fellowship seems especially suspicious. For another, he's afraid
that a local pyschologist knows about the nervous breakdown he had during the
war -and wants to have him committed. ''Perhaps, now, Eckhardt was trying to
trick him into confessing that he'd come close to shooting a man tonight,'' Mr.
Caputo writes. ''Starkmann remembered that there was a big V.A. hopsital in
Ironwood. Did the small blond man have the authority to bring him in for an
examination? He would leap out of the car and live like an animal in the woods
before he again submitted to the humiliations he'd suffered in the hospital in
Nam.''

Cutting back and forth between Chris's memories of the war - recreated with
frightening, dreamlike power - and his current paranoia, Mr. Caputo does a
brilliant job of communicating his increasingly crazed state of mind. We feel
his panic, and we also feel June's growing sense of danger. There's an urgency
to Mr. Caputo's writing in the final half of this novel, and it makes us share
both June's fear of and sympathy for her husband, who has precipitately become a
violent stranger.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Philip Caputo (Lawson Little)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              221 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Medical Negligence Needs a U. S. Study

BYLINE: By Andrew Stein; Andrew Stein is president of the New York City Council.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 766 words


Every year hundreds of thousands of Americans die or are maimed because of the
incompetence or negligence of members of the medical profession -more than were
killed or wounded in any year of the Vietnam War. That makes medical negligence
one of the nation's worst public health menaces.

Yet the medical profession has been notably reluctant to recognize the gravity
of the issue, and the policing efforts of the 50 states remain inadequate and
uncoordinated. The time is long overdue for the establishment of a Presidential
commission on this deadly medical problem.

The commission should be given adequate resources to study the extent and causes
of medical negligence and to alert the public to its dangers.

Most important, the commission's mandate should be to recommend reforms in the
administration of hospitals, in doctor training and in professional discipline.
It ought to examine the role of criminal law in dealing with cases of gross
negligence.

The medical profession has known for a long time that it has a problem. In the
mid-1970's, the California Medical Association and the California Hospital
Association jointly commissioned a landmark study of negligent hospital care
throughout the state. Researchers examined a sample of 20,000 hospital records
and found that 1 of every 20 admissions resulted in an injury caused by medical
treatment. They concluded further that 17 percent of those injuries, or one out
of every 126 hospital admissions, were caused by legally provable negligence.
Finally, 1 out of 4 of those negligent injuries resulted in death.

The researchers found that in California in one year alone negligent medical
care in hospitals caused injuries to approximately 24,000 people - of whom 6,000
died and 1,000 were permanently disabled.

Extrapolating from the California study, other responsible medical researchers
arrived at estimates of 260,000 to 300,000 injuries and deaths in hospitals in
the United States every year arising from negligence. (These numbers, it should
be noted, do not take into account the additional damage done to patients as a
result of negligence in doctors' offices.) It might have been expected that the
study would stimulate further research on possible measures to reduce the risk.
Yet the medical profession has appeared to spend more energy obfuscating the
problem than trying to solve it. Despite the billions of dollars spent on
medical research in the last decade, not a single national or statewide study
similar to the one in California has been conducted. One can only wonder at the
profession's hesitancy.

Even as it disdained scientific study of the issue, the medical establishment
persisted in shrugging off every new disclosure of negligent injuries or deaths
as either ''anecdotal'' or unrepresentative of the medical system as a whole.

An example of this hidebound response followed the release of a New York State
health department report that found that 50 of 1,300 deaths in New York City
hospitals studied by investigators could be attributed to negligent care.
Hospital spokesmen said only that the deaths were aberrational, and criticized
the ''unfair negative publicity,'' which they said undermined public confidence
in their institutions.

Of course, such irresponsible attitudes do not characterize the entire medical
profession. Credit is due, for example, to doctors, such as Arnold Relman,
editor of the New England Journal of Medicine, who have prodded the profession
to do more about negligent and incompetent doctors.

Some state health departments and medical licensing boards have recently begun
to strengthen policing efforts. In New York, the state health commissioner,
David Axelrod, has taken bold initiatives to protect the public from negligence.
It is heartening that some New York hospitals have voluntarily adopted new
standards requiring their emergency rooms to be staffed around the clock by
fully accredited senior doctors.

Nevertheless, much of the medical profession, and many state agencies
responsible for policing it, remain stubbornly resistant to change. Too often,
slight reforms are accomplished only after years of public pressure, or when
medical institutions are embarrassed by bad publicity. Left alone, the medical
profession will deal with the problems behind closed doors - which is to say
that it won't be dealt with at all.

That is why a Presidential commission remains an imperative. By finally making
medical negligence a national priority, the commission could help doctors
accomplish their chosen mission of saving lives and preventing injury.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              222 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BUS DRIVER AND CELLIST, MAN IS HARVARD BOUND

BYLINE: By DEIRDRE CARMODY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 34, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 717 words


Stephen James, a 34-year-old Bronx bus driver and high school dropout, will
graduate summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa next week from Lehman College with
either a 3.99 or a perfect 4.0 average (depending on final marks).

In the fall he will realize a dream and enter the Ph.D. program in American
literature at Harvard.

Mr. James, a tall, lanky, smiling man, is also a cellist, a cyclist (75 miles a
day when he was in training), a former basketball star and a cross-country
runner. He has been a professional carpenter and construction worker. He plays
the organ, the piano and the guitar and has devoted years to studying the
ancient Chinese martial arts.

''I've always said I'll do what I really want to do,'' he said the other day.
''I've never really considered not being able to do it.''

Mr. James was also accepted in the Ph.D. program at the Graduate School of Arts
and Sciences at Columbia. When Harvard heard that he had not applied there
because he could afford only one application fee, it waived its $40 fee and
awarded him a full six-year fellowship.

A Familiar Figure

Mr. James, who drives the express run betweeen Co-Op City and Manhattan, is a
familiar figure in his bus driver's uniform on the Lehman campus. Driving
express buses, he said, has its advantages. The buses usually go in full and
return empty, and as soon as the last passenger leaves the bus, Mr. James puts
on his earphones and listens to tapes he has made of his instructors in class or
dictates a term paper into his tape recorder.

The schedule was grueling. On a typical day Mr. James reported to work at 6:30
A.M., drove the bus into Manhattan and back and arrived at Lehman in the Bedford
Park section of the Bronx by 10 A.M. He stayed on campus until after 3 P.M. and
then made the afternoon bus run. Normally he got home around 7 P.M., spent time
with his wife and 4-year-old son, Elliot, and then studied until 2 A.M. or
later. Some nights he never went to bed at all.

On weekends he set aside time for his two older children, Joy, 12, and Robert,
9, who live nearby with their mother in the eastern Bronx.

Buddhism and the Bronx

Mr. James's conversation is filled with references to Freud, Kant, Walt Whitman,
Chinese philosophy, Yeats, Thoreau, the Greeks, Buddhism and Egyptian
literature, with an occasional digression on the historical tensions between
Norwegians and Swedes, the Vietnam War, the ethnic experience in America and the
joys of teaching algebraic concepts to a 4-year-old.

Mr. James grew up in the South Bronx in a small apartment over a storefront
where he lived with his mother and his grandparents. His mother, who worked for
the city as a clerk, loved to read and was an avid book club joiner.

''There were enormous amounts of books scattered around the house -and not
enough money to fix the TV,'' he said.

He attended De Witt Clinton High School, where, he said, there were no controls
over the student body. He signed in at school every morning, but finding classes
a waste of time, he rarely went to class. Instead he joined the student
orchestra and divided his time between playing the cello and taking gymnastics.
In the middle of 11th grade, he dropped out of school.

Influence of Eastern Religions

Around this time he began going to see Bruce Lee films and became fascinated
with the martial arts. To this day he spends at least 20 minutes in the morning,
and some time at night if possible, on tai chi, an ancient Chinese exercise done
in slow motion for relaxation and to promote circulation in the body. He has
studied Eastern religions, especially Buddhism, which he says have had a
profound influence on his life.

''I think it's not a reasonable expectation to do as I've done, but what they
should get from this is that it is possible to do at all levels as well as they
possibly can,'' he said. ''There are other things and other models. A carpenter
or a bus driver is as good a model as a Harvard Ph.D.''

Then the subject of whether his final mark would be a 3.99 or a 4.0 came up.
''It really makes no difference as far as I'm concerned although I hope it will
end up being a 3.99'' he said. ''I don't want what I've done to be seen as
unattainable, and I think a 3.99 is not considered unattainable, whereas a
perfect score is.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              223 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NIXON'S NOTE TELL OF AN EARLY DISTRUST OF THE PRESS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 24, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 679 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 30


Richard M. Nixon regarded most reporters as enemies long before the Watergate
scandal engulfed his Presidency and ordered his aides to treat them with
contempt.

Mr. Nixon's personal files, opened to the public on Thursday by the National
Archives, show that he frequently brooded about his perceived problems with the
press and wrote memorandum after memorandum to his chief of staff, H. R.
Haldeman, and his press secretary, Ron Ziegler, demanding retribution for some
reporters.

In a memorandum to Mr. Haldeman on April 14, 1972, Mr Nixon assailed a Time
magazine columnist, Hugh Sidey, and a columnist for The New Republic magazine,
John Osborne.

''What we have to realize,'' Mr. Nixon wrote, ''is the cold fact that both Sidey
and Osborne are totally against us. They are not honest reporters.''

Mr. Nixon said both men had spoken of him ''in the most vicious derogatory
terms'' in ''the place where you really find out what the people think - the
Georgetown cocktail parties.''

He Orders Them 'Cut Off'

''The evidence on this is absolutely conclusive,'' he said. ''You do not need to
ask me where I got it.''

Mr. Nixon went on to order that Mr. Sidey and Mr. Osborne ''be cut off in as
effective a way as possible,'' adding, ''This means that their calls simply
don't get returned, etc.''

Mr. Sidey said Thursday that he was unaware of any such Presidential edict at
the time, adding: ''I am somewhat surprised by the intensity and the extent of
that. I don't recall anything that bitter either in terms of the staff or with
Nixon.'' Mr. Osborne is dead.

On June 2, 1971, Mr. Nixon wrote to Mr. Haldeman that he had taken Mr. Ziegler's
advice and played the ''good sport'' at the annual White House Correspondents
Dinner, only to find at his next news conference: ''The reporters were
considerably more bad-mannered and vicious than usual. This bears out my theory
that treating them with considerably more contempt is in the long run a more
productive policy.''

Less than two weeks later, Mr. Nixon ordered Mr. Haldeman to see to it that
''under absolutely no circumstances is anyone on the White House staff, on any
subject, to respond to an inquiry from The New York Times unless and until I
give express permission - and I do not expect to give such permission in the
foreseeable future.''

Mr. Nixon, who was angered by The Times's publication of the Pentagon papers,
the secret Government history of the Vietnam War, said, ''This is a delicate
matter for you to handle, and all the orders, of course, must be given orally.''


'Time for All-Out Attack'

On March 2, 1970, Mr. Nixon told Mr. Haldeman: ''The headlines in both The
Washington Post and New York Times are really so ridiculous that if our boy
scouts don't react to this I am going to be very disappointed. It is time for an
all-out, slam-bang attack on the fact that the news people are overwhelmingly
for Muskie, Kennedy, any liberal position.''

He was referring to Senator Edmund S. Muskie of Maine and Senator Edward M.
Kennedy of Massachusetts.

''Now I want this done.'' Nixon wrote. ''I want a game plan on my desk.'' Two
months earlier, Mr. Nixon dictated a long memorandum for circulation to his
senior staff members in which he estimated that more than 65 percent of the
press corps ''begin with a strong negative attitude'' about his Presidency.

''They cannot be won by handling their logistics well or by treating them
'fairly,' '' Mr. Nixon said. ''We should never react to this group and should
treat them with the courteous, cool contempt which has been my policy over the
last few years.''

Mr. Ziegler and Mr. Haldeman were called to task by Mr. Nixon in January 1973
after the President received a birthday greeting from Senator Harry F. Byrd Jr.
of Virginia in which the Senator mentioned in passing that he did not believe an
interview by Saul Pett of The Associated Press had captured ''the warmth of the
real Nixon.''

Mr. Nixon promptly scrawled a note to Mr. Ziegler and Mr. Haldeman: ''If the
piece was a hatchet job, why was the interview granted?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              224 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MUSIC: FOLK SONGS FROM VIETNAM

BYLINE: By ROBERT PALMER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 53, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 280 words


PHONG NGUYEN, the Vietnamese ethnomusicologist, instrumentalist and singer,
noted during the World Music Institute's concert of Vietnamese music on Friday
that he had collected 42 different folk songs titled ''Song of The Black
Horse.'' He was sorry, he added with a smile, that he could not play them all.
The one he did play had a broad, arching melody, which he sang with a wealth of
delicately quavering microtonal variations, accompanying himself on a
two-stringed lute that delicately shadowed his vocal lines.

And that was the way the concert went. The introductions to and commentaries on
the material were scholarly, almost to a fault. The music was different, neither
dry nor academic, with a fresh, sunny lyricism that made listening a pleasure
even when the melodic material emphasized intervals far removed from Western
tuning practices.

Phong Nguyen and Kim Oanh offered shimmering improvisations and folk song
expositions on slightly different models of the dan tranh, a plucked zither that
customarily has 17 strings. The music swirled with harp-like glissandos, which
advanced and receded against the principal melodies of the pieces with a
flowing, wave-like motion.

The evening's most impressive performances were by Hoang Oanh, who was popular
throughout Vietnam in the mid-1950's for her interpretations of traditional
music and poetry. Her voice rippled like distant laughter, she displayed a
luminous upper register and rich middle range, and her intonation was
impeccable. Her performance of ''Ly Tinh Tang,'' a traditional melody from Hue,
was remarkable for its microtonal subtleties and graceful negotiations of an
extremely convoluted melody line.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              225 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EXPLORING THE KINGDOM OF AIDS

BYLINE: By PETER DAVIS; Peter Davis is the author of ''Hometown'' and, most
recently, ''Where Is Nicaragua?''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4588 words


I SPENT A MONTH recently in the imaginary kingdom of AIDS, tracking what experts
say is the designated future of the disease: its coming assault upon the
heterosexual community. What I was looking at was the behavior of heterosexuals
surrounded by the same storm warnings yet acting in a wide variety of ways.

Since it is primarily contracted through sex and the use of drugs, two
activities associated with both desire and free will, acquired immune deficiency
syndrome tests us as no disease ever has. It is the first plague in the history
of mankind whose regulation is entirely dependent upon our knowing behavior.

Threatened or unthreatened by the disease, we find ourselves displayed with
embarrassing clarity in the searchlight AIDS throws on our attitudes and
feelings. As a married man with three sons and a daughter, I thought I was
open-minded, accepting of diversity, hopeful the near future would bring a cure
for something I didn't understand. I discovered that where AIDS is concerned, I
was insatiably curious sexually, morally ambivalent, and politically angry.

Meanwhile, in the imaginary AIDS kingdom, I found moods ranging from panic to
defiance to a kind of jubilant apathy. And over everything hung a blanket of
confusion, the heavy fog in the AIDS kingdom that will not blow away. Why would
people given the same facts and information and theories respond so differently?

TWO GLAMOROUS women spoke heatedly, intimately. They are very close to each
other and remarkably alike, both bicoastal, both fashionably dressed. At first
glance, the principal difference between them is age; a quarter-century ago the
older one had given birth to the younger.

''How long have you known him?'' the mother asked.

''Not long,'' the daughter answered. ''Maybe two months.''

''Astonishing. What possesses you to get married so soon?''

''Mother, he'll make a perfect first husband.''

''What? Aren't you planning for the rest of your life here?''

''Maybe he'll outgrow me, maybe I'll outgrow him, but at the moment this seems a
very constructive move, Mother.''

'' 'A very constructive move,' '' the mother mimicked. ''The sheer pragmatism
stuns me. Come on, now, why are you doing this?''

''Frankly, Mother, I don't want to stay in the singles stream. I'm afraid I
might get AIDS.''

As the daughter sizes up her future, she is better off throwing part of her life
away on someone she does not love rather than throwing her entire life away on
someone else she may sleep with but also not love. If a chance rendezvous can be
fatal, the relationship between sex and death, anciently understood in art and
ritual, is restored.

In the kingdom of AIDS, a penis itself, often likened to a sword in folk tales,
again becomes a deadly weapon. This young woman tries to protect herself by a
hasty marriage. Another, an elegant divorced woman of 41, celebrated for her
beauty and passion, swore herself to celibacy when her relationship with a
financier broke up six months ago. ''It is agony,'' she said, ''but I may never
share my bed again with anyone.''

Watching the fear rise among many whose behavior is not generally considered to
be risky - that is, among heterosexual men who do not use drugs, and among women
who are neither drug users nor involved with bisexual men - I have been struck
by a fear of my own: that the panic may so far outstrip the disease as to be
ludicrous. The danger is that when the panic is finally recognized as silly,
sensible precaution will disappear along with unreasonable fear.

Is the panic justified? In interviews with more than 100 New Yorkers, many of
whom had friends with AIDS, I have not heard of a single case where the disease
was passed sexually by one non-drug-using, untransfused heterosexual to another.
Most Americans who will have AIDS in 1991 are among the estimated 1.5 million
already infected with the virus, carrying around a live epidemiological bullet
in their sexual organs and bloodstreams. More than 90 percent of the 35,000 AIDS
victims in the United States thus far have been men.

On the other hand - AIDS has more hands than an orgy - the HIV virus does take
all that time to incubate, up to five years, perhaps longer. As in Schnitzler's
play, ''La Ronde,'' a man sleeps with a woman who sleeps with another man who
sleeps with another woman. . . . Somewhere in that circle may be a bisexual or
an intravenous drug user.

Ratios can shift. In central Africa, the disease has spread primarily among
heterosexuals, and slightly more women than men have it. Who can say
conclusively the panic is not justified? And with AIDS, expectation is all:
since our perception of the threat presumably determines our behavior, perhaps
only an exaggerated depiction of the danger AIDS now poses for heterosexuals
will prevent that worst-case scenario from ultimately becoming the reality. It
seems paradoxical; but the result is we are being warned that we are all bombs,
and some of our fuses have been lighted. A 38-YEAR-OLD WOMAN IN publishing broke
off a lengthy relationship last summer. For months she didn't allow herself to
have a date. Finally, her old boyfriend from college, freshly divorced in
Darien, Conn., asked to take her to dinner.

''He's still a drip,'' she told me, ''but it was safe psychologically for me so
I went. Well, I brought him back to the apartment and we made love. Then we're
lying there, you know, right afterward, and he says to me, 'You're friends with
a lot of people in show business, aren't you?' Darien! It was my own fault.

''So I say, 'I guess I know a few.' Whereupon he props himself up rather
starchily on one elbow and says, 'I suppose I'd better start to worry about AIDS
now, hadn't I?' Right after making love! There I'd been, flattered he wanted me
after all these years, and suddenly he sees me as his executioner. Sex is always
so fraught with possibilities for humiliation anyway. Now we're being taught
that it's also Russian roulette.''

Fear, guilt, hostility, violent fantasies, rage, the life impulse or a death
wish - the dynamics of people's responses to AIDS often mirror their feelings
about sex. For those scared by sex, AIDS is the penalty for feeling sexual in
the first place. Sex is associated with aggression, and aggression must be
punished. What more effective punishment than AIDS itself, the ultimate
castration?

A divorced 40-year-old man told me he would ''never again sleep with a woman I
haven't checked out thoroughly.'' He might have been talking about a new car.
Men and women are acting more afraid of one another than ever before in this
century. The ease with which people began to treat each other during the 1960's
is vanishing. Men and women talk of one another almost as if two separate races
are involved.

''I'm your total yuppie profile, from the Ivy League education to the job to the
expectations,'' said a young woman I'll call Amy Flagg, a show business
executive not yet out of her 20's. The spate of articles about AIDS had
literally iced the passions of Amy and her friends.

''Yesterday I was at lunch with another woman executive and two young TV writers
we'd like to do business with,'' she continued. ''Everybody had read at least
two AIDS cover stories and was petrified. What would a few months ago have been
a slightly flirtatious occasion combined with business instead became this sober
deadly consideration of something no one wanted to talk about yet couldn't stop
thinking about.

''You find out someone had a drug problem three years ago, forget it. A
bisexual, forget it, forget it, forget it. Even if a guy you know is straight
but is kind of promiscuous, forget it. The people I know aren't yet taking the,
uh, precautions when they do have sex. I guess we're all going to start soon.
God, I wish I could have just one lunch in the Russian Tea Room where we talk
about something else besides AIDS. Herpes, maybe.''

Samantha Ellis, as I'll call a 31-year-old investment banker noted among her
friends for both her independence and abandon, was furious, and herpes was part
of the reason. ''The medical profession cried wolf on herpes, and the
journalists tagged right along,'' she said. ''It turned out to be a hoax. Why
should we believe any of you now? Frankly, I'm someone who adores lovemaking. I
think the enjoyment of one's sexuality is such a precious gift and attribute -
like a flower blooming - that I bitterly resent anyone attempting to crush it.''

I asked whether Samantha has changed the way she lives.

''The stories had no effect on me until recently,'' she said. ''I just can't
handle the idea of prophylactics. I'd have no hesitancy about buying them myself
but I'd find it difficult to ask someone to actually use them.''

The injunction not to ''exchange bodily fluids'' not only denies a fundamental
aspect of intercourse - since sex by definition involves the sharing of selves -
but it also means that a newly formed couple must pause to negotiate a delicate
pathway around infection: ''Do you mind using a condom?'' ''Oh, ah, do you
happen to have any with you?'' ''Have you ever been with an IV drug user?''

''I'm a lot more careful now about sleeping with someone I think is bisexual,''
says Samantha. ''This is, in a way, a tyranny, part of the inexorable return to
conservatism. It's so antithetical to intermingling, so antidemocratic, it
destroys the integrity and openness achieved by the sexual revolution. People
are saying you should sleep only with your own kind.''

Last year, on a business trip to the Midwest, Samantha met a stagehand she
liked. She brought him back to New York for a while. ''We had a lot of fun and
although this wasn't the point, we broadened each other's horizons. He didn't
have a habit, but occasionally he shot drugs into his arm. If I met him today I
wouldn't sleep with him. We never would have had the relationship. I resent so
much what's happening.''

FOR THE LARGER community, as for Samantha Ellis, the holiday is over. Doctor's
orders. Whether the heterosexual citizenry is following the helpful hints to
safer sex and longer life, hints packaged like scouting handbooks on how to tie
different kinds of knots, few are unaware of a change in circumstance. People
who felt guilty about sex or about not enjoying it as much as they had been told
in the previous two decades that they should, have just quit. They have the
perfect excuse. It used to be good for you, like aerobics and Brussels sprouts;
goodbye to all that because now it is dangerous to your health, like smoking and
hang gliding.

The baby boom's babies are supposed to turn back the clock, never easy when the
hands are racing forward as they tend to do at 21. The urges of youthful
rebellion - young people pushing out against the limits set by their parents -
are now directed to the ''sensible'' instead of the experimental. The
45-year-old former radicals are now expected to teach their children how to be
reactionary.

''What a frightful time to be young!'' said a society lady, known for her
cosmopolitan views but celibate since she stopped living with someone last
summer. ''The new caring man and independent woman we heard so much about, the
lovers keeping their own apartments just in case, uh, something interesting
turns up while you're away, dear, a little tentative shall we say, exploration,
all that is out, out, out.

''Two years ago, when our gay friends were dying, we thought real men not only
didn't eat quiche, they didn't get AIDS. Now the campaign is on among us, and we
have all these grand New York matrons showing up at benefits puckering their
lips to lecture gravely that it won't be possible to have anal intercourse
anymore, it's passe, my dear, ca ne se fait plus, as though mankind is being
robbed of one of the wonders of the world, the Pyramids are collapsing perhaps.

''As for our friends the gays, they are not so very gay anymore, my dear, nor so
wild with abandon, nor leading the charge anymore against established sexual
practices. They opened the door and rushed through. And they felt the earliest
warning signal.''

I DECIDED TO LOOK DEEPER, into the trenches of the imaginary AIDS kingdom, the
bars where young people go to make new acquaintances. Dorrian's Red Hand on
Second Avenue has had a reputation as an easy place to find a pick-up. (It
became notorious one night last summer when Jennifer Dawn Levin met Robert E.
Chambers Jr. there, and the two left for a sexual encounter in Central Park that
ended in Miss Levin's death.) Preppies and junior yuppies still swagger around
in Dorrian's as if they owned the sexual turf, but according to at least a dozen
customers there is far less action than there was a year ago.

''I won't sleep with anyone unless I really, really know him,'' said a slender
young woman wearing huge gold earrings and a long black sweater-dress. A young
man in a crew-neck sweater leaned against the bar, watching her. ''AIDS has me
scared to death,'' she added. ''I always thought I could do anything; now I know
I can't.'' I asked how she knew. ''The media hype got me. I guess I changed
about a year and a half ago.''

''You didn't change that long ago,'' said the man in the crew-necked sweater.

''O.K.,'' said the woman with the gold earrings, ''but on my last experience I
used a condom.'' ''I remember.'' ''Next time bring your own, moron.''

Three 24-year-old men - call them Tom, Dick and Harry - all described themselves
as extremely worried about AIDS. Two years out of college, Tom is a
building-supply salesman hoping to become a veterinarian, Dick is a real-estate
salesman, and Harry a medical student.

Of the three, only Tom wore a condom the last time he had sex, which was with a
prostitute who made him use one. Harry the medical student carries condoms with
him all the time; he just doesn't always use them. Dick had bought some for the
first time a few weeks earlier. He had met a girl he knew he was going to sleep
with on the second date, so he made the purchase. But his last previous
experience before I met him was with an old girlfriend.

''I figured I was safe so I didn't use a rubber,'' Dick said. ''What bothers me
is this incubation period, because two, three and four years ago I was having
sex with girls I didn't know at all.''

''As worried as I am,'' he went on, ''I'm a young single male, and I'm going to
be meeting people and picking them up. I'll just have to be more careful.''

''The trouble with condoms,'' Tom said, ''they take the pleasure out.''

''They take some of the pleasure out, but they beat dying,'' Dick said. ''You
use a condom at first, then later you can forget about them.''

''Right,'' said Harry, ''you get serious, you throw away your rubbers.''

At a table nearby, three 23-year-old women in advertising - let them be Alice,
Betty and Carol - worried about stopping AIDS without stopping sex. They said
Dorrian's had changed and they had changed. When 3 A.M. rolled around they no
longer saw people leaving with somebody different every night.

''One good thing about AIDS is it kind of wakes everybody up,'' Alice said.
''It's like, 'Knock, knock in there, anybody home? Time to take care of your
life, you know.' ''

''Really,'' Betty said. ''I can't believe condoms are the final answer though. I
haven't used a rubber in eight years, not since my first experience when I was
15. Believe me, I don't want to go through that again.''

''I used one once,'' Alice said, ''but I didn't like it.''

''It's like there's something between you and him, some kind of barrier,'' Carol
said. ''We all believe in precautions, but we don't necessarily take them,''
Carol said. ''Like I know cigarettes are harmful and have killed a lot more
people than AIDS, but I haven't stopped smoking them.''

WHAT WILL MAKE people really ''take precautions?'' And what is the degree of
danger for heterosexuals anyway?

I asked Dr. Mervyn F. Silverman, the former public health director for San
Francisco and now president of the American Foundation for AIDS Research, what
level of concern he thought was appropriate among heterosexuals.

''Today the amount of virus floating around available to heterosexuals is
small,'' he said, ''but the paradox is we can't let ourselves think that way,
because if we operate on that premise we'll wake up one day with an overwhelming
problem. We walk a tightrope between Chicken-Little-the-sky-is-falling and
apathy. Neither one is helpful.'' But aren't the specialists inevitably
spreading not merely precaution but panic when they project a huge AIDS
population in the near future?

''Probably,'' Dr. Silverman said, ''but just because there's no reason to panic
doesn't mean there's no reason to be careful. What I want most is for someone to
say to me five years from now, 'You were all wet. AIDS never made a dent in the
heterosexual community.' It'll mean we did our job.''

I thought of Dr. Silverman's paradox as I watched the scene in P.J. Clarke's.
Though not a singles bar, Clarke's appeals to many upscale New Yorkers with a
variety of tastes.

''Hey, I'm not going with anyone right now, but condoms are not for me,'' said
Chuck, a 25-year-old stockbroker, to his friend, Steve. ''If I do meet someone,
I'll probably end up just winging it.''

''Me too,'' said Steve, who is 24. ''I wing it.''

''I've thought about condoms,'' said Mariel, a 20-year-old college student,
''but I always end up winging it myself.''

Kevin, a 24-year-old insurance salesman who was the only black person in the
group, let his friends finish before saying anything. ''The war stories have got
to me,'' he said. ''I know a woman who was once married to an addict. She left
him six years ago, but she's dying now. A gay man I used to work with is already
dead. I've been celibate for six months because of AIDS. I'm waiting until I
meet someone I'm really interested in. Then I'll have to date for a while. Then
I'll use a condom.''

What had really gotten to Kevin, what had really made him change his behavior,
as he made clear, was not press coverage but personal experience. With AIDS
killing two of his friends, he was taking no chances.

''Hey, listen,'' Chuck said, motioning for another round of beers, ''sex is the
lifeblood of the nation. I say go for it, ha ha.''

FREQUENTLY, IN suburban bars even more than in New York City, I heard the remark
that ''we only go out with people we know.'' As Samantha Ellis said, AIDS has
done away with the democratic element that the 60's introduced to sex. ''Safe
sex'' did not mean only condoms and spermicides; it also meant staying within
one's prescribed circle. The old taboos against outsiders are coming back again
now.

The problem is that ''safe sex'' is a contradiction in terms. The familiar, as
happily married couples know, can be filled with variation and the unexpected,
but if something is entirely and predictably safe, with no element of adventure
or the unknown, it's not very sexy. If, as a number of men and women on Long
Island told me, they now come to public places in prearranged groups and have
resolved to meet new friends only in their churches and synagogues, the choice
of romantic partners is further restricted to members of one's own religion. The
political conservatism that swept the land in the early 1980's is being joined
by its social (and therefore sexual) counterpart.

I saw the politics of AIDS become increasingly polarized as I toured its
kingdom. Essentially, the battle was between those who saw the disease as a
medical problem and those who used it as a moral opportunity. Within the Reagan
Administration, Surgeon General C. Everett Koop was virtually alone in hoping to
treat AIDS as a medical issue. A conservative who strongly opposes abortion, Dr.
Koop has emerged as a champion of instruction for schoolchildren in the
prevention of AIDS, which inevitably involves sex education.

Rejecting Dr. Koop's plea, President Reagan has urged schoolchildren to abstain
from sex as the best method of avoiding AIDS. ''After all,'' he asked. ''when it
comes to preventing AIDS, don't medicine and morality teach the same lesson?''

Well, no. Medicine does not teach abstinence any more than philosophy teaches
happiness. The medical profession looks for ways a disease may spread, can be
prevented, and finally cured; it hardly advises mankind not to engage in
reproductive activity. As for morality, of course, it all depends on whose
morals are being promoted. George Bernard Shaw's would be considerably different
from Billy Graham's, and it is not entirely clear that even President Reagan's
friends would all choose the latter.

The President's Domestic Policy Council has urged educators to ''place sexuality
within the context of marriage'' and pretty much let it go at that. In addition
to being a message that could have been promulgated by the McKinley
Administration, it totally ignores the presence - almost the omnipresence - of
sex among adolescents. The message also implies that sex itself is the cause of
AIDS, and that AIDS may therefore be considered a proper punishment for those
who enjoy sex in an unsanctioned context.

But sex is no more the cause of AIDS than swimming was the cause of polio.
Indiscriminate sex with partners whose behavior is risky constitutes risky
behavior, just as swimming in crowded public pools exposed one to the polio
virus. We were never lectured that swimming needed to be considered in the
context of joining an exclusive pool club; we were told only that the polio
virus could swim around, like us, in pools.

It is not that I have no stronger moral feelings about sexuality than about
swimming, because I do. Sex can be an unstoppable force, a force that can
destroy relationships, if ungoverned, as well as confirm love and create life.
But none of that has anything to do with the prevention of AIDS. To confuse the
prevention of AIDS with the promotion of a specific morality is to defeat both
resoundingly.

TO RAISE YOUNG PEOPLE'S awareness of the AIDS problem, to stop them from
''winging it,'' many schools have begun special programs for their students,
programs that vary widely depending on the school. At the elite Dalton School in
Manhattan, for example, a frequent question from students is: Can you catch AIDS
from French kissing? The standard answer is: It hasn't been proved but why take
the chance.

French kissing is not what they are worried about in the New York City public
schools, an obviously crucial battleground of the AIDS kingdom. What they are
worried about, in addition to AIDS, is needles in veins and babies in
teen-agers. A poster at the back of Maggi Zadek's classroom at John Bowne High
School in Queens shows two crossed arms with sleeves rolled up ready to receive
an injection of heroin. Underneath, it reads: ''AIDS IS DEADLY - Don't Pass the
Spike!''

In her elective course on adolescent sexuality, the peppy Ms. Zadek, a
42-year-old divorced woman who could qualify as any team's head cheerleader in
the big game against AIDS, drilled her 11th- and 12th-grade students on the
disease and how to fight it. She bounced from her desk to the blackboard,
wheeling to face her charges, marching to their desks to insure wakefulness,
joking, always in motion to engage the 27 young minds that had been entrusted to
her. Since Ms. Zadek's principal subject was, after all, sex, there was a live
possibility that she might succeed.

''All right, why are we suddenly so conscious of AIDS - Sabrina?''

''Because it's in the straight community now.''

''Right. Why is AIDS so scary -Shawn?'' ''It's fatal.'' ''I see. Does AIDS kill
- Curtis?''

''No. It breaks down the cells in your immune system to let other diseases kill
you.''

''That's it. You die of opportunistic diseases.''

''Now if we are going to have intercourse, what should we do to stop AIDS -
Jenny?'' ''Use condoms.'' ''Why not the pill? I'll tell you - because condoms
can stop AIDS passing through them. If I'm the man with AIDS, it's in my semen,
and I could pass it to you.''

''Now we've mentioned rough sex,'' Ms. Zadek went on, ''during which capillaries
can be broken, allowing blood and semen to mix. We're not talking about an
annoying herpes rash. We're talking death here. Jason?'' ''We live in our
glands, not our brains.''

''But we can at least use our brains to save our glands. Jason, you don't want
to risk your whole life on a girl at 16.'' ''Seventeen.'' ''All right. Hey,
Jason, be in control of your life.''

The problem for Jason, for Maggi Zadek, and for the rest of us is that AIDS is a
problem with no solution. Education will always help, but it will only help -
not save us. With our multiplicity of orientations, we will continue to take the
same warnings, information and confusions and act differently in response to
them. We are faced with a disease for which there is no preventive vaccine, no
cure, and no sure end but death. Can it be so surprising if our responses to
this disease range from paranoia to denial?

In this respect, the threat of AIDS is not unlike that of nuclear annihilation.
In both cases, the will to act, either personally or collectively, must be
preceded by a perceived and immediate danger. With AIDS, that perception is
rising among us. A generation ago, a President, speaking of the cold war, warned
Americans they were in for a long twilight struggle. He might as well have been
predicting AIDS.

THE ART WORLD GOES ALL-OUT AGAINST AIDS

''IT'S A WORLD-CLASS TRAGEDY AND emergency,'' says the painter Jim Dine,
explaining why he has joined more than 600 visual artists in Art Against AIDS.
''I have children, and I'm about to have a grandchild -that's why.''

This week, artworks ranging in price from $500 to $1.6 million for a canvas from
the estate of Jackson Pollock will go on display and sale in some 70 New York
City galleries to benefit the American Foundation for AIDS Research (AmFAR),
which finances biomedical and educational projects. Founded in 1985 by Dr.
Mathilde Krim of Manhattan and Rock Hudson's physician, Dr. Michael S. Gottlieb
of Los Angeles, AmFAR boasts Elizabeth Taylor as its national chairman.

Art Against AIDS promises to be a citywide social event as well as a
philanthropic one, involving not only the art world but big money, high society
and Hollywood. After a reception at Sotheby's, celebrities, including the art
dealer Leo Castelli and the actor Richard Gere, will host dinners for
contributors. The finale will be a shindig at the nightclub, the Tunnel. ''We
haven't seen this kind of response to anything since the Vietnam war,'' says
Anne Livet, whose cultural consulting firm, Livet Reichard Company Inc., is
helping to organize the affair. Her partner, Stephen Reichard, attributes the
outpouring of concern to the art world's uniquely personal basis. ''It's not
like dance or fashion, which depend on groups,'' Reichard says. ''An artist's
career can be totally one-on-one. You can have a C.E.O. breaking bread with an
artist living in 450 square feet in the East Village.''

At least 50 percent of the first $200,000 of every sale goes to AmFAR. The other
half is split between the artist and the dealer according to their customary
arrangement; profits above $200,000 are divided according to individual
agreements. Many participants are donating all the proceeds. Castelli and his
artists, for instance, have already raised $300,000 for AmFAR, which hopes to
realize between $2 million and $3 million. ''We have friends,'' says Castelli,
''who have died from this sickness.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              226 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON LANGUAGE;
JIMINY CRICKET SINGS AGAIN

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 10, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1176 words


SEVENTEEN YEARS ago, the nation's campuses were erupting with demonstrations
against the war in Vietnam, the best-selling novel was Erich Segal's ''Love
Story,'' the most popular film was ''Patton'' and the top song was Simon and
Garfunkel's ''Bridge Over Troubled Water,'' and throughout the Eastern United
States you could hardly hear yourself think because of the chirping of the male
cicadas.

Like Richard Nixon, the cicadas disappeared and have now made a comeback.
Brood-10 cicadas - this year's variety of the inch-long winged insects wrongly
referred to as ''17-year locusts'' - are already hanging from the fruit trees
and dropping by the millions on cringing suburban passersby.

Cicada, pronounced si-KAY-da, is one of those words you need only once every 17
years, and then you need it badly. It is not a locust, which destructively
chews, whereas the cicada harmlessly sucks (I fully expect bumper stickers
announcing ''Cicadas Suck'' on teen-agers' cars in my neighborhood), and
furthermore this all-too-reliable visitor, with the longest developmental cycle
of any insect, is better than Halley's comet for marking eras.

You need an understanding of this word if you intend to cook out this summer.
Urban guests will say: ''What's all that racket? And should the flames shoot up
that high?'' The asbestos-gloved host, unperturbed by having to wear earmuffs in
June, will reply: ''That's the mating call of the male cicada, and this is the
way I barbecue.''

The Latin name cicada is echoic, which means ''imitative of the sound made by
the thing it denotes,'' sometimes called onomatopoeic by the crowd that prefers
longer Greek derivations. (Greek-speakers will call the same insect the tettix,
because that's the way the call of the cicada or tree cricket sounded to ancient
Athenian suburbanites; that ticking sound hardly resembles the whirring buzz of
the Latin term. Perhaps an unpopular Brood-10 leader once said: ''Tettix, tettix
doesn't attract females for me anymore -what if I try cicada?'') I don't know
why the word is classified in dictionaries as echoic. Today the noise made by
the insect does not sound like si-KAY-da to me; the disturbance squawk sounds
like BRA-A-ACK; the congregational song, BUZZ-AYE-EE, and the mating call I am
reluctant to commit to print lest the unsuspecting reader say it aloud and be
swarmed over.

In newspaper stories and television broadcasts about this visitation, the
definition is likely to be ''a homopterous tree cricket,'' although crickets are
of a different order of insect. People often use a scientific word like
homop-terous without a definition because it sounds pompously technical, as if
to say: ''I looked it up, and that's what it says in the dictionary; don't
bother me with the meaning.''

In the tribe of invertebrate animals called arthropods, there is a class labeled
Insecta, within which we find an order called Homoptera. Entomologists know that
the key element of this name is pter, from the Greek pteron, meaning ''wing'';
this type of winged insect is of an order with sucking mouthparts, which is why
thoughtful teen-agers would affix the bumper stickers to their cars as a useful
mnemonic. (Entomon is Greek for ''insect''; etymos is Greek for ''true,''
particularly ''the literal meaning according to origin.'' An annoyed etymologist
says, ''Buzz off, entomologist,'' when he wants to be onomatopoeically
offensive.) Ready for some heavy erudition to lay on back-seat barbecuers?
Poetry lovers will note that poets prefer the Italian word cicala, pronounced
si-KAH-la, to the Latin cicada. Byron, in ''Don Juan,'' wrote of ''the shrill
cicalas, people of the pine,'' and Tennyson noted, ''At eve a dry cicala sung.''

That was the spelling also used by W. Rhys Roberts in translating one of my
earliest predecessors, a Greek philologist named Demetrius Phalereus, who wrote
his work on prose style, now known as ''De Elocutione,'' around the third
century B.C. I tripped over this book, published in 1902 by Cambridge University
Press, while browsing at Booked Up, a bookstore in Georgetown owned by Larry
McMurtry, the novelist. (Owning a bookstore gives a writer an edge.) Demetrius
was impressed with allegorical language, and found delight in the brevity and
force of messages that took advantage of widely known allusions. One example he
gives is that of the defiant message of the Lacedaemonians to the threatening
Philip, which read simply: ''Dionysius at Corinth.'' As Demetrius puts it, ''If
they had expanded the thought at full length, saying 'Dionysius has been deposed
from his sovereignty and is now a beggarly schoolmaster at Corinth,' the result
would have been a bit of narrative rather than a taunt.''

The Greek rhetorician again used Dionysius the Younger, tyrant of Syracuse, as
an example of the suggestion of irony in what is called ''covert allusion.''
(What has this to do with the damned noisy insects? Stick around.) ''Great lords
and ladies dislike to hear their own faults mentioned,'' writes Demetrius.
''Accordingly, when counseling them to refrain from faults, we shall not speak
in direct terms. We shall, rather, blame some other persons who have acted in
the same way. For example, in addressing the tyrant Dionysius, we shall inveigh
against the tyrant Phalaris and his cruelty. . . . The hearer is admonished
without feeling himself censured.'' In modern times, this covert allusion has
become known as the Adulatory Admonition of the White House Counsel.

Demetrius has a final example of the Lacedaemonians' natural turn toward the
powerful use of language. ''Brevity is, indeed, more forcible and peremptory,''
he writes, ''while prolixity is suited for begging and praying. For this reason,
symbolic expressions are forcible, as resembling brief utterances. We are left
to infer the chief of the meaning from a short statement, as though it were a
sort of riddle.''

He cites the saying of the menacing Dionysius that the despot made before he was
deposed and became a poorly paid teacher of rhetoric in Corinth: ''Your cicalas
shall chirp from the ground.'' Comments Demetrius on that allegorical threat
referring to the crickets that live in the trees: ''The saying 'Your cicalas
shall chirp from the ground' is more forcible in this figurative form than if
the sentence had simply run, 'Your trees shall be hewed down.' ''

Put that on your outdoor grill and let the sparks fly upward. The summer song of
the cicada has been sung for thousands of years. Not only did it provide the
ancients with allegorical ammunition to deride former big shots reduced to
miserable teachers of rhetoric, but also the damned recurrent chirping down the
corridors of time has provided suitable allegorical material for writers on
language.

I commend the ancient word picture to our arms-control negotiators in Geneva;
when the Soviet statements resound with Dionysian rodomontade, come right back
with a cool ''Your cicalas (or cicadas) shall chirp from the ground.'' Let the
decoding computers at the K.G.B. figure that one out.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              227 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW THE ECONOMY SUSTAINS ITS LONG, LACKLUSTER CLIMB

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 851 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE American economy has now been expanding without interruption for four and
one-half years, and is rapidly closing in, the President's chief economic
adviser boasted last week, on a significant longevity record.

''In October of this year, the current expansion will become the longest
peacetime expansion in the postwar period,'' Beryl W. Sprinkel said at a White
House briefing, and ''we found out by checking the data, the longest in the 130
years for which data are available.''

What Mr. Sprinkel was not celebrating was the economy's recent level of
performance. Increases in gross national product of 2.7 percent in 1985 and 2.5
percent in 1986 compare poorly with the best periods since the war in Vietnam,
much less since the Civil War.

The United States, in short, is experiencing growth of extraordinary duration
but lackluster pace. Whatever happened to the rotation of expansions and
contractions that marked the economy since the end of World War II?

The questions and answers that follow explore the situation.

Question. Is the traditional business cycle - boom followed by recession - a
thing of the past?

Answer. Almost certainly not. Despite the best efforts of the Federal Reserve
and other policy makers to keep growth at a healthy clip without raising
inflation, no authority is wise enough -even if there is the political will -to
control a modern industrial economy.

More likely, the current extended period of slow growth is largely the result of
chance, involving countervailing fiscal and monetary forces, and trends in
particular sections of the economy. Inevitably, the economy will either speed up
or slip into recession.

Q. Still, something seems to have changed. The economy has shrugged off such
important developments as a rapid expansion of the money supply, an oil-price
roller-coaster and the biggest overhaul of the tax code in history.

A. Actually, many economists think that the business cycle, though still alive,
may have lost some of its punch. The ''amplitudes'' of the ups and downs,
according to Norman Robertson of Mellon Bank, may be milder because of the rise
of the service sector, which is fairly stable compared to manufacturing.

Such analysts also point to a widespread effort by companies to hold down
inventories by moving more quickly to slow production or cut prices if stocks
begin to pile up.

Q. Nearly five years is a long time without a recession. Are we due for one?

A. Economists are fond of saying that business expansions can die of several
causes, such as overheating that causes inflation and higher interest rates, but
that they never die of simple old age.

It could be several years before the next recession or it could arrive in 1987.
The Government index designed to predict economic turns fell six-tenths of 1
percent in April - the biggest decline in two years - the Commerce Department
reported Friday. But, then, specialists point out that the index of leading
indicators does not adequately reflect the new service economy.

Changing Terms

Q. Wouldn't today's situation have been called a growth recession only a few
years ago?

A. Our standards have changed. Anything less than 3 to 4 percent-a-year growth
used to be unacceptable, because growth slower than that would not reduce
unemployment. Now more economists and politicians, seeing unemployment scarcely
above 6 percent, a seven-year low, and glad not to worry about inflation, think
2 to 3 percent growth is not a bad prospect.

Q. Consumer prices rose only 1.1 percent in 1986. Isn't such low inflation
unusual in the fifth year of expansion?

A. Indeed. But remember that last year's figure was mainly the result of a
collapse in oil prices. With prices rebounding, consumer prices are climbing
faster. In fact, they are expected to rise by up to 5 percent this year after
having held in a steady 3.8 to 4 percent range between 1982 and 1985.

That's not considered an alarming rate. But Federal Reserve chairman Paul A.
Volcker has said that one of the main lessons he has learned is that it is
harder to curb entrenched inflation than you think.

Q. Why is inflation moving above the level that prevailed before the big swing
in oil prices?

A. Mainly, it is thought, because of the decline of the dollar against many key
world currencies. This has made American goods more competitive abroad, but it
also tends to raise the cost of imported goods and the domestic goods that
compete with them. Q. What's likely to happen now?  A. Without some unexpected
breakthrough at the Venice economic summit next week, the best guess is that
we'll get more of the same - modest growth, a continued modest pickup in
inflation and a steady unemployment rate. The United States trade deficit is now
headed down from record levels, helping manufacturing. But consumer spending may
rise only half as much this year as last.

''We see little evidence that the economy is booming and plenty of evidence that
it is still muddling,'' said Edward Yardeni, an economist at Prudential-Bache
Securities. In fact, he added, there's ''some evidence that it is sinking.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              228 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: MAY 31, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 52, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1494 words





                                                      Weeks
This                               Last                  On
Week                               Week                List Fiction

 1                                    2          3           THE HAUNTED MESA,
                                                            by Louis L'Amour.
                                                             (Bantam, $18.95.)
                                                            Unraveling the
                                                            mystery of
                                                             Indian cliff
                                                            dwellers who
                                                            vanished centuries
                                                            ago.

 2                                    1          11          FINE THINGS, by
                                                            Danielle Steel.
                                                            (Delacorte,
                                                             $18.95.) The
                                                            vicissitudes of a
                                                            son of the 60's on
                                                            his
                                                             way to the 80's.

 3                                    3          17          WINDMILLS OF THE
                                                            GODS, by Sidney
                                                            Sheldon.
                                                             (Morrow, $18.95.)
                                                            The nightmarish
                                                            experiences
                                                             that befall a
                                                            woman and her
                                                            family after her
                                                             appointment as
                                                            Ambassador to
                                                            Rumania.

 4                                    4          8           THE LADIES OF
                                                            MISSALONGHI, by
                                                            Colleen
                                                             McCullough.
                                                            (Harper & Row,
                                                            $12.95.) Men may
                                                             dominate but women
                                                            rule in an
                                                            Australian town at
                                                             the turn of the
                                                            century.

 5                                    5          8           TEXASVILLE, by
                                                            Larry McMurtry.
                                                            (Simon &
                                                             Schuster, $18.95.)
                                                            From the 50's to
                                                            the 80's in
                                                             Thalia, Tex. - a
                                                            sequel to ''The
                                                            Last Picture
                                                            Show.''

 6                                    6          18          THE EYES OF THE
                                                            DRAGON, by Stephen
                                                            King.
                                                             (Viking, $18.95.)
                                                            A fairy tale,
                                                            complete with an
                                                            aged
                                                             king, two princes,
                                                            an evil wizard and
                                                            a mouse.

 7                                    7          10          DESTINY, by Sally
                                                            Beauman. (Bantam,
                                                            $19.95.)
                                                             The 30-year
                                                            romance of a couple
                                                            with diverse
                                                             backgrounds and
                                                            ambitions.

 8                                   12          3           HEIRESS, by Janet
                                                            Dailey. (Little,
                                                            Brown, $17.95.)
                                                             Two sisters, one
                                                            legitimate, one
                                                            not, vie for their
                                                             father's affection
                                                            and fortune.

 9                                   10          44          RED STORM RISING,
                                                            by Tom Clancy.
                                                            (Putnam,
                                                             $19.95.) The West
                                                            tries to stave off
                                                            the Russians in
                                                             World War III.

10                                   11          6           NO DEALS, MR.
                                                            BOND, by John
                                                            Gardner.
                                                             (Putnam, $13.95.)
                                                            James Bond returns
                                                            to solve a
                                                             case of ritual
                                                            killings of amazing
                                                            similarity.

11                                  T 9          8           THE THANATOS
                                                            SYNDROME, by Walker
                                                            Percy.
                                                             (Farrar, Straus &
                                                            Giroux, $17.95.)
                                                            The continuing
                                                             battle between
                                                            good and evil, seen
                                                            through a
                                                             psychiatrist's
                                                            adventures in 1996.

12 *                                  8          12          BOLT, by Dick
                                                            Francis. (Putnam,
                                                            $17.95.) The
                                                             jockey-hero of
                                                            ''Break In'' has to
                                                            contend with a
                                                             romantic crisis
                                                            and an arms-selling
                                                            intrigue.

13                                   14          35          THE PRINCE OF
                                                            TIDES, by Pat
                                                            Conroy.
                                                             (Houghton Mifflin,
                                                            $19.95.) Complex
                                                            family
                                                             relationships in
                                                            South Carolina and
                                                            New York City.

14                                   16          5           GUARDIANS OF THE
                                                            WEST, by David
                                                            Eddings.
                                                             (Del
                                                            Rey/Ballantine,
                                                            $16.95.) Kings,
                                                            sorcerers,
                                                             gods and men in a
                                                            7,000-year war in a
                                                            land of
                                                             fantasy.

15 *                                                      1  THE DAMNATION
                                                            GAME, by Clive
                                                            Barker. (Ace/
                                                             Putnam, $18.95.) A
                                                            bodyguard's
                                                            experiences
                                                             protecting a
                                                            reclusive
                                                            industrialist from
                                                            an
                                                             unknown force that
                                                            is after his soul.

                                                      Weeks
This                               Last                  On
Week                               Week                List Nonfiction

 1                                    1          14          COMMUNION, by
                                                            Whitley Strieber.
                                                            (Beech Tree/
                                                             Morrow, $17.95.) A
                                                            professional writer
                                                            tells of the
                                                             visits of
                                                            ''intelligent
                                                            nonhumans'' to his
                                                            home.

 2 *                                  3          5           THE CLOSING OF THE
                                                            AMERICAN MIND, by
                                                             Allan Bloom.
                                                            (Simon & Schuster,
                                                            $18.95.) A critique
                                                             of liberal arts
                                                            education and
                                                            American
                                                             undergraduates
                                                            during the past 25
                                                            years.

 3                                    2          8           LOVE, MEDICINE &
                                                            MIRACLES, by Bernie
                                                            S.
                                                             Siegel. (Harper &
                                                            Row, $15.95.) A
                                                            surgeon stresses
                                                             the importance of
                                                            the patient's mind
                                                            and emotions
                                                             in treating
                                                            serious illness.

 4                                    6          26          A DAY IN THE LIFE
                                                            OF AMERICA.
                                                            (Collins
                                                             Publishers,
                                                            $39.95.) The nation
                                                            on May 2, 1986, as
                                                             recorded in
                                                            pictures by 200
                                                            photojournalists.

 5                                    8          8           HOLD ON, MR.
                                                            PRESIDENT! by Sam
                                                            Donaldson.
                                                             (Random House,
                                                            $17.95.) A White
                                                            House television
                                                             correspondent
                                                            comments on his
                                                            assignment and
                                                             the ways of the
                                                            news media.

 6                                    9          4           GLORY DAYS, by
                                                            Dave Marsh.
                                                            (Pantheon,
                                                             $18.95.) Bruce
                                                            Springsteen in the
                                                            1980's; an account
                                                             written with the
                                                            rock star's
                                                            cooperation.

 7 *                                  5          3           HAMMER, by Armand
                                                            Hammer with Neil
                                                            Lyndon.
                                                             (Putnam, $22.95.)
                                                            The autobiography
                                                            of an
                                                             octogenarian
                                                            industrialist and
                                                            philanthropist.

 8 *                                  7          7           THIS 'N THAT, by
                                                            Bette Davis with
                                                            Michael
                                                             Herskowitz.
                                                            (Putnam, $17.95.)
                                                            The actress's
                                                             memories and
                                                            opinions.

 9                                    4        H 15          THE FITZGERALDS
                                                            AND THE KENNEDYS,
                                                            by
                                                             Doris Kearns
                                                            Goodwin. (Simon &
                                                            Schuster, $22.95.)
                                                             From the Boston
                                                            slums of Irish
                                                            immigrants to the
                                                             White House: three
                                                            generations of a
                                                            family.

10                                   10          22          A SEASON ON THE
                                                            BRINK, by John
                                                            Feinstein.
                                                             (Macmillan,
                                                            $16.95.) A
                                                            chronicle of one
                                                            season
                                                             spent with the
                                                            coach Bob Knight
                                                            and his Indiana
                                                             University
                                                            basketball team.

11 *                                 12          11          BOONE, by T. Boone
                                                            Pickens Jr.
                                                            (Houghton
                                                             Mifflin, $18.95.)
                                                            The autobiography
                                                            of an oilman
                                                             and
                                                            corporation-takeove
                                                            r entrepreneur.

12                                   11          16          THE FATAL SHORE,
                                                            by Robert Hughes.
                                                            (Knopf,
                                                             $24.95.) Australia
                                                            from penal colony
                                                            to its gradual
                                                             emergence as a
                                                            flourishing nation.

13 *                                 13          2           GRACE, by James
                                                            Spada.
                                                            (Dolphin/Doubleday,

 $17.95.) The
private and public
lives of Princess

 Grace of Monaco.

14                                   15          13          INTIMATE PARTNERS,
                                                            by Maggie Scarf.
                                                             (Random House,
                                                            $18.95.) Changing
                                                            patterns in love
                                                             and marriage.

15                                                        2  BE TRUE TO YOUR
                                                            SCHOOL, by Bob
                                                            Greene.
                                                             (Atheneum,
                                                            $18.95.) The year
                                                            1964, as recorded
                                                            in
                                                             the diary of a
                                                            high school
                                                            student.

                                                      Weeks
This                               Last                  On
Week                               Week                List Advice, How-to and
                                                            Miscellaneous

 1                                    3          90          WEBSTER'S NINTH
                                                            NEW COLLEGIATE
                                                             DICTIONARY.
                                                            (Merriam-Webster,
                                                            $14.95.) A
                                                             standard reference
                                                            work in a 1983
                                                            revision.

 2                                    1          34          MEN WHO HATE WOMEN
                                                            & THE WOMEN WHO
                                                             LOVE THEM, by
                                                            Susan Forward and
                                                            Joan Torres.
                                                             (Bantam, $16.95.)
                                                            How to cope with
                                                            overbearing
                                                             men.

 3                                    2          31          THE FRUGAL GOURMET
                                                            COOKS WITH WINE,
                                                             by Jeff Smith.
                                                            (Morrow, $16.95.)
                                                            Recipes to be
                                                             prepared at
                                                            moderate cost.

 4                                                        8  HOW TO BE YOUR OWN
                                                            NUTRITIONIST, by
                                                             Stuart M. Berger.
                                                            (Morrow, $16.95.)
                                                            Ways to create
                                                             a diet regimen for
                                                            health and energy.

 5                                    4          8           BETTY CROCKER'S
                                                            COOKBOOK. (Golden
                                                             Press/Western
                                                            Publishing,
                                                            $19.95.) New,
                                                            revised
                                                             ring-bound
                                                            edition.


 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

MORE DIE OF HEARTBREAK, by Saul Bellow. (Morrow, $17.95.) This brilliant novel
of the relationship between a 35-year-old man and his uncle - with its widening
ripples of betrayal, deceit and self-deceit, of conspiracy, of sex confused with
love, and of a bruising confidence game - demonstrates how you can love someone
without at all loving what he did to you.

A GOOD ENOUGH PARENT: A Book on Child-Rearing, by Bruno Bettelheim. (Knopf,
$18.95.) A leisurely, humanistic approach to children for their elders, in which
both sides are awarded gold stars by an eminent teacher who counsels
understanding above all, closely followed by forbearance.

WALTZING WITH A DICTATOR: The Marcoses and the Making of American Policy, by
Raymond Bonner. (Times Books, $19.95.) This impressive study of five American
Presidents and Ferdinand Marcos emphasizes that the United States' relationship
with the Philippines is like no other - and that is a major problem.

BEST INTENTIONS: The Education and Killing of Edmund Perry, by Robert Sam Anson.
(Random House, $17.95.) A 17-year-old black youth, child of Harlem, honors
graduate of Phillips Exeter Academy, died after being shot by a white policeman
who claimed self-defense. The extremes in his short life and the heritage of
racism in America are the author's baffling subjects.

INDIAN COUNTRY, by Philip Caputo. (Bantam, $18.95.) A Vietnam veteran in
Michigan is trapped by his armor of fear, paranoia and mania in this artful and
clever psychological novel.

PRIVATE DOMAIN, by Paul Taylor. (Knopf, $22.95.) One of the world's great modern
dancers and choreographers creates an extraordinarily vivid and revealing
duet-with-one autobiography that should rank among the definitive accounts of
what it means to be a creative artist in America.

IN THE COUNTRY OF LAST THINGS, by Paul Auster. (Viking, $15.95.) If in the
beginning was the word, then in this linguistic-game novel of a city (New York?)
post-apocalypse, it still will be.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              229 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Expletives Not Deleted

SECTION: Section 7; Page 58, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 411 words



To the Editor:

Ronald Steel lauds Stephen E. Ambrose for having achieved, in ''Nixon'' (review,
April 26), a ''detached and objective biography that seeks neither to accuse nor
to justify.'' In the accompanying interview, Alex Ward records Mr. Ambrose's
admission that he was no admirer of Mr. Nixon. The magnitude of his achievement
can be appreciated more adequately if one takes into account Mr. Ambrose's
position in 1970, when he was the Dwight D. Eisenhower Professor of History at
Kansas State University.

In the fall of 1970, President Nixon ventured out of the White House to a
university campus for the first time since the Cambodian incursion of the
previous spring that led to widespread campus demonstrations and the tragedies
of Kent State and Jackson State universities. The chosen location and occasion
was the Alfred E. Landon Lectures at Kansas State University. A demonstration
against Mr. Nixon and his Vietnam and Cambodia policies was mounted by students
and faculty, both prior to the address and during its delivery in the university
fieldhouse. There was a sizable security force on hand, and precautions were
taken that included a helicopter landing in a field next to the lecture hall,
all in the hope of avoiding any confrontation.

One of the leaders of the anti-Nixon demonstration was Mr. Ambrose, who was
afterward singled out by some faculty for his vociferous heckling, allegedly
including choice unprintable expletives. An attempt was made in the faculty
senate to censure him for conduct unbecoming a member of the faculty. Thanks to
saner members of the senate the charges lapsed. The aftermath, however, was an
exceedingly chilly atmosphere that led Mr. Ambrose to leave the university. In
1974, after the Watergate affair had publicly exposed the President's
involvement - and his own regular use of expletives in his meetings with White
House staff - Mr. Ambrose was quoted in the campus paper as ironically noting
that he had been threatened with censure for the use of language that was both
accurate and part of Mr. Nixon's regular vocabulary while in office.

That he has now produced the first part of a biography acclaimed for its
detachment and objectivity represents a triumph of the historian's craft. One
awaits the next volume with eagerness, since it will deal with that part of Mr.
Nixon's career that Stephen Ambrose himself once so passionately addressed.

HAROLD L. ORBACH
  Manhattan, Kan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              230 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUMMER READING;
BOOKS FOR VACATION READING

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 4718 words


This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas issue of
December 1986. It only suggests high points in the main fields of reader
interest. Books are arranged alphabetically under subject headings. The quoted
comments are from The Book Review.

 Autobiography & Biography

BERLIN DIARIES, 1940-1945. By Marie Vassiltchikov. (Knopf, $19.95.) ''In
addition to providing the best eyewitness account we have of the bombing of
Berlin'' during World War II, this diary by ''a White Russian princess who left
Russia . . . and grew up in Germany . . . throws some interesting light on the
plot'' to overthrow Hitler.

THE CHILDREN AT SANTA CLARA. By Elizabeth Marek. (Elizabeth Sifton/Viking,
$16.95.) This account of working with disturbed adolescents is the ''celebration
by a gentle and unworldly young woman of the terror and the head-clearing shock
of standing close to the uncontrolled flame of the real world.''

A CLIENT CALLED NOAH: A Family Journey Continued. By Josh Greenfeld. (Holt,
$18.95.) This third volume chronicling the life of the author's brain-damaged
son has ''some of the best qualities of fiction'' as it depicts a family that
more than endures, it prevails.

FAITH, SEX, MYSTERY: A Memoir. By Richard Gilman. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
''The story of a Jewish atheist's conversion to Roman Catholicism, and his
leaving the church after eight years'' is ''deserving of all honor for its dark
honesty, its fierce reflective intellectuality.''

FIERCE ATTACHMENTS: A Memoir. By Vivian Gornick. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$15.95.) ''A fine, unflinchingly honest book'' about the author's relationship
with her mother.

THE FITZGERALDS AND THE KENNEDYS. By Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster,
$22.95.) This biography of the Kennedy family by an author with a ''strong and
canny'' voice ''provides genuine surprises.''

HARDBALL: The Education of a Baseball Commissioner. By Bowie Kuhn. (Times Books,
$19.95.) ''A much worthier, more interesting and better-written book than the
autobiographies we're used to getting from baseball's usual memoirists.''

LITTLE WILSON AND BIG GOD. By Anthony Burgess. (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, $22.50.)
This first of a projected two-volume autobiography of the novelist provides
''unfailing literary pleasure . . . many hearty guffaws [and] many illuminations
of wit.''

LOOK HOMEWARD: A Life of Thomas Wolfe. By David Herbert Donald. (Little, Brown,
$24.95.) ''A critical biography [that] is very well formed, and clearly
surpasses its predecessors.''

MEMOIRS OF A FORTUNATE JEW: An Italian Story. By Dan Vittorio Segre. (Adler &
Adler, $16.95.) In 1939 the author ''abandoned Mussolini's Italy for Palestine.
How and why he came to make this move and what awaited him in its aftermath form
the heart of this engaging narrative.'' NIXON: The Education of a Politician
1913-1962. By Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) A ''very thorough
and richly detailed account of Mr. Nixon's first 50 years, up to his
unsuccessful bid for the governorship of California.''

THE ORTON DIARIES. Edited by John Lahr. (Harper & Row, $19.95.) Joe Orton's
diaries show ''how the plays reflected the man, and how both plays and man
excited jealousies that turned lethal.''

OUT OF STEP: An Unquiet Life in the 20th Century. By Sidney Hook. (Harper & Row,
$29.95.) A ''full and vigorously written'' record ''of an intense, embattled but
entirely honorable life.''

PRIVATE DOMAIN. By Paul Taylor. (Knopf, $22.95.) ''One of the world's great
modern dancers and choreographers'' has written an autobiography that ''should
rank among the definitive accounts of what it means to be a creative artist in
America.''

REAGAN'S AMERICA: Innocents at Home. By Garry Wills. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A
''remarkable and evenhanded study of Ronald Reagan.''

SECRECY AND POWER: The Life of J. Edgar Hoover. By Richard Gid Powers. (Free
Press, $27.95.) ''The best biography of Hoover so far.''

SONG IN A WEARY THROAT: An American Pilgrimage. By Pauli Murray. (Harper & Row,
$23.95.) A posthumously published autobiography that provides ''a detailed
chronicle of the mid-20th-century effort to set the civil rights movement in
motion.''

UNDERSTANDING TOSCANINI: How He Became an American Culture-God and Helped Create
a New Audience for Old Music. By Joseph Horowitz. (Knopf, $30.) This ''massively
detailed study . . . provides a compelling argument that 'the world's greatest
conductor' was a largely American success story.''

WILLA CATHER: The Emerging Years. By Sharon O'Brien. (Oxford, $24.95.) ''Without
anger or defensiveness,'' the author has written a female artist's life,
''seldom if ever re-created so imaginatively and, therefore, so accurately.''

 CHILDREN'S BOOKS

IN COAL COUNTRY. By Judith Hendershot. Illustrated by Thomas B. Allen. (Knopf,
$13.95.) An evocative memoir of an Appalachian coal mining company town at a
time not so long ago, with illustrations that are both ''honest and beautiful.''
(Ages 5 to 10) ISAAC CAMPION. By Janni Howker. (Greenwillow, $10.25.) A short,
powerful novel in which a very old man remembers the pivotal events of his
boyhood in Lancashire at the turn of the century. (Ages 10 to 14) THE RIDICULOUS
STORY OF GAMMER GURTON'S NEEDLE. Adapted by David Lloyd. Illustrated by
Charlotte Voake. (Clarkson N. Potter/ Crown, $13.95.) A faithful, imaginative
and droll adaptation of a famous, but essentially unread, 16th-century English
farce. The text is amusing; the illustrations are witty and beautiful. (Ages 3
and up) THE SHADOWMAKER. By Ron Hansen. Illustrated by Margot Tomes. (Harper &
Row, $10.95.) A delightful fable about a wizard who comes to a happy town and
convinces people that their old shadows are dull and that they need fabulous new
ones. (Ages 7 to 11) THE TRICKSTERS. By Margaret Mahy. (Margaret K. McElderry,
$12.95.) A sparkling, stylishly written novel of adolescent awakening, Christmas
holidays in New Zealand and, perhaps, ghosts. (Ages 14 and up)

CRIME

IN LA-LA LAND WE TRUST. By Robert Campbell. (Mysterious Press, $15.95.)
Whistler, a private eye in Los Angeles, investigates a police cover-up in this
occasionally bizarre, often gritty novel by ''one of the most stylish crime
writers in the business.''

LAST JUDGMENT. By Richard Hugo. (Stein & Day, $16.95.) In a ''complicated
story,'' a terrorist armed with a fearsome weapon threatens England. ''This
riveting book should not be ignored.''

THE LITTLE DOG LAUGHED. By Joseph Hansen. (Holt, $15.95.) A homosexual insurance
investigator looks into the death of a famous reporter. ''The writing has the
usual Hansen fluency and sharp characterizations. . . . Mr. Hansen really likes
his characters.''

MOONSPENDER. By Jonathan Gash. (St. Martin's, $14.95.) The scruffy antiques
dealer Lovejoy is back, and he's getting into all kinds of trouble. Mr. Gash
''fleshes out the character in an easygoing, affectionate manner.''

SKINWALKERS. By Tony Hillerman. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) This procedural about
four murders - ''told in sensitive prose that once in a while approaches
poetry'' - features Lieut. Joe Leaphorn and Officer Jim Chee of the Navajo
Tribal Police.

CURRENT AFFAIRS & SOCIAL COMMENT

THE AMERICAN CONNECTION: U.S. Guns, Money, and Influence in Northern Ireland. By
Jack Holland. (Viking, $19.95.) ''Bubbling with cold reality,'' this
journalist's book ''hopes for more intelligent and less romantic American
involvement with Ireland.''

BEYOND OUR MEANS: How America's Long Years of Debt, Deficits and Reckless
Borrowing Now Threaten to Overwhelm Us. By Alfred L. Malabre Jr. (Random House,
$17.95.) ''A sober account of our fiscal and monetary sins that is scarier than
anything by Stephen King.''

THE CLOSING OF THE AMERICAN MIND: How Higher Education Has Failed Democracy and
Impoverished the Souls of Today's Students. By Allan Bloom. (Simon & Schuster,
$18.95.) This ''extraordinary meditation on the fate of liberal education'' has
proved controversial.

DEEP BLACK: Space Espionage and National Security. By William E. Burrows.
(Random House, $19.95.) The ''very revealing'' story of ''how the United States
keeps track of the size and nature of the threat from the other nuclear
superpower.''

ENEMY IN THE PROMISED LAND: An Egyptian Woman's Journey Into Israel. By Sana
Hasan. (Pantheon, $18.95.) ''A fine, provocative study of the Israelis'' that is
also a ''painful personal drama.''

FAST FORWARD: Hollywood, the Japanese, and the Onslaught of the VCR. By James
Lardner. (Norton, $18.95.) ''A complicated but swift account'' of ''a successful
adult toy,'' the video-cassette recorder.

A GOOD ENOUGH PARENT: A Book on Child-Rearing. By Bruno Bettelheim. (Knopf,
$18.95.) In this ''leisurely, humanistic approach'' to raising children, the
author ''brings to his task more than 50 years' experience as a child
psychologist and a surprising fund of memories of what it is like to be an
actual child.''

IRON & SILK. By Mark Salzman. (Random House, $16.95.) A collection of
''compelling'' anecdotes, ''each intended to give a glimpse of a circumstance of
life in China or a trait of the Chinese'' by a young man who spent two years
teaching English to Chinese doctors.

THE NATIONAL DEBT. By Lawrence Malkin. (Holt, $17.95.) A ''thoughtful''
treatment of a ''subject that for too long has been addressed too little and too
late.''

ON BOXING. By Joyce Carol Oates. (Dolphin/ Doubleday, $14.95.) This
''interesting'' book is ''better than its subject''; the author is ''truer to
the sport than most boxers are.''

ON GLORY ROADS: A Pilgrim's Book About Pilgrimage. By Eleanor Munro. (Thames &
Hudson, $17.95.) ''By actually making these [religious] journeys,'' the author
''made herself a genuine pilgrim, an outside member of the religions that still
prevail throughout most of the world.''

RAPE. Edited by Sylvanna Tomaselli and Roy Porter. (Basil Blackwell, $24.95.)
The editors invited scholars to discuss rape ''from the perspective of their own
fields. The result of this laudable enterprise is an informative, if sometimes
frustrating, mix of ideas from law, psychoanalysis, anthropology, classics, art
history, philosophy, sociobiology and popular culture.''

ROCK OF AGES: The Rolling Stone History of Rock & Roll. By Ed Ward, Geoffrey
Stokes and Ken Tucker. (Rolling Stone/ Summit, Cloth, $24.95; Paper, $14.95.)
Each of the book's authors ''demonstrates a deep affection and affinity for the
subject.''

SHADOWS AND WHISPERS: Power Politics Inside the Kremlin From Brezhnev to
Gorbachev. By Dusko Doder. (Random House, $19.95.) ''What gives his book . . .
its compelling quality is [the author's] sheer relish for the Byzantine, the
squalid, the noble, the funny, the tragic and the plainly human.''

STORMING THE MAGIC KINGDOM: Wall Street, the Raiders, and the Battle for Disney.
By John Taylor. (Knopf, $18.95.) This ''tale of raw corporate power . . .
portrays well the diverse cultures and styles of the people and institutions
that govern contemporary show business.''

VISIONS AND NIGHTMARES: America After Reagan. By Robert Lekachman. (Macmillan,
$19.95.) ''A somber realism is the strength'' of this ''provocative,
thoughtful'' book.

WHERE IS NICARAGUA? By Peter Davis. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) The ''simple,
shrewd point'' of this book ''is that we cannot understand the bloody war for
Nicaragua without first understanding the war for Nicaragua going on in our
heads.''

ESSAYS & CRITICISM

JOYCE'S BOOK OF THE DARK: Finnegans Wake. By John Bishop. (University of
Wisconsin, $25.) The author's ''immersive reading of the 'Wake' . . . enriches
manyfold our awareness of those peripheries and fringes that may well be the
book's most vital imaginative areas.''

NOBODY BETTER, BETTER THAN NOBODY. By Ian Frazier. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$14.95.) Five essays from The New Yorker offer ''some wonderfully dry and droll
reporting.''

THE PERPETUAL ORGY: Flaubert and Madame Bovary. By Mario Vargas Llosa.
Translated by Helen Lane. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.) An
''unconventional, shiningly intelligent and fiercely sensible homage to
Flaubert.'' THE PHILOSOPHICAL DISENFRANCHISEMENT OF ART. By Arthur C. Danto.
(Columbia University, $25.) Along with the author's other writings on the
philosophy of art, these essays open ''a new round in the struggle for an
integrated theory of form and meaning in art.''

FICTION

AEGYPT. By John Crowley. (Bantam, $17.95.) This fantasy is ''a dizzying
experience, achieved with unerring security of technique.''

ALL WE NEED OF HELL. By Harry Crews. (Harper & Row, $14.95.) An ''excellent,
edgy'' novel about the ''Sunbelt version'' of ''a familiar world, rotten with
greed, sloth, materialism and mendacity.''

THE AMERICAN AMBASSADOR. By Ward Just. (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.) The author
has done ''his best work, and given us a splendid book that is both thoughtful
and fast-moving.''

ANYWHERE BUT HERE. By Mona Simpson. (Knopf, $18.95.) A ''challenging'' and
''unique'' first novel about ''the most exasperating, insupportable and credible
mother-daughter duo to make their presence felt in recent fiction.''

BEING INVISIBLE. By Thomas Berger. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) There is much in
this novel ''to celebrate - the pleasures of invention, humor, surprise, of Mr.
Berger's enraged, unforgiving view.''

THE CENTURY'S DAUGHTER. By Pat Barker. (Putnam, $16.95.) ''A detailed assault on
the policies of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher,'' this novel ''deals with what
commercial fiction used to be about - real lives.''

CHROMA. By Frederick Barthelme. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) ''Consumer passions
don't seem pasted on in these stories, but rather create a texture and a spooky
land for modern fairy tales.''

COLLECTED STORIES 1948-1986. By Wright Morris. (Harper & Row, $24.95.) In these
stories ''the writer's unique voice . . . belongs to the Middle Western farm
people among whom he spent his early years.'' THE COUNTERLIFE. By Philip Roth.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) This novel ''constitutes a fulfillment of the
tendencies, a successful integration of themes, and the final working through of
obsessions that have previously troubled if not marred'' the author's work.

THE EXILE. By William Kotzwinkle. (Seymour Lawrence/Dutton, $17.95.) The author
''has broken into a new category - Hollywood satirist - but with a topspin all
his own, including stylish shadings of black humor, fantasy and psychological
conjecture.''

FAST LANES. By Jayne Anne Phillips. (Seymour Lawrence/Delacorte, $15.95.) ''A
heterogeneous collection'' of stories that ''moves backward in time and gains
authority as it does so.''

FIVE HUNDRED SCORPIONS. By Shelby Hearon. (Atheneum, $18.95.) This ''bittersweet
domestic comedy about a marriage threatened with dissolution'' is ''thoroughly
realistic . . . yet includes the magical and fantastic.''

FOE. By J. M. Coetzee. (Viking, $15.95.) The author ''has written a superb novel
by reconsidering the events of 'Robinson Crusoe' and presenting them from a new
point of view.''

HIGH GROUND. By John McGahern. (Viking, $15.95.) With this collection of short
stories, the author ''joins a charmed circle of contemporary Irish writers that
includes Edna O'Brien, Seamus Heaney and Thomas Kinsella.''

INDIAN COUNTRY. By Philip Caputo. (Bantam, $18.95.) ''A fine traditional novel
that handles a difficult theme'' - the effects of the Vietnam War on American
veterans - ''both cleverly and artfully.''

AN INSULAR POSSESSION. By Timothy Mo. (Random House, $19.95.) This ''fine''
novel ''fascinates much as a great, highly illustrated encyclopedia will
fascinate, with odd bits of information competing with long, sustained passages
of action, description and pure narrative.''

LAZAR MALKIN ENTERS HEAVEN. By Steve Stern. (Viking, $16.95.) ''A startling''
collection of stories, all but one set in a mythic Jewish neighborhood in
Memphis, by ''a prodigiously talented writer.'' MAMA. By Terry McMillan.
(Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) This first novel, ''a chronicle of a poor black
family's gritty passage through the 60's into the 70's . . . distinguishes
itself by its exuberant comic sensibility.''

THE MESSIAH OF STOCKHOLM. By Cynthia Ozick. (Knopf, $15.95.) ''A complex and
fascinating meditation on the nature of writing and the responsibilities of
those who choose to create - or judge - tales.''

MORE DIE OF HEARTBREAK. By Saul Bellow. (Morrow, $16.95.) The relationship -
''with its widening ripples of betrayal, deceit and self-deceit, of conspiracy,
of sex confused with love'' - between an expert on Russian literature and
history and his uncle, a famous botanist, is the subject of this ''brilliant''
novel.

A NIGHT AT THE MOVIES: Or, You Must Remember This. By Robert Coover. (Linden/
Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) In these short fictions, the author ''has made
literary art out of total immersion in the movies,'' and enlarged ''his literary
technique by forcing it to approximate filmic style.''

NO COUNTRY FOR YOUNG MEN. By Julia O'Faolain. (Carroll & Graf, $19.50.)
''Bitter, comprehensive realism'' about the Irish ''national question'' marks
this ''stunning performance.''

THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION. By Stephen McCauley. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A
''funny, exceptionally vivid first novel . . . about what it is like to be young
in these crazy times.''

THE OLD DEVILS. By Kingsley Amis. (Summit, $16.95.) This ''wonderfully comic
presentation of life's awfulness'' won England's 1986 Booker Prize.

OVERHEAD IN A BALLOON: Twelve Stories of Paris. By Mavis Gallant. (Random House,
$16.95.) ''In the taut, high-wire literary performances in this volume, Mavis
Gallant is at the top of her form.''

PERSIAN NIGHTS. By Diane Johnson. (Knopf, $17.95.) A ''funny, incisive,
frightening and eminently skillful'' novel that ''investigates the question of
moral responsibility against the backdrop of Iran shortly before the 1979
revolution.''

THE PROPHETEERS. By Max Apple. (Harper & Row, Cloth, $16.95; Perennial Library,
Paper, $7.95.) In this fable, ''an oddly saintly satirist'' reinvents the
destinies of the likes of Walt Disney and Howard Johnson. ''Call the novel a
joy.'' THE RED WHITE AND BLUE. By John Gregory Dunne. (Simon & Schuster,
$18.95.) The ''real story'' of this ''slice of America on a plate'' is
''history's habit of ensnaring us in its meshes.''

SPHINX. By D. M. Thomas. (Viking, $17.95.) The third novel in a series that
includes ''Ararat'' and ''Swallow'' and is marked by ''bravura art'' and
''sexually charged improvisations of poetry and politics.''

A SPORT OF NATURE. By Nadine Gordimer. (Knopf, $18.95.) ''A powerful novel of
awakening, emergence, and, in so far as fiction can make it possible, a call for
a new order'' in South Africa.

STARING AT THE SUN. By Julian Barnes. (Knopf, $15.95.) The author's ''brilliant
new novel flashes between the extremes of enchantment and disenchantment,
questioning where we might find our proper places as men and women in the coming
century.''

TEMPORARY SHELTER. By Mary Gordon. (Random House, $16.95.) This collection of 20
stories contains some ''that are touching, and some that are memorable.''

THE THANATOS SYNDROME. By Walker Percy. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.95.)
''Though the novel's surface action spins along at a brisk thriller pace . . .
the real plot . . . chronicles the continuing battle between good and evil in .
. . modern society.''

THAT NIGHT. By Alice McDermott. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $14.95.) ''This brief,
lyrical novel is a kind of elegy, to both childhood in suburbia and the
childhood of suburbia.''

TONGUES OF FLAME. By Tim Parks. (Grove, $14.95.) Last year, this first novel,
''a hilarious and original portrait of a young boy grappling with good and
evil,'' won England's Somerset Maugham Award for writers under 35.

TRUST ME. By John Updike. (Knopf, $17.95.) ''The best of these stories are
luminous with compassion, and full of the deep humor very sad tales have when
their burden is that we are all frail creatures in a mysterious and perilous
world.''

ZERO DB: And Other Stories. By Madison Smartt Bell. (Ticknor & Fields, $15.95.)
In ''astonishing'' stories, the author shows that he ''loves things and people
the way they are while simultaneously expressing outrage that they are not
better, wiser, kinder.''

HISTORY

ANOTHER DAY OF LIFE. By Ryszard Kapuscinski. Translated by William R. Brand and
Katarzyna Mroczkowska-Brand. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$14.95.) A Polish journalist's ''fragmentary, anecdotal and impressionistic
account'' of the end of Portuguese rule in Angola in 1975.

ARMED TRUCE: The Beginnings of the Cold War, 1945-46. By Hugh Thomas. (Atheneum,
$27.50.) ''The value'' of this first of a multivolume series on the cold war
''is that it stirs in us an awareness of how the broad and primitive notions
forged at that time continue to dominate our reactions and cloud our
understanding even today.''

ENEMIES OF THE PEOPLE. By Anne F. Thurston. (Knopf, $19.95.) An ''important''
oral history of the ordeal of China's intellectuals during the Cultural
Revolution.

THE FATAL SHORE. By Robert Hughes. (Knopf, $24.95.) A ''beautifully recounted
story of the strange orin n ofhehe Ausalalian soul'' - ''authoritative and
engrossing.''

A HISTORY OF THE JEWS. By Paul Johnson. (Harper & Row, $25.) The author's
''continuing self-education in Jewish history keeps moving [him] away from
seeing Jewish experience as a function of Christianity and toward understanding
Jews in their own terms'' - ''a remarkable achievement.''

THE ITALIANS AND THE HOLOCAUST: Persecution, Rescue, and Survival. By Susan
Zuccotti. (Basic Books, $19.95.) This ''careful historical account linked to
personal narratives . . . will be regarded as a definitive work.''

THE MAKING OF THE ATOMIC BOMB. By Richard Rhodes. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.)
''A major work of historical synthesis that brings to life the men and machines
that gave us the nuclear age.''

A MORE PERFECT UNION. By William Peters. (Crown, $22.50.) This ''week-by week
review'' of the Constitutional Convention is ''balanced'' and ''reliable.''

MUTINY ON THE AMISTAD: The Saga of a Slave Revolt and Its Impact on American
Abolition, Law, and Diplomacy. By Howard Jones. (Oxford, $22.95.) ''An important
new account'' of an 1839 slave mutiny by Africans aboard a Spanish ship en route
from Cuba to Puerto Rico.

THE OTHER NUREMBERG: The Untold Story of the Tokyo War Crimes Trials. By Arnold
C. Brackman. (Morrow, $19.95.) ''Indelible portraits'' of the defendants mark
this ''first full account'' of the 1946 trial of Japanese war criminals.

PAGANS AND CHRISTIANS. By Robin Lane Fox. (Knopf, $35.) In ''the most ambitious
recent work'' on early Christian history, the author ''describes in fastidious
detail the forms of the pagan cults and their accompanying piety in the second
and third centuries.''

THE PALACE FILE. By Nguyen Tien Hung and Jerrold L. Schecter. (Harper & Row,
$22.95.) ''Written largely from a Saigon perspective, this book provides
significant new data on United States relations with South Vietnam from 1968 to
1975.''

PERON AND THE ENIGMAS OF ARGENTINA. By Robert D. Crassweller. (Norton, $22.95.)
''Perhaps the best single-volume history of 20th-century Argentina: sensitive,
urbane, deeply comprehending.''

THE SECOND OLDEST PROFESSION: Spies and Spying in the Twentieth Century. By
Philip Knightley. (Norton, $19.95.) ''A short, sharp and stylish account of the
contemporary Anglo-Saxon intelligence world.''

''THEM'': Stalin's Polish Puppets. By Teresa Toranska. Translated by Agnieszka
Kolakowska. (Harper & Row, $22.95.) In this ''invaluable historical, political
and psychological document,'' Poland's Stalinist leaders of the 1940's and 50's
are subjected to ''well-prepared, systematic interrogations'' by a journalist.

WALTZING WITH A DICTATOR: The Marcoses and the Making of American Policy. By
Raymond Bonner. (Times Books, $19.95.) An ''impressive study of the relationship
between five American Presidents and Ferdinand Marcos, who ruled the Philippines
from 1965 until 1986.''

POETRY

AN ARROW IN THE WALL. Selected Poetry and Prose. By Andrei Voznesensky. (Holt,
$22.95.) An ''admirable selection of pieces translated by a number of hands
[that] is the best attempt so far made to bring a contemporary Russian poet into
a Western context.''

THE COLLECTED POEMS OF WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS. Volume One: 1909-1939. Edited by
A. Walton Litz and Christopher MacGowan. (New Directions, $35.) This
''beautifully edited collection'' traces ''the development of an indigenous
American avant-garde style, a unique modernist accomplishment that embraces all
of the poet's intelligence along with all of his American experience.''

THE NEARNESS OF YOU. By Carolyn Kizer. (Copper Canyon, $15.) ''A deeply engaging
poetry and prose meditation on the poet's father'' is ''the emotional center of
this collection,'' in which the author ''plays with the forms of poems and her
memories of men.'' She depicts ''romantic love by embedding it in the world'' -
a world sometimes ''cruel,'' sometimes ''elegantly transformed.''

NEW AND COLLECTED POEMS 1970-1985. By David Ignatow. (Wesleyan, $30.) In ''these
poems - written between David Ignatow's 55th and 72d birthdays'' - we see the
poet ''at the top of his form, writing beautifully clear and quiet poems
seemingly without effort.'' Each of the 26 new poems in the collection is ''as
good as any Mr. Ignatow has written in his entire career.''

RECKONER. By James Tate. (Wesleyan, $17.) The author ''is an elegant and
anarchic clown, a lord of poetic misrule with serious, subversive purpose. . . .
In his vision both the hilarity and the menace of the world become . . .
extreme.''

 SCIENCE & SOCIAL SCIENCE

COASTING. By Jonathan Raban. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) Jonathan Raban's
''meandering up and down [England's] coastline'' has resulted in ''a lively,
intensely personal recounting of a voyage into a gifted writer's country and
self.''

FEARFUL SYMMETRY: The Search for Beauty in Modern Physics. By A. Zee.
(Macmillan, $25.) ''A very good summary of the spiritual motivations and the
actual content of modern fundamental physics.''

THE ICE: A Journey to Antarctica. By Stephen J. Pyne. (University of Iowa,
$37.50.) ''A mind-boggling - and exhausting - exploration of our planet's cold
white underside.''

MOLECULES OF THE MIND: The Brave New Science of Molecular Psychology. By Jon
Franklin. (Atheneum, $18.95.) The author ''carefully illustrates our ambivalence
toward mental illness, whose victims most of us ultimately find somewhat
repulsive and morally weak.''

THE SOCIETY OF MIND. By Marvin Minsky. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) An
''ingenious and stimulating'' exploration of the ''means of explaining the world
to a computer.''

THEY ALL LAUGHED AT CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS: Tales of Medicine and the Art of
Discovery. By Gerald Weiss-mann. (Times Books, $17.95.) A ''graceful, feisty''
collection of essays on modern medicine.

THURSDAY'S UNIVERSE. By Marcia Bartusiak. (Times Books, $19.95.) ''For a few
years at least this will be a book that can render the arcana of astrophysical
research understandable to the public.''

WINSTON CHURCHILL'S AFTERNOON NAP: A Wide-Awake Inquiry Into the Human Nature of
Time. By Jeremy Campbell. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) This ''informative essay
on the human experience of time . . . proceeds without much regard for sophistry
or scholastic cavils.''

SCIENCE FICTION

THE FOLK OF THE AIR. By Peter S. Beagle. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $16.95.) ''A
fantasy novel set in contemporary California mixes science and the supernatural
so seamlessly that the bedazzled reader soon ceases to care which is which.''

MIRRORSHADES: The Cyberpunk Anthology. Edited by Bruce Sterling. (Arbor House,
$16.95.) These 12 stories present ''a science fiction that takes the runaway
power of science and technology for granted, that plays paranoia straight and
finds comic relief in anarchy.''

THE TIME WANDERERS. By Arkady and Boris Strugatsky. Translated by Antonina W.
Bouis. (Richardson & Steirman, $16.95.) The Russian authors ''confirm their
standing in the first rank of contemporary science fiction writers'' in this
novel that ''seems to be about aliens.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              231 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER REVIEW;
BIBLICAL 'JOSEPH' STEPS FORTH IN 1960's

BYLINE: By Leah D. Frank

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 23, Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 462 words


''Joseph and His Amazing Technicolor Dream Coat,'' the pop/rock musical by Tim
Rice and Andrew Lloyd Webber, is a clever stage adaptation of the Old Testament
tale about Joseph, son of Jacob. Joseph, for those of you who might not
remember, is the one who correctly interpreted Pharoah's dreams and thereby
saved Egypt from famine.

''Joseph's'' familiar, inoffensive plot coupled with lively music that sends an
audience into hand-clapping frenzies, has made it a popular staple in regional
and community theater repertories. What makes the current production at Theater
3 noteworthy, is that director Michael Oliver Tester has lifted ''Joseph'' out
of its traditional setting and plunked it into the middle of the 1960's without
changing either its spirit or its meaning. This ''Joseph'' is wrapped in a
colorful 60's retrospective of dreams, dreams deferred, and dreams shattered.
The show opens to an empty stage filled only with a tape recording track of
''Turn, Turn, Turn'' with a sound overlay of momentous moments chronicling the
Kennedys, King, Vietnam, Lyndon Johnson, and other stalwarts of that era. This
segment goes on way past the audience's ability to ''get it.'' However, that's
minor quibbling.

There are other reminders of the 60's also. Aside from the costumes, which are a
mixture of tie-dyed hippie and early Egyptian, Mr. Tester has filled the show
with directorial touches such as the demonstrators at Joseph's trial, chanting
and waving signs with slogans such as ''Hell no, let him go,'' and ''Jail is not
healthy for dreamers and other living things.'' Pharoah at one point turns into
a Richard Nixon look-alike and the Kent State shooting is briefly re-enacted.

As always at this theater, the singers range from capable to outstanding, and
the overall vocal effect is a pleasure. Carolyn Droscoski, one of Theater 3's
biggest stars, plays the narrator, the central role in the show. Ms. Droscoski's
bright smiles seems to encompass the entire stage as she sings the Biblical
story and charms the audience. Michael Butera gives a strong performance as the
trusting Joseph who rises from a farmhand to become an important leader of his
people. The large cast communicates energy and good will along with the show's
songs and dances.

G. Hines has designed a single set of platforms, ramps, and stairs which are
anchored by three huge peace symbols. The set has been painted to give an
impression of a pastel tie-dyed fabric.

Theater three has finally installed its long-promised air-conditioning system,
which makes their summer season something to seriously consider for the first
time. This peppy ''Joseph'' is the opening production of the summer, and it will
continue at the theater's Main Stage in Port Jefferson through June 27.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Michael Buter and Carolyn Droscoski in ''Joseph and The
Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat''

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              232 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TV TURNING TO PEOPLE METERS TO FIND WHO WATCHES WHAT

BYLINE: By PETER J. BOYER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 2032 words


Beginning this fall, members of about 2,000 families will take in hand a
remote-control device and push a button every time they watch television. In
doing so, they will become the most important viewers in America, determining
what programs the rest of the country will see in the future.

The device is a little plastic box, beige with flashing red and green lights.
Edgy television executives are watching it nervously, as if waiting for it to
explode. Some are already assessing the damage.

The device is called a people meter, a new and ostensibly more accurate way to
measure the size of television audiences. Its going into use this fall, portends
significant upsets in the quirky but agreed-upon ratings system that has
governed commercial television for 37 years.

The vice president of research at NBC, William Rubens, expressing the view of
many network officials, characterized the expected effect of people meters in
the network television marketplace with one word: ''Chaos.''

At stake are millions of dollars in advertising and the programs watched by
millions. Advertisers pay a broad range of fees for commercial time, from
$80,000 to $400,000 and more for each 30-second spot, depending upon a program's
Nielsen performance.

The people meter is a new tool of the A. C. Nielsen Company, whose national
ratings have been the television industry's bible since the early 1950's.
Nielsen ratings, which estimate how many people watch a particular program, are
the basis on which the networks determine the rates they charge for commercials
and of their decisions about which programs will live and which will be
canceled.

The advent of the people meter, an electronic mini-computer that will replace
handwritten diaries as a key component of the ratings system, has already
affected what television viewers will see this fall. Anticipating that the new
measuring devices will favor younger, more urban viewers - partly because those
viewers are more comfortable with the new gadgetry - network programmers have in
turn favored shows they think will appeal to a younger, urban audience.

The futuristic ''Max Headroom'' on ABC and the CBS police drama ''Cagney and
Lacey'' will be back next season despite relatively poor ratings partly because
of their expected people-meter appeal. On the other hand, some enduring
favorites, such as CBS's ''Dallas'' and NBC's ''Cosby Show'' fared less well in
people-meter trial runs and may be hurt by the new system.

Advertisers, always looking for better information on who is watching their
commercials, tend to favor people meters. Network executives, who don't like the
generally lower ratings that people meters show for the networks, question the
validity of the data and tend to oppose the transition.

Underlying the chaos is an innate mistrust of ratings research on the part of
many people in television, a feeling that the process, which seemed to be a mix
of science and voodoo in the first place, will now be complicated by computer
electronics.

'Impossible to Assess'

''I find it unnerving,'' said the president of CBS News, Howard Stringer (whose
zippy ''West 57th'' may be helped by people meters but whose more traditional
''CBS Evening News'' may be hurt). ''I'd like the programs to be judged by real
viewers, not by some system that people find impossible to assess. People meters
are another gadget which we don't entirely understand.''

On the surface, the transition to people meters seems a simple enough
technological advance.

The old Nielsen system merged two research processes, a meter system and a diary
system. The meters were hooked to television sets in 1,700 homes - a ''sample
universe'' designed to represent the American population - and recorded the
number of sets in use and which programs they were tuned to.

That system did not reveal who was watching - the demographic data that
advertisers covet. So, Nielsen also distributed diaries to about 2,600
households (with about one-third of them alternating shifts each week), asking
participants to fill in the demographic information. That data was applied to
the viewing totals estimated by the meters, and the ratings were thus
determined.

Disadvantages of the Diaries

But advertisers and networks agreed that there were problems with diaries. The
chore of filling them out usually fell to just one member of the household (most
often the adult woman), who would sit down at the end of the week and try to
remember which family members watched what.

''It was too onerous a task,'' the vice president of research for CBS, David
Poltrack, said. ''With cable bringing 25 channels, people couldn't remember what
they watched. How could you possibly remember accurately what had gone on?''

Because it relied on memory, the diary system tended to favor the most popular
programs - a diarist who usually watched ''Cosby,'' for example, might
automatically enter that program whether the family had actually watched it that
week or not.

Meeting the Competition

So Nielsen, spurred by competition from a British company, Audits of Great
Britain, developed a device that combined the functions of the meters and the
diary in a little box that sits on top of the television set and can be operated
from a hand-held remote control. The meter function is the same as before - it
literally counts how many households are tuned to which programs. The diaries
will now be kept electronically, with each member of the household,
demographically profiled in advance, pushing an assigned button whenever he or
she watches television.

In theory, the system should be more accurate than the diary. ''It's not relying
on people's memories and favoritism, as you did in the past,'' said the manager
of network operations at the advertising firm DFS-Dorland, Martin L. Cole.
''That's why 'Dallas' got bigger numbers - people sit down two days later and
say, 'I must have watched ''Dallas.'' ' Now, it's just punch up the buttons and
it'll record what you watched.''

But the seemingly simple matter of punching up a few buttons has presented
myriad potential problems.

The executives in charge of research at the networks, especially at CBS and NBC,
which have fared less well by people meters than ABC, insist that the people
meters won't be as accurate as the old system.

'Against Human Nature'

For one thing, fewer people have been willing to participate in people-meter
research, which involves having cables laid and holes drilled and which makes
active what has always been that most passive of pastimes, watching television.

''It's just against human nature,'' said Mr. Rubens of NBC. ''If I tell you that
every time a member of your family walks into the room they have to push a
button, that's a much more difficult chore. People get less conscientious,
teen-agers rebel, kids have problems with it and we think adults get tired of
it. Every time you walk in and out of the room, it's intrusive, bothersome and
can affect the way people view television.''

The people meter's ''sample universe'' - recently expanded from 1,000 to 2,000
people and to be increased to 4,000 in 1988 - has younger, more affluent viewers
than the sample used by the old system.

A senior vice president of Nielsen, John Dimling, said that the old Nielsen
sample was unbalanced, favoring older and more rural viewers, and that the new
people-meter sample more accurately reflected the real world, and could be
adjusted if the need arose. But the prevailing view at the networks is that the
new sample reflects a disinclination on the part of older, rural and blue-collar
viewers to add electronic gadgetry to their television viewing habits - the
so-called ''technophobe'' factor.

Children, too, are said to be underrepresented in the new system, partly because
they are less likely to be conscientious button-pushers.

Also, since the people meters have built-in quality controls - mistakes in
pushing the buttons, for example, automatically discount a household's input -
the more a family watches television and the more family members it has
operating the meters, the likelier it is to make mistakes and invalidate its
data. Under the old system, 80 percent of households with children were counted
in an average day's sample; in the test run of people meters, the participation
of households with children drops to 73 percent.

Splits in the Ratings

''Just that could distort the numbers,'' Mr. Rubens said. ''That, for instance,
could make some of the difference in 'Cosby.' More households with children
watch the show than households without children.''

The Nielsen company has conducted side-by-side tests of the people-meter system
and the old diary-and-meter system, and the difference in ratings for some
programs was dramatic.

In April, NBC's ''Cosby Show,'' the most popular program on television, scored
nearly two ratings points lower on the people meters than it did in the old
system - each rating point representing about 859,000 households (and millions
of dollars in advertising revenue). In the seasonlong comparative tally, CBS's
''Dallas,'' the show ranked No. 11 for the season, lost 11 percent of its
viewers in the people-meter sample.

An indication of the wide swings that people meters may bring can be seen in the
''Dallas'' situation. That show's main competition on Friday night is ''Miami
Vice'' on NBC, which is aimed at a younger audience and which improved its
performance on people meters. In the old system, ''Dallas'' easily won the
night, earning a season-average rating of 21.3 compared with 16.8 for ''Miami
Vice.'' But in the people-meter count, ''Dallas'' and ''Miami Vice'' were close
to even, with ratings of 19 and 18.1 respectively.

Pain for the Price Setters

Such differences in the two systems present a huge headache to network salesmen,
who are trying to price their commercials. The networks and advertisers are
about to enter the ''up front'' buying season, when $2.5 billion worth of
commercial time will be sold. The networks sell commercial time based on certain
audience guarantees, and if the programs do not deliver the promised number of
viewers, the networks have to deliver ''make goods'' - free advertising time.

The audience-delivery estimates will be based on the history provided by the old
system, but program performance will be measured by the new people-meter system.

The switch presents a dilemma. If CBS, for example, sells commercials for
''Dallas'' based on the show's performance under the old system, the network is
faced with paying out ''make goods'' if ''Dallas'' does worse on people meters.
But the alternative is to lower the price of commercials, and risk cutting
revenue unnecessarily.

''The networks are in a tougher position than we are,'' said Stephen Grubbs,
senior vice president of national television buying for the Batten, Barton,
Durstine & Osborn Inc. advertising agency. ''They'll have to live with
guarantees, and they'll have to live with the error, if there is any.''

Network protests notwithstanding (the networks delayed the switch to people
meters a year ago), there will apparently be no going back. Nielsen will
discontinue its old system in September.

Scheduling for New Perceptions

Anticipating the switch, network research executives worked closely with network
programmers this spring in fashioning the fall schedules, hoping to match shows
to what was perceived to be the new people-meter audience. ''Cagney and Lacey,''
for example, was at the edge of cancellation, but was revived by the prospect of
people meters. ''It was a real performer on people meters,'' Mr. Poltrack said.

CBS, noted for its conservative programming philosophy, also went after the
young audience more aggressively than it had in years, partly because of the
people-meter factor. It scheduled a weekly ''Platoon''-like series set in
Vietnam, and a fantasy show called ''Beauty and the Beast,'' which is aimed at
younger audiences.

At NBC, the low-rated ''Crime Story'' series is said to have been saved by its
potential people-meter appeal, and ''Sledge Hammer'' and ''Spenser: For Hire''
were similarly granted reprieves by ABC.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              233 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
HOW THE GAME'S PLAYED: GETTING ON THE HOT LINE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 404 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 31


In the simulation of the Korean Peninsula crisis, the President of the United
States and the General Secretary of the Soviet Union hold a tense telephone
conversation, as the superpowers try to head off further conflict. What follows
are excerpts from such a mock conversation:

General Secretary: Mr. President, things have deteriorated too much in Korea and
if both of us don't take immediate steps to control the situation, they may get
out of hand.

President: Agreed, but our situation is much more complex and you don't make it
any easier. North Korea is fully manageable.

GS: That's what you think. What do you propose to do? P: Give me your thoughts
first.  GS: Okay. Both of us can easily pull back naval forces. Right? P: Right.
Next.  GS: We warn our respective Korean allies that we will only help them in
defense. No aggression will be tolerated. P: Next. GS: The Chinese must be
brought in. They have the longest border with Korea. And they still remember how
they stopped your aggression in 1951-52.

P: This would be difficult to sell to the Congress.

GS: That's your problem, Mr. President.

P: I don't count on your sympathy. But pulling back our forces is in our hands,
and let's make this step first. And you won't encourage the North Koreans to act
militarily?

GS: I promise to do my best in calming them down. But we must agree on talks -
on an ambassadorial level. With a Chinese ambassador present. P: No leaks? GS:
Absolutely. You know, we are good at it. P: In a secluded place? GS: Why not? On
any of your aircraft carriers or on a small island like Barbados.

P: We'll let our secretaries of states work out the details. Hunter can be on
the way to Moscow in an hour.

GS: By the way, there has been some talk in your country that the two Koreas
must be unified to eliminate future crises. In my view, it is a pipe dream. Such
unification would have to be policed by a million strong force, and the Soviet
Union is not going to contribute one platoon to this task.

P: You've learned a lesson or two in Afghanistan, haven't you?

GS: Precisely. In fact, more than you learned in Vietnam.

P: Do you think the Chinese may be willing. . ?

GS: Forget it, Mr. President. The Chinese will not occupy a friendly country,
and they can't occupy a hostile one. They don't claim to be a superpower. I
truly admire them. So, we will be waiting for Hunter, to discuss the details of
our conference.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              234 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: DEFINING FOREIGN POLICY;
THE MOOD IN CONGRESS IS BOLD AND BITTER

BYLINE: By STEVEN E. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1234 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 1


Representative Jim Wright finally got mad last week. Almost two weeks after an
Iraqi plane had shot up an American frigate in the Persian Gulf, the Speaker of
the House demanded -and received - a high-level briefing on Administration plans
for the region.

As a result of that briefing, the House will take up a resolution on Tuesday
requiring the Administration to keep Congress fully informed of the evolving
situation in the Gulf. And the President has promised to sign it.

This outburst of aggressiveness from Congressional leaders reflects a widening
view on Capitol Hill that the Administration has lost much of its competence and
credibility on international issues. Democrats and Republicans alike say they
have been consistently misled by policymakers who lack a coherent approach to
world problems.

Howard H. Baker Jr., President Reagan's chief of staff, and Frank C. Carlucci,
the President's national security adviser, have been trying to exploit their
long-standing ties to Capitol Hill in a rear-guard effort to ward off the
Congressional offensive, but they have not been successful. The animosity toward
the Administration has been building since last fall, when many lawmakers
realized they had been deceived on the Iran-contra issue, and the impending
elections next year are lending a partisan cast to almost every Congressional
decision these days.

Perhaps the ultimate symbol of Congress's skeptical mood came when Senator Jim
Sasser of Tennessee was dispatched to make a tour of the Persian Gulf, even as
the Administration was sending out its own fact-finding team.

''This Administration, in the eyes of Congress, cannot be fully trusted,'' said
Representative Matthew F. McHugh, a New York Democrat who serves on the
Intelligence Committee. ''And therefore Congress, to protect its legitimate
role, has to try to impose limits, to tighten reporting requirements, things
which wouldn't be necessary if the Administration were perceived as being
sensitive to Congressional rights and responsibilities.''

A New Era Foreseen

As Representative Olympia J. Snowe of Maine, a Republican member of the Foreign
Affairs Committee, put it: ''The days of a single-handed foreign policy are
over.''

From the Administration viewpoint, much of this talk from Congress smacks of
irresponsibility, and the irritation level in the Executive Branch is rising
rapidly.

''Congress does only two things well - nothing and over-react,'' snapped a
senior White House official. ''They want to share in the decision-making. They
want to be nurtured and consulted with, to be aware of everything, and to be
able to render judgments publicly and privately. But perhaps they don't always
understand the consequences for the international scene.''

Tension From Indecision

This rivalry is as old as the Republic. ''There will always be a groping for the
proper balance in the foreign policy area between Congress and the Executive
Branch,'' said Representative McHugh. ''That's something built in when you have
dual responsility. The imprecision always creates some tension.''

That tension got a lot worse during the Vietnam War, but in the early years of
the Reagan Presidency, Congress was generally supportive of the Administration's
foreign policy. It backed the President's plan to station Marines in Beirut, and
eventually agreed to provide military aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, known as
contras.

But this year, the mood has changed. The House passed a trade bill over the
President's strenuous objections requiring retaliation against unfair trading
practices. Amendments have passed the House, and are pending in the Senate, that
would direct the President to abide by the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty.

Change After 1986 Elections

Hearings have been held on a bill that would tighten procedures for informing
Congress about secret operations. Aid to the contras is likely to be canceled by
the end of the year. And lawmakers have been complaining that the Persian Gulf
fracas should trigger the War Powers Resolution, which requires formal
notification of Congress when troops enter a potential battle zone.

One major cause of this Congressional activism was the election last fall.
President Reagan tried, and failed, to convince voters to retain Republican
control of the Senate, and Democrats feel less intimidated by the political
artillery based in the Oval Office.

''Nobody's afraid of him anymore,'' Representative Barney Frank, a Massachusetts
Democrat, said of the President. ''That's what he had going for him during those
first few years.''

In addition, the election shuffled the Democratic leadership on Capitol Hill,
with Mr. Wright succeeding Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. as Speaker, and Senator Robert
C. Byrd of West Virginia becoming majority leader for the first time in six
years. Both are ''instititutional men,'' as one Senate aide put it, men who are
determined to promote the interests of Congress, while establishing their own
credentials as aggressive opponents of the White House.

''This Administration has a habit of ignoring everybody and going its merry
way,'' the Senate aide said. ''But you have two people up here now, running the
two bodies, who don't think that's what the Constitution says.''

The Administration retorts that Democratic leaders are playing politics with
foreign policy. As Tom Griscom, the White House communications director, put it,
''Everybody is trying to stake a claim and put in place what the national agenda
is going to be in 1988.''

Representative Henry J. Hyde of Illinois, a senior Republican on the Foreign
Affairs Committee, also discerns partisan motives in the current strife. ''When
you have a conservative Republican President and a liberal Democratic Congress,
gridlock perhaps is the best one can expect,'' he said.

But the criticisms of the Administration do not come just from one party.
Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader, emerged from a White House meeting with
the President last week and reported that ''a number of Republicans'' had
expressed reservations about Mr. Reagan's Persian Gulf policy. The White House
talked a good game about consulting with Congress, Mr. Dole added, but did not
follow through.

''I would say,'' added Representative Vin Weber, a Minnesota Republican, ''that
there has been a declining confidence in Congress in the ability of the
Administration to manage foreign policy.''

Part of that decline has been caused by memory, and regret. Many lawmakers now
say they should have opposed the Marine presence in Beirut, where 241 marines
were killed, and they do not want to make the same mistake again.

Others, such as Ms. Snowe, have been shaken by the information revealed by the
Iran-contra hearings. ''I feel misled,'' said the Maine Republican. ''It's
becoming clear now that there are many things they didn't tell us.''

''It's a string you pull, but you can't push,'' added Representative Robert
Torricelli, a New Jersey Democrat. ''Foreign policy can't be directed by
Congress. But there's a collapse of competence in the Administration, and no one
else is meeting this responsibility.''

But even as they become more aggressive in the foreign policy arena, many
lawmakers acknowledge that their influence remains severely limited. ''You can
keep the President from doing bad things, but you can't make him do good
things,'' said Representative Frank.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of political leaders who voiced opinions on current foreign
policy (NYT; UPI; AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              235 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HELPING HAND IS OFFERED TO MAN WHO SAVED A LIFE

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 370 words


Gonzalo Delgado, a bread-truck driver and Special Forces veteran of Vietnam, may
have lost a 12-speed bicycle to a thief, but he found a lot of friends.

Mr. Delgado, who is 38 years old, was riding his mountain bicycle from his Coney
Island home to the Cobble Hill section of Brooklyn Sunday afternoon, when a
lightning bolt felled a woman and her husband in Prospect Park.

He set down the bike and, together with a parks patrol officer, applied
cardiopulmonary resuscitation and mouth-to-mouth resuscitation until the
unconscious woman could be taken to the hospital.

When Mr. Delgado got a chance to look up, the bike was gone.

''I felt very sad, sad about something taken from one,'' he said yesterday.
''Then anger set in.''

An Offer of a Bicycle

Mr. Delgado said that he was a widower with three daughters living in his
mother's home, that he knew about resuscitation from two tours of duty in
Southeast Asia and that he had bought the $600 bike just six weeks ago. ''I
still owe $145 on it,'' he said.

Many people who read or heard of his plight also were saddened and angered that
a Good Samaritan became a victim.

''I thought I'd like to, if possible, give him a bicycle,'' said Doug Dougfield,
a contractor in Newtown, Conn. Why? ''From time to time I just feel like doing
things.''

''It just struck a chord in me,'' said Dana Devon, a lawyer and freelance writer
in Merion, Pa. ''If there's a way to do it, I'd like to send him a small
donation. He certainly deserves to get his bicycle back.''

Also yesterday, Mr. Delgado made a brief appearance on the NBC-TV program ''Live
At Five'' and the switchboard promptly lighted up. ''We're getting a lot of
calls from people who want to help him out,'' reported Jim Unchester, an
assignment editor, ''not only with checks and money but to pat him on the back,
to praise him for what he did.''

The Brooklyn couple who suffered electrical shock from the lightning were
transferred yesterday from Brooklyn's Methodist Hospital to the burn unit of New
York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center. A spokeswoman, Margaret Moore, said the
woman, Ezella Owen, remained in critical condition and her husband, Keith, was
listed in ''satisfactory'' condition.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              236 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 3, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WIESEL TESTIFIES AT BARBIE'S TRIAL

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 680 words

DATELINE: LYONS, France, June 2


The writer Elie Wiesel testified at the trial of Klaus Barbie here today,
speaking to the judges and jury of personal memories of Auschwitz, of the
silence of millions of victims and of what he called the unique nature of the
Nazi campaign to wipe out the Jews.

Mr. Wiesel, speaking in a crowded courtroom in tones more sad than angry, said
the trial and the testimony of survivors remain in the ''collective
consciousness,'' helping thereby to prevent the victims of the Nazi genocide
from being forgotten.

Mr. Wiesel, a survivor of the Auschwitz death camp who won the Nobel Peace Prize
last year, was asked by Jews in Lyons to testify about the dimensions of the
crimes in which Mr. Barbie, the wartime Gestapo chief of Lyons, is accused of
playing a part.

Defense Lawyer's Challenge

But his testimony also became the occasion of a long anticipated effort by Mr.
Barbie's defense lawyer, Jacques Verges, to argue just the opposite -that what
he called ''other atrocities,'' comparable to the Nazi persecution of the Jews,
had taken place in the 20th century and they remain unpunished.

Mr. Verges, speaking in loud and apparently angry tones to Mr. Wiesel, mentioned
the French war in Algeria, the massacre at My Lai in Vietnam, and what he
characterized as Jewish atrocities against Arabs, specifically the massacre of
Arab civilians in the village of Deir Yassin in 1948.

''I am against all brutality no matter where it comes from,'' Mr. Wiesel said of
Mr. Verges's argument, ''But I find it regrettable, deplorable, that the lawyer
of the defense, who defends a man accused of crimes against humanity, dares to
accuse the Jewish people.''

Later, speaking to reporters, Mr. Wiesel said Mr. Verges, who is known in France
as an advocate of the Arab position in the Middle East, was ''full of hatred,
hatred for me personally, hatred for the Jewish people, and hatred for the
victims.'' #15th Day of Trial Mr. Wiesel's appearance came on the 15th day of a
trial that, until now, has dwelled on the often dramatic and poignant accounts
by witnesses, both of the horrors of the genocide and of the specific acts
attributed to Mr. Barbie.

Today, for example, the court heard two mothers talk of children deported,
reportedly at the orders of Mr. Barbie, from a refuge in Izieu, 50 miles east of
Lyons.

One of them, Ita-Rosa Halaunbrenner, lost two children who had been hidden in
Izieu; the other, Fortunee Benguigui, now 83 years old, lost three children,
ages 12, 7 and 5. At one point, while photographs of her children were passed
among the panel of judges and the nine jurors, Mrs. Benguigui could be heard
sobbing softly into the courtroom microphone and murmuring, ''It is the only
picture that I have of them.''

Mr. Barbie refused to attend the session, as he has every day since the third
day of the trial. Only once since then has he been compelled to face his
accusers.

Mr. Wiesel, in his testimony, said it was impossible for anyone who did not
experience the Nazi death camps like Auschwitz to truly understand what it was
to be a Nazi victim.

'We Have to Bear Witness'

''We have to talk, we have to bear witness,'' he said. ''That is why this trial
is so important to me. All those who have come before you to talk, they will
prevent the killers from killing again, and that is why I am here, to prevent
them from killing again.''

Speaking of the unique nature of the Jewish tragedy, Mr. Wiesel said: ''I don't
want to be condescending or to minimize the suffering of others. I want to have
the same compassion for all victims.''

''But, we have to say that the Holocaust was a case apart,'' he said. ''For the
first time, a plan was put into operation to kill all of the Jews of the world,
wherever they were.''

When Mr. Wiesel was finished, Mr. Verges, who has challenged the testimony of
only two or three of the many witnesses so far, stood to advance what many have
predicted would be the main lines of his defense, namely that Mr. Barbie is not
more guilty than numerous others who have gone unpunished after committing
atrocities.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              237 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 3, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PRISONERS ABUSED, RIGHTS GROUP SAYS

BYLINE: By MARVINE HOWE

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 457 words


The human rights organization Amnesty International charged yesterday that
thousands of political prisoners in Cambodia were victims of arbitrary arrest,
the widespread use of torture and ''cruel and inhuman'' prison conditions.

Issuing a detailed report on human rights abuses in Cambodia, Amnesty
International urged the governments of Cambodia and its ally Vietnam to end
current violations and prevent them in the future.

At the start of a worldwide campaign to denounce continued ill-treatment of
Cambodians, Curt Goering, the deputy director of Amnesty International U.S.A.,
said at a news conference in Manhattan that copies of the human rights report
had been sent to the governments of Phnom Penh and Hanoi but that there had been
no reply.

The Amnesty International report also cites and denounces abuses by parties in
the opposition Cambodian coalition, which includes fighters of the former Khmer
Rouge Government and was until recently led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk. But the
main focus of the current campaign, according to Mr. Goering, is violations
committed by the Phnom Penh Government, which controls most of the country, and
its Vietnamese advisers.

'Several Thousand' Held

Estrellita Jones, Amnesty International's Washington-based coordinator for Asian
affairs, refused to compare the current human rights abuses in Cambodia with the
violations under the former ruler, Pol Pot, and his Khmer Rouge. She noted
earlier reports denouncing the former administration for pratices resulting in
the death of ''between one and two million'' of Cambodia's seven or eight
million citizens.

Total figures for the current number of political prisoners are not available,
according to Ms. Jones. But she said there were estimates of ''several
thousand'' who have been held without charge or trial and ''many do not survive
the ordeal.''

Amnesty International has compiled the names of more than 400 political
prisoners believed to be held as of early this year, when the 90-page report was
being drafted.

Use of Torture Reported

Of these prisoners, Amnesty has detailed information on more than 100, with
nearly half of them reportedly confined for at least seven years. The political
prisoners are mostly men, ranging in age from early 20's through 70. A third of
them were members of the Cambodian local administration or militia before
detention; others were factory workers, fishermen or tradesmen. There are also
reports of students, teachers and Buddhist monks in detention.

Amnesty has received information on 46 deaths in Cambodian prisons between 1979
and 1985, according to the report. Twelve of these deaths, the report said,
occurred during or soon after interrogations in which torture was used.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              238 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 3, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 946 words


TO THE SARGASSO SEA. By William McPherson. 461 pages. Simon & Schuster. $18.95.

IN his graceful first novel, ''Testing the Current'' (1984), William McPherson
looked at pre-World War II America through the watchful, curious eyes of an
8-year old boy named Tommy MacAllister. The upper-class, Midwestern realm of his
parents is an old-fashioned world, where genteel hypocrisy cloaks adultery and
racial bigotry, where decorous manners enable everyone to hold onto the illusion
of their innocence. While Tommy is warned about the perils of venturing too
quickly into the complexities of the grown-up world - represented by the
swirling rapids of the neighboring river - the novel ends with his venturing,
tentatively, ''into the currents of time.''

That water imagery surfaces again in Mr. McPherson's new novel, ''To the
Sargasso Sea,'' a sequel of sorts to ''Testing the Current,'' which finds Tommy
grown up - a moderately successful playwright, married and himself the father of
an 8-year old child. Tommy, who has since changed his name to Andrew, and his
wife Ann belong to the sort of privileged, liberal set that attends Vietnam
protests (the book takes place in the early 1970's), follows Off-Broadway
theater, and plays (or knows how to play) golf; among their friends, they're
thought of as the perfect couple, ''the couple on the wedding cake.''

''The MacAllisters didn't think of themselves as very conventional people,''
writes Mr. McPherson, ''though of course they were, not very different from the
lawyers and accountants and people in business they were slightly if secretly
contemptuous of -not very different, in fact, from their own parents, whose
quotidian lives had seemed on the surface so traditional, so unlike their own.''

Tommy's father had taught him, long ago, that the ''right way'' to handle a boat
was to sail ''directly into the current and then straight to the shore, with no
meandering,'' but now, at the age of 40, Andrew suddenly finds himself drifting,
perilously, into what can only be called a mid-life crisis. The past - in
particular the lingering question of his mother's adultery - has begun to cast
peculiar shadows over his life, and he starts to feel as though his life were
lurching out of control. During a trip to London, he finds himself committing
adultery with Daisy, an older woman from his hometown; and during another trip
to Bermuda (in the Sargasso Sea), he finds himself dangerously attracted to a
young man who admires his plays. He feels disoriented, confused - or, like the
characters in one of his stories, ''lost in the weeds, but swimming.''

That, the reader quickly discovers, is only one of many, many references to
water and swimming in this novel. Having grown up by a river, Andrew says he
thinks of himself as ''a water person,'' and he remains obsessed, throughout the
novel, with a children's book he once owned about a fish who lives in the
Sargasso Sea. Much is made of the fact that both his wife and mistress wear
sea-colored jewels (an emerald ring, a large acquamarine) as well as pearls; and
their trip to Bermuda provides the occasion for lots of ocean references from
''The Tempest'': ''Those are pearls that were his eyes:/ Nothing of him that
doth fade/ But doth suffer a sea change/ Into something rich and strange.''

Andrew, as well as practically everyone he meets, seems to like to quote from
favorite books. His mistress quotes Wallace Stevens, while his wife quotes T. S.
Eliot. His director quotes Elizabeth Bowen, his producer quotes Keats, and his
producer's wife quotes Auden. Even a maker of pornographic movies whom Andrew
meets in Bermuda quotes Tolstoy. Scuba diving, Andrew is reminded of some lines
by Hart Crane; thinking about sex, he's reminded of Yeats's poem about Leda and
the swan.

Certainly, we can understand why Andrew is such a relentless quote-mongerer -
literature provides him with a way of distancing himself from his emotions, just
as playwriting gives him a way of projecting his feelings onto others. The
incessant use of literary references on the part of the other characters,
however, strikes the reader as contrived, redundant and annoying - perhaps it's
all meant as some kind of satiric comment on the shallow intellectualizing that
goes on in certain social circles, but it ends up doing little but showing off
the author's familiarity with books.

To make matters worse, all the quotations - combined with the characters'
penchant for comparing their experiences to famous works of art -have the effect
of portentously foreshadowing everything that happens in the novel. We know that
something is going to happen in Bermuda because Andrew notes that the lizard is
the only animal native to the island, then refers to John Skelton's lines,
''When ye think all danger for to pass/ 'Ware of the lizard lieth lurking in the
grass.'' Similarly, we know that he's going to get involved with his young male
fan, because he's reading a book titled ''The Greeks and the Irrational'' and
starts talking about Dionysian rites.

Yet, for all the clots of self-consciousness in its narrative, ''To the Sargasso
Sea'' is not without its pleasures. Like his playwright hero, Mr. McPherson has
a gift for writing clever social banter, and like his hero, he has a good ear -
for the telling phrase, the mistold joke. The relationship between Andrew and
his wife is delineated with humor and compassion; and despite his sophomoric
self-indulgences, Andrew, himself, comes across as a fairly sympathetic fellow.
Still, the ease and charm that informed the story of his boyhood is missing in
this volume - and in the end, that makes a telling difference.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of William McPherson (Nancy Crampton)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              239 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 3, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NATIVE SON IS HONORED BY STATE OF WASHINGTON

BYLINE: By WALLACE TURNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 658 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, June 2


Nostalgia for the days when Washington's delegation to the United States Senate
moved mountains and dammed rivers filled the air at a banquet Sunday night to
commemorate the 75th birthday of Henry M. Jackson. The day had been set aside by
the Legislature to honor him.

Among the speakers was 82-year-old Warren G. Magnuson, the other half of the
''Scoop and Maggie'' Democratic team that for three decades saw that Federal
money went to finance projects in the Pacific Northwest.

''Let me tell you, we were a team in the United States Senate,'' said Mr.
Magnuson, who has lived in retirement here since he failed to win a seventh term
in the Senate in 1980. ''We cast over 10,000 votes in the Congress of the United
States. Seldom did we oppose each other.''

''Someone said to me once that Scoop and I worked both sides of the street, and
I told him that was true, but that we met on the street corner every night,''
Mr. Magnuson said. ''The other day the University of Washington sorted us out by
our special interests. They named the school of health sciences after Warren
Magnuson and the school of international studies after Scoop Jackson.''

Foreign Policy Syposium Held

On Saturday, as a part of the weekend of activities commemorating Senator
Jackson's birthday, a foreign policy symposium was held at the University of
Washington. The participants included Senators Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New
York and Sam Nunn of Georgia, both Democrats; James Billington, the new
Librarian of Congress; William Ruckelshaus, former head of the Environmental
Protection Agency, and Prof. Robert Gilpin of Princeton University.

Mr. Jackson, born and reared in Everett, Wash., was elected to the House in 1938
at the age of 26. He won a Senate seat in 1952 and was easily re-elected five
times.

Mr. Jackson's role in the Senate was described by speakers as ranging from
sponsorship of the National Environmental Policy Act and the creation of several
parks in Washington and Alsaka to his campaigns for the reopening of trade with
China long before the Unted States adopted that position. He supported Israel,
opposed Senator Joseph R. McCarthy and was an advocate of United States
intervention in Vietnam.

He died Sept. 1, 1983, in his sleep of a ruptured artery near his heart a few
hours after returning from a trip to China. He was 71 years old.

Mr. Magnuson was elected to the House in 1936 and went to the Senate in 1944.
Their senatorial papers are in a joint collection at the University of
Washington.

'The Senator From Boeing'

T. A. Wilson, chairman of the Boeing Company, this state's most important
economic enterprise, opened his remarks by saying, ''I'm happy to be here to
honor the memory of the Senator from Boeing,'' an epithet often applied to
Senator Jackson. ''I wish we at Boeing really could take credit for all of
Senator Jackson's accomplishments. People seem to forget that he voted for every
arms control treaty that came to the Senate while he served.''

Senator Ted Stevens, Republican of Alaska, said his state owed a special debt to
Senators Jackson and Magnuson. ''You were responsible for us becoming a state.''
Senator Stevens first met the Washington Senators when he was a mail clerk at
the Senate office building.

Senator Daniel J. Evans, a Republican who was Governor of Washington for 12
years, now holds the Senate seat once filled by Mr. Jackson. He said ''I know
better than anyone in this room what it means to fill Scoop's shoes. In a word:
Impossible. In those years when I was Governor and I would talk with other
governors about problems common to each of us, I always had an inner smile
because I knew I had Scoop and Maggie there in Washington to back us up.''

Helen H. Jackson, who lives in the house in Everett, Wash., where her husband
died, is the chairman of the board of governors of the Henry M. Jackson
Foundation, which was the beneficiary of the proceeds of the banquet.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Helen Jackson (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              240 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 4, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
SOUTH KOREAN WITH FUTURE: ROH TAE WOO

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 764 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, June 3


In handpicking the man virtually assured of becoming his successor, President
Chun Doo Hwan of South Korea settled this week on a trusted friend who had
helped him gain power and hold onto it.

Mr. Chun could feel comfortable that in Roh Tae Woo he had selected someone
likely to continue his own policies, which rest on a deep commitment to military
readiness, national security, economic growth and minimal tolerance for
political dissent.

All along, Mr. Roh's designation as the presidential candidate of the ruling
Democratic Justice Party was a foregone conclusion, despite several months of
speculation in Seoul that Mr. Chun was looking elsewhere to drape his mantle of
power. No one else, after all, had been at his side through so many pivotal
moments.

When Mr. Chun, then a general, seized power in late 1979 after the assassination
of President Park Chung Hee, it was General Roh who provided the necessary
muscle by sending his Ninth Infantry Division into Seoul.

Grim Ride From Airport

In 1983, when much of South Korea's ruling elite was killed by a bomb in
Rangoon, Burma, it was Mr. Roh whom Mr. Chun called to meet him at Kimpo Airport
in Seoul. Alone except for a driver, they discussed the country's future in a
predawn ride to the Blue House, the presidential residence.

Two years later, after the opposition registered stunning election victories, it
was once again Mr. Roh whom he turned to, this time to take over as chairman of
the ruling party.

Now he has been tapped for the biggest assignment of all.

In the Korean political timetable, Mr. Roh (pronounced no) will formally be
named the party's choice next Wednesday. In December, a 5,000-member electoral
college, responding to the party's bidding, will vote him into office. Next Feb.
25, if all goes as planned, he will move into the Blue House and Mr. Chun will
become the first South Korean leader to depart voluntarily.

Opposition Calls for Protest

The big question is whether anything in authoritarian South Korea will truly
change.

Opposition leaders say no. They contend that a military-backed Government is
simply shifting leaders, not policies or attitudes. In a statement today, the
opposition Reunification Democratic Party charged that Mr. Roh's designation was
aimed at ''eternalizing the current dictatorial regime.'' With other
anti-Government forces, the party has called for a nationwide protest starting
next week when the Roh nomination is to be made official.

There is little likelihood that Mr. Roh will enjoy significantly greater
legitimacy than his predecessor in the eyes of some South Koreans. President
Chun, many political analysts contend, was doomed to unpopularity from the start
because his troops had killed scores of people in the city of Kwangju to help
him consolidate power. Mr. Roh, it is argued, is saddled with the same burden.

In contrast to the aloof Mr. Chun, the 54-year-old Mr. Roh is a man of easy
conversation. Associates also say that over the years he has evolved from an
anti-dissident hard-liner to a man willing to tolerate protests more than some
of his fellow former generals.

Like most modern South Korean leaders, Mr. Roh comes from Taegu in southern
Kyongsang Province, where he was born on Dec. 4, 1932. Details about his family
are scarce.

He and Mr. Chun graduated together from the Korea Military Academy in 1955,
members of a class that viewed itself as a new elite because it was the first to
go through an expanded four-year program. In the 1960's, the two old classmates
served together in South Vietnam.

A Succession of Posts

After the Chun takeover in 1979, Mr. Roh headed the Defense Security Command, a
powerful network responsible for political surveillance. In 1981 he left the
military, moving through a succession of posts, including Sports Minister, Home
Affairs Minister and chairman of the Seoul Olympics Organizing Committee.

On several occasions, he has affirmed that the military should stay out of daily
management of government. Even so, the key to South Korean success is retaining
the army's support. In Seoul, a widely held assumption is that Mr. Roh should
have little trouble on this score. And some colleagues say it would be wrong to
underestimate his desire to steer an independent course.

''The delicacy of the transition will make him somewhat conservative in
presenting his ideas and raising his voice,'' Hyun Hong Choo, a National
Assemblyman from the governing party, said recently. ''Still, he has his own
agenda. As time passes, his voice will be heard more and more.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Roh Tae Woo (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              241 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 4, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. IMPOTENCE ON THE CAMBODIAN GENOCIDE ISSUE;
The Greater Danger

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 289 words


To the Editor:

Your editorial, a laudable piece with great emotional quality, helps maintain
awareness of an almost forgotten tragedy, but it is 10 years late and fails to
discuss the greater danger of the Vietnamese occupation. In fact, the
fundamental issue of Cambodia's survival remains unaddressed.

One should recall that in 1977 Canada, Norway, the United Kingdom, the United
States and the International Commission of Jurists started to raise the human
rights issue against Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge, but these efforts ran into
objections by the Soviet bloc. Since 1975 Cambodian refugees have demonstrated
every year, in New York, Washington and other major cities, against Khmer Rouge
atrocities. Their calls have gone unheeded.

After the Vietnamese invasion and subsequent occupation of Cambodia, many
self-appointed Cambodia experts suddenly began to condemn Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge.
Hardly anything has been said about Communist Vietnam's new model of colonialism
in Cambodia. The policy is being pursued by Vietnamese occupation forces and
colonizers, which constitute about one-sixth of Cambodia's population and are
protected by extraterritoriality. This is the equivalent of having 40 million
Russians in the U.S. who can steal, kill and rape without being subjected to
American laws.

The memory of Pol Pot's victims would be honored only if all Khmer Rouge
officials involved in the genocide, including those in Vietnamese-controlled
regime, were tried along with the Vietnamese colonialists. Until freedom,
independence and democracy is restored to Cambodia, any other course would be a
disservice to the Cambodian people and would perpetuate instability in Southeast
Asia.

SICHAN SIV
New York, May 21, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              242 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 4, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: FOREIGN POLICY EXPERTS;
Democrats in Exile Count the Days

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1214 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 2


Democratic Presidential hopefuls keep telephoning R. James Woolsey.

''I've talked with Bruce Babbitt several times, I got a call from one of
Dukakis's staff people who wanted to get together, and Biden had me up to meet
with him and talk,'' said Mr. Woolsey, a former Under Secretary of the Navy in
the Carter Administration years who is a well-known Washington lawyer.

''I've known Gore for some time,'' he continued, referring to Senator Albert
Gore Jr. of Tennessee. ''And Gephardt had me out to dinner. Have I left someone
out? Jackson. Jesse Jackson hasn't called.''

Mr. Woolsey, a respected 46-year-old military expert, is a central figure in
what could be loosely termed the Democratic Party foreign policy establishment
in exile: the group of lawyers, academicians, research scholars and Wall Street
financiers who are counting the days to the end of the Reagan era and hoping,
perhaps hungering, for a Democratic Presidential triumph. And a high level
Administration job.

Some, like Mr. Woolsey, get calls, Many are working the phones themselves.
''There's the usual scurrying around with a number of people offering their
services,'' said one aide to Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri.
''It's awfully fun to watch.''

'Very Sharp Elbows'

Richard E. Feinberg, an economist and Latin American specialist who worked in
the State Department during the Carter Administration, served as an adviser to
Gary Hart, among other candidates.

''As the Hart candidacy was warming up there were people trying to elbow their
way in, some with very sharp elbows,'' said Mr. Feinberg. ''How do people do it?
By ingratiating themselves with senior advisers, by writing unsolicited
memoranda providing either advice on campaigning or specific issues, by offering
to organize a briefing session on a subject.''

''Now that Hart has left, there's more room for horses out there, and there's
more room for grooms,'' Mr. Feinberg said.

Some of the advisers are such established policy figures as former Secretary of
State Cyrus R. Vance; former Defense Secretary Harold Brown; Warren Christopher,
the former Deputy Secretary of State; Sol Linowitz, the Middle East negotiator
under President Carter, and James R. Schlesinger, the former Defense Secretary
and Director of Central Intelligence. Virtually all have been sought out for
advice.

Timing Is Important

It is, however, the younger ones -men and women who played senior and
middle-level roles in the Carter Administration and who hope to play dominant
roles in another Democratic administration - who seem to be serving as the key
foreign policy and military cadre for candidates.

Many are caught in a dilemma: to sign on early with a candidate, or shop around
and wait and see who emerges as a front-runner. Signing on early may mean
teaming up with a loser. Waiting for a possible winner may mean joining a team
too late.

One of the handful of experts to sign up with a candidate is Madeleine Albright,
a Georgtown University professor who was a member of the National Security
Council in the Carter years. Ms. Albright recently agreed to serve as foreign
policy adviser to Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts. Such Harvard
academics as Joseph Nye, a former Deputy Under Secretary of State for security
assistance in the Carter years, and Albert Carnesale, an arms control
specialist, are assisting Ms. Albright. .

Asked about the risks of joining a candidate so early, Ms. Albright said: ''I am
interested in developing foreign policy. A job is not foremost in my mind. I am
not leaving my position at Georgetown. I am a volunteer. I'm obviously hopeful
and confident that Dukakis will be the nominee. I feel strongly committed to
him, and I see no reason to delay.''

Likes Being a Professor

Mr. Nye, who is director of the Center for Science and International Affairs at
Harvard, said: ''I'm not aware of any stampede in favor of one candidate or
another. At this stage, contacts are more personal. You know somebody. They ask
for your help. You provide help.''

Mr. Nye said that the possibility of returning to Washington one day was hardly
foremost in his mind. ''If an opportunity came, it's hard not to do it if you
can affect a policy you care about,'' he said. ''But as a job, per se, frankly,
bring a professor is better.''

But others make it plain that the motives of advisers are often more complicated
and, indeed, self-serving. ''There are some people interested in trying to
promote the debate and help whoever is nominated, and others who are trying to
grab the brass ring,'' said Robert E. Hunter, a National Security Council
official in the Carter Administration who has, as he said, ''gotten a phone call
or two'' from the prospective candidates.

''There's a share of public servants and a share of opportunists, just like any
other field,'' said Mr. Hunter, who is director of European studies at the
Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. ''At the moment, I
would say a lot of people are just trying to decide who the most qualified
candidates are.''

From Camp to Camp

Virtually all the prospective Presidential candidates have sought advice from a
range of experts who, at the moment, glide from one camp to another. For
example, Senator Joseph R. Biden, the Delaware Democrat, has conferred with,
among others, Walter Slocombe, a Washington lawyer and arms control expert;
Donald Rice, president of the Rand Corporation; John D. Steinbrunner and Richard
K. Betts, national security experts at the Brookings Insitutution, and Alton
Frye, Washington director and senior fellow of the Council on Foreign Relations.

Mr. Babbitt, a former Democratic Governor of Arizona, has consulted with such
experts as Stansfield Turner, former Director of Central Intelligence, and
Richard Holbrooke, a former State Department official and now managing director
of Shearson Lehman Brothers.

''There is this group of foreign policy and defense specialists, people who
spend their time commuting between New York and Boston and Washington, who know
each other, who are in these groups advising the candidates,'' observed Samuel
P. Huntington, director of the Center for International Affairs at Harvard and a
former National Security Council official. ''That doesn't mean there's consensus
or agreement, although I suppose there's more agreement now on foreign policy
issues than there has been over the last 10 or 15 years. The bitter division
over Vietnam has tended to disappear, and I don't see people taking extreme
positions in the same way that people often took 10 years ago. There's simply
less polarization now.''

On the other hand, young associates of some of the candidates express puzzlement
at the ideological and personal entanglements.

''I'm conscious of all these different groups as we build our foreign policy
network,'' said Robb Kurz, Representative Gephardt's legislative assistant for
defense and foreign affairs. ''There's the Washington establishment, there's the
New York establishment, there's the Jimmy Carter people, the Kissinger-Nixon
people, the careerists, the defense people.

''I keep asking, 'Who belongs to which group?' '' he said. ''I keep getting the
same response. People laugh and say, 'You'll find out.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Richard E. Feinberg, Robert E. Hunter and R. James Woolsey
(NYT/Marty Katz)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              243 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ACTIVIST GENERAL IN LINE FOR TOP MARINE POST

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 4


Lieut. Gen. Alfred M. Gray Jr. has been recommended by Navy Secretary James H.
Webb as the next Commandant of the Marine Corps, replacing Gen. P. X. Kelley
when he retires this month, according to Pentagon officials.

Approval of Mr. Webb's choice by Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and
by President Reagan is viewed as likely when the two men return from trips
abroad.

The choice of General Gray illustrates the importance of experience as a field
commander and of a reputation as an activist leader for senior officers
competing for positions at the top of the military hierarchy.

If he is nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate, General Gray,
who is 58 years old, would take over as Commandant at a time when the reputation
of the Marines is tarnished by a scandal involving marine guards at the United
States Embassy in Moscow who have been accused of spying for the Soviet Union.
The Corps has also been hurt by disclosures about Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, a
marine who is a central figure in the arms sales to Iran and the diversion of
funds to the Nicaraguan rebels.

Focus on Leadership Qualities

Because of these problems, Mr. Webb, who served as an officer with the Marines
in Vietnam and wrote a novel, ''Fields of Fire,'' based on his experience there,
focused his search on the leadership qualities of the half dozen or so generals
who were being considered as General Kelley's replacement.

For several weeks Marine officers have suggested that the front-runners included
Lieut. Gen. Thomas R. Morgan, the Assistant Commandant, and Lieut. Gen. Ernest
C. Cheatham Jr., the deputy chief of staff for manpower.

General Morgan was viewed as General Kelley's candidate; as the incumbent's
assistant, he had served in Washington and was said to be an experienced and
accomplished officer.

General Cheatham, who was decorated for gallantry in Vietnam, had the warrior
image that Mr. Webb sought.

In Marine Corps circles, the selection process was seen as a factional contest.
But today many marines seemed pleased by the outcome of the contest.

Sound Military Credentials

They said General Gray may have come to the fore as a compromise, but also
because he had served in key commands. He is described as being a man of sound
military credentials.

Indeed, some military experts say three of his recent posts, all involving
combat commands, gave him an opportunity to establish ties to the rank and file
and to put into effect his ideas about how the Corps should operate.

General Gray, who will turn 59 this month, was not considered a front-runner for
the Commandant's job, in part because he will need an exemption from retirement
rules to serve out his four-year term, although such exemptions are not unusual.

A native of Point Pleasant Beach, N.J., he enlisted in the Marines in 1950 and
served in the Korean War as a lieutenant in 1952 and 1953.

Head of Fleet Marine Forces

In the last 10 years his assignments have been primarily outside Washington,
although he served in Quantico, Va., from 1978 to 1981, when he worked on the
development of weapons and tactics.

He has commanded a brigade, a division and, most recently, the Fleet Marine
Forces in the Atlantic, based in Norfolk, Va.

''Of all the senior officers in the Corps,'' said John Greenwood, a retired
colonel who is editor of the Marine Corps Gazette, a magazine published for
Marine officers by their professional association, ''he is almost unique in his
ability to captivate the imagination of younger leaders.''

William S. Lind, a military analyst who often criticizes the military
establishment for its lack of innovation, called General Gray ''the best
possible choice for the job,'' adding, ''He has brought about a renaissance in
Marine Corps tactical and operational thinking and training and is the Marine
Corps's clear leader in the 1980's so far.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lieut. Gen. Alfred M. Gray Jr. (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              244 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 6, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Federal Express Executive Named to Head F.A.A.

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 543 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 5


T. Allan McArtor, an executive at Federal Express, was named by President Reagan
today to head the Federal Aviation Administration, a hot spot in which the
nominee faces the formidable task of trying to restore the public's confidence
in the safety and reliability of the commercial airline system.

''He has a fair job ahead of him,'' said Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat
of New Jersey, who heads an Appropriations subcommittee concerned with aviation.
''It is an agency under siege from all quarters - the public, the National
Transportation Safety Board and Congress.''

Mr. McArtor's office in Memphis said that he would not comment until his Senate
confirmation hearing.

Mr. Lautenberg said that one of the biggest problems facing Mr. McArtor was the
shortage of air traffic controllers. Because of dismissals of controllers who
struck in 1981, he said, the number of controllers has declined while air
traffic has risen 50 percent.

''The F.A.A. has a lot of work ahead of it to bring up the trust of the public
and the Congress,'' the Senator said.

The Department of Transportation, of which the F.A.A. is a part, has repeatedly
said that it has enough air traffic controllers, but Senator Lautenberg noted
that this week Secretary Elizabeth Hanford Dole announced that many new
controllers would be hired to ease the burden on the current work force.

Donald D. Engen, a retired Navy admiral, announced his resignation as head of
the F.A.A. in March after three years in which he was repeatedly frustrated in
his dealings with the Transportation Department, the airline industry and
Congress.

The appointment of Mr. McArtor, which had been expected, was announced by
President Reagan in Venice, where he is attending the economic summit meeting.

Mr. McArtor, 44 years old, is a senior vice president of Federal Express, the
country's largest overnight air freight company. A spokesman for the company
said that Mr. McArtor's current position involves telecommunications, radio and
video systems, optic fibers and satellites.

Federal Express has been one of the country's great business success stories,
having been founded in Memphis in 1973 and grown to a business that brought in
$2.6 billion in the 1986 fiscal year. It has 72 jet airplanes and 65
propeller-driven craft and employs 43,100 people.

One of Mr. McArtor's projects, however, did not share in the company's overall
success. That project was Zap Mail, a system designed to transmit documents
electronically, and it lost millions of dollars before Federal Express decided
to discontinue it.

The new head of the aviation administration is an aviator himself. Mr. McArtor
received the Silver Star and the Distinguished Flying Cross for his service in
Vietnam.

Representative Guy V. Molinari, Republican of Staten Island, who has used his
membership on the House Public Works and Transportation Committee to put the
F.A.A. under scrutiny, said of the appointment: ''He apparently was involved in
air freight, and it would be improper for me to pass judgment on the man. But I
do express disappointment that Admiral Engen has chosen to leave at this time.''

Of Mr. McArtor, Mr. Molinari said, ''He has good credentials, and I hope he is
willing to listen and to learn.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              245 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 6, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SCHROEDER CONSIDERS RUNNING FOR PRESIDENT

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 586 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 5


Representative Patricia Schroeder of Colorado said today she was considering
becoming a candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination.

Mrs. Schroeder, who is 46 years old and is the senior woman member of the House
of Representatives, had been a supporter of Gary Hart, the Coloradan who
withdrew from the race last month after his relationship with a Miami woman was
disclosed.

In recent weeks, Mrs. Schroeder said, she has been urged by many Democrats to
consider making her own bid for the nomination.

Aides said the eight-term Congresswoman expected to decide sometime this summer
whether to join a field that already has seven Democratic contenders. If she
runs, Mrs. Schroeder would be the first woman to seek the Presidency since 1972,
when Representative Shirley Chisholm, Democrat of Brooklyn, ran unsuccessfully.

''People have asked me to look at it seriously, and I feel I have to look at it
seriously,'' Mrs. Schroeder said today in an interview with The Associated
Press.

'Is It Too Late?'

''The only reason to run is to really go out and try to win,'' she said. ''You
look at it. How committed are people? How far along is the process? Is it too
late?''

Mrs. Schroeder said that her ability to raise the money needed for a
late-starting campaign would be crucial to her decision.

''That's very serious, that's very sobering,'' she said. ''You can have the best
ideas in the world and they don't get out unless you have the money to get them
out.

Dan Buck, her administrative assistant, said Mrs. Schroeder planned to spend
this weekend in California meeting with Democratic fund-raisers and strategists.

Although Mrs. Schroeder would be starting late, Mr. Buck said she would have one
advantage over the other Democratic contenders: ''She graduated from high school
in Iowa, she got married in Iowa and she still has a lot of relatives in Iowa.''

The Iowa caucuses in February are the first official voting of the 1988 primary
campaign.

One Democratic strategist said: ''She has served in the House longer than
Gephardt and has paid her political dues campaigning for other Democrats all
over the country. She has national political stature and her credentials are as
good or better as any of the other candidates.''

A Critic of Pentagon Waste

Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, who is leading the Democratic
Presidential field in Iowa in statewide opinion polls, was elected to the House
in 1976.

Mrs. Schroeder was elected to Congress in 1972, an upset victor in a campaign in
which she opposed the war in Vietnam and stressed environmental concerns. In her
first year in the House she won a seat on the Armed Services Committee over the
strong objection of the committee's chairman, Representative F. Edward Hebert, a
conservative Democrat from Louisiana. She is a sharp critic of Pentagon waste.

Some political strategists say Mrs. Schroeder, who is a strong advocate of arms
control, could mobilize the anti-nuclear groups behind her candidacy, which so
far have scattered their support among a number of candidates.

She also serves on the Judiciary Committee and is a leading sponsor of
legislation sought by women's groups, as well as a strong opponent of efforts to
restrict the right to abortion. Mr. Buck said that ''family issues'' would be
central to her campaign, if she ran.

The Congresswoman also coined a memorable phrase about President Reagan, calling
him ''the Teflon President'' because criticism did not seem to stick to him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              246 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WITH OLD VALUES AND NEW TITLES, CIVICS COURSES MAKE A COMEBACK

BYLINE: By EDWARD B. FISKE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1416 words


Buoyed by the celebration of the bicentennial of the United States Constitution
this year, the study of American government and democratic values is making a
comeback in primary and high schools.

The old term civics, which to older Americans conjures up memories of weighty
textbooks filled with diagrams of the three branches of Government or how a bill
becomes a law, is no longer fashionable. Instead, students are signing up for
courses in ''law-related education'' or ''citizenship education.''

Beginning in the fall of 1988, seniors in New York State high schools will be
required to take a new one-semester course on ''Participation in Government,''
which emphasizes such activities as mock trials.

A 'Hands-On' Exercise

The State Board of Education in California will soon present a social studies
curriculum that weaves together the study of ''civic virtue'' and ''democratic
values'' from kindergarten through the 12th grade.

Elsewhere, teachers are devising their own ways of making the study of
democratic values a ''hands on'' exercise. Cher Barefoot, a social studies
teacher at the Eleanor McMain School in New Orleans, takes her ninth graders to
the local courthouse to attend a trial; then they take their own vote on whether
the defendant is guilty. In Oakland, Calif., elementary school students write a
code of laws for their school and elect class officers in real voting booths.

At the Copley Square High School in Boston, students in Mildred Fryer's
ninth-grade social studies class debate case studies such as whether the
children of Jehovah's Witnesses should be required to salute the American flag.
Next week they will perform a play they have written about the Constitution's
precursor, the Articles of Confederation.

Fragmented Instruction

The resurgence of interest in democratic institutions comes in the wake of a
series of reports suggesting that American students are woefully deficient in
their understanding of how government works.

A 1983 study by the National Assessment of Educational Progress, a federally
financed project to evaluate school performance, found that 70 percent of the
17-year-olds ''failed to realize that the President cannot declare laws
unconstitutional.'' Only 40 percent knew that ''the Communist Party can nominate
a candidate for President of the United States.''

Ernest L. Boyer, author of ''High School,'' another 1983 study, concluded that
civics instruction had been ''shockingly neglected'' in recent years. ''We
observed only fragmented and scattered instruction in this area, and much of
that was superficial and uninspired,'' he said. ''Students are not even
beginning to have a basic understanding of the institutions that govern us.''

The recent efforts to bolster civics instruction are part of a broader national
effort, most of it driven by governors and state legislatures, to improve
teaching in all basic subjects.

Sense of Patriotism

Educators say the efforts also reflect changes in national attitudes, including
a greater sense of patriotism and a willingness to look at both the positive and
negative aspects of democratic government.

''During the 60's we got away from pride in America, and there was a period of
debunking American history,'' said Jack Zuckerman, principal of Public School 6
at 45 East 81st Street in Manhattan. ''But I think we're coming back. We point
out that the original Constitution was deficient in many respect, such as
denying civil rights for minorities and women. We also point out that, as a
basic document to set the stage for our present democracy, it's a wonderful
document.''

Last month the American Federation of Teachers published a booklet signed by 153
prominent Americans, from the tennis star Arthur Ashe to John Cardinal O'Connor
of New York, calling for ''special effort to raise the level of education for
democratic citizenship.'' They urged educators to abandon their morally neutral
approach to competing forms of government and to affirm that ''democracy is the
worthiest form of human governance ever conceived.''

Dealing With Issues

Civics first emerged as a subject in American public schools in the early 20th
century, largely because of pressures from the populist-oriented Progressive
political movement.

For many years the pattern was to teach civics in junior high school and in the
ninth grade, a strategy that assured instruction even for those who would
subsequently drop out of high school. High school seniors were then offered a
course in American government. In many cases the 12th-grade course dealt not so
much with governmental structures as with issues such as racism or poverty that
pose a challenge to the democratic way of life.

This pattern broke down in the 1960's and 1970's, when social unrest over civil
rights, the war in Vietnam and other issues put democratic institutions on the
defensive.

In many schools ninth-grade civics disappeared as a separate subject. Under the
influence of what came to be called ''new social studies,'' schools began
offering elective courses to older students in specific social sciences , such
as economics, psychology or sociology. ''Civics has become a nonword in the
curriculum,'' said Mr. Boyer. How Much is Taught?  At this point no one knows
exactly how much civics teaching goes on in American classrooms. ''We have local
control of education, so we don't really have good data,'' said Frances Haley,
executive director of the National Council for the Social Studies.

Chester E. Finn Jr., the assistant secretary of education in charge of research,
and Diane Ravitch, a historian at the Teachers College of Columbia University,
conducted a study to be published in September by the National Assessment of
Educational Progress. Half of the 17-year olds told researchers that they had
never taken ''a course in either civics or government,'' while nearly a quarter
had taken a one-year course and one-sixth had taken a half-year course.

Mr. Finn noted, however, that civics was often taught under the rubric of social
studies and was ''not studied as a discrete entity.''

Virtually every major textbook publisher puts out at least one civics textbook,
usually aimed at the junior high level. But several recent reports have had
harsh things to say about them.

Devoid of Controversy

People for the American Way, a liberal lobbying group, convened a panel of
scholars and educators to study 18 junior and senior high school government and
civics textbooks. While finding them ''impressive in their breadth of coverage,
attractive and well-organized,'' the panel criticized them for being preoccupied
with dates and facts and utterly devoid of controversy.

''They read like the Federal Register,'' said Anthony T. Podesta, president of
the organization. ''What emerges is a portrait of government as lifeless
institutions and mechanical processes, remote from politics and citizens.''

Reaction against both the absence and the dullness of civics education began in
the 1970's. The movement was supported by the American Bar Association and the
Center for Civic Education in Calabasas, Calif., a non-profit organization that
publishes widely used curriculum materials.

''The goal is to involve kids in Socratic dialogues and mock trials and other
things that will show them the realities of how government works,'' said Charles
Quigley, director of the center. ''It's really civic education, but people
learned that if you wanted funding from the Ford Foundation you called it
law-related education.''

A Lesson in Law

One school that follows this approach is New Rochelle High School, outside New
York City, where more than a quarter of the seniors usually sign up for an
elective course entitled ''Law Studies'' that involves conducting a mock trial.

One day last week Dan McNamera led his class through a discussion of the Fourth
Amendment's protection against unreasonable searches and seizures. He asked
students whether they agreed with judges who have refused to admit illegally
obtained evidence into a trial.

Jennifer Levison, a 17-year-old senior, at first suggested that ''the evidence
should be admitted and the policeman who obtained it should also be punished.''
But under prodding from the teacher and other classmates she decided that
''there is not a simple right answer.''

Later Miss Levison said she was glad she took the course. ''In American history
you memorize the amendments,'' she said. ''Here you apply them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Wing Chan and Andy Ng with a teacher, Jane Skelton going over
their part in a play; Photo of Students at New Rochelle High School discussing
the Fourth Amendment in a civics class (NYT/Suzanne DeChillo and Susan Lapides)
(Page 30)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              247 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. HPES A MISKITO INDIAN PARLEY WILL BOLSTER FIGHT AGAINST SANDINISTAS

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1109 words

DATELINE: TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras, June 1


After five years of steady failure, American officials are making a last-ditch
effort to create a new Miskito Indian guerrilla organization willing to take on
the Sandinista army.

In what appears to be a final attempt to resuscitate the fading Indian rebel
movement, the State Department has demanded and obtained the replacement of the
Central Intelligence Agency operatives who handled the Indians, after accusing
the agents of incompetence, according to diplomats and Miskito rebel leaders.

The Miskito rebel leaders, and diplomats who monitor them, say that late next
week, for the first time in five years of exile from Nicaragua, the Miskitos
will be allowed to hold a meeting of most of their elders and major leaders to
decide for themselves who should lead them and whether they want to continue
fighting the Sandinistas.

Top Indian leaders and diplomats in Tegucigalpa say that for the last five
years, the C.I.A. has relied on bribes, threats and the exile of selected Indian
officials to prevent the Indians from choosing their own leaders, because it
feared losing control of the Miskitos and also feared they might choose not to
fight.

'A Chance to Unify'

A top Indian official, Armstrong Wiggins, said of the meeting planned for next
week: ''We have a chance to unify, but if the people decide not to continue
fighting, that choice should be respected. Our people have suffered a lot.''

The C.I.A.'s handling of the Indians has raised questions in Washington and
Honduras.

''It has been pretty disastrous,'' said a diplomat who is aware of American
policy toward the Miskitos. ''Now it's time to see what the Miskitos will decide
for themselves.''

An American official involved in the policy said: ''There is a consensus among
all the agencies involved that the Miskito situation was mishandled. We
understand that the Miskitos have to demonstrate who their leaders are, and we
will respect their choice.''

Few analysts venture the view that the highly independent Indians could ever
have been easily organized into a major rebel force.

But several analysts say the handling of the Miskitos has been one of the major
failures of the Reagan Administration's policy toward Nicaragua. Diplomats who
discuss the Miskitos' problems refer to the United States use and abandonment of
other minority ethnic groups, like the Meo tribesmen in Vietnam and the Kurds in
Iran, who they say were the losers in past rebel wars run by the C.I.A.

Living on the isolated Atlantic coast and rivers of northern Nicaragua, the
Miskitos were never particularly warm toward the Sandinistas and became actively
hostile after Sandinista troops executed more than a dozen Indians, burned their
villages and killed their livestock in 1981 and 1982. Armed by the C.I.A. More
than 20,000 Indians fled into Honduras, where C.I.A. agents soon began arming
them. But faced with feuding Indian leaders, the C.I.A. backed only those
Miskitos whom it felt it could most easily control, several Indian and
diplomatic officials say.

The effort stumbled from disaster to disaster, as disgruntled Indian officials,
former combatants and diplomats accused C.I.A.-backed Indian rebels of torture,
executions, kidnappings and a marked propensity to spend C.I.A. dollars in
Honduras and Miami rather than leading the fight in Nicaragua.

As the Indian rebel movement fell apart this year, the C.I.A. desperately
sought, for the third time in the last five years, to create a front
organization for the Indians. Few Miskitos were willing to join, however,
diplomats and Indian officials say.

To press the Miskitos, C.I.A. agents backed the Honduran Army colonel who was in
charge of the isolated northeastern coastal border area where the Indian
refugees live.

Some Called 'Bad Indians'

Without formal legal process, witnesses of the colonel's actions say, he jailed
some dissident Miskito leaders, among them some of those who did not want to
fight, and publicly accused them of being ''bad Indians'' for failing to take
the battle to the Sandinistas.

Miskito representatives met with the colonel last month to complain about his
conduct. Two Indian leaders said the Honduran officer, with a C.I.A. agent
standing next to him, told the Miskito representatives that ''good Indians fight
in Nicaragua and bad Indians will be jailed.''

Faced with such prospects and a life in exile, Miskito refugees in Honduras have
begun to return to Nicaragua in larger numbers this year.

Their return has been encouraged by the Sandinistas, who have publicly
apologized for past abuses and offered to allow the Indians limited political
autonomy and to permit some armed rebels to return to some of their villages,
provided they agreed not to attack Sandinista units.

Mistrust for Sandinistas

But the situation still appears to be in flux, and it remains uncertain what
will happen when Indian leaders meet with representatives of some 12,000 exiles
in Honduras to decide what to do next. The Miskitos, whose dream has always been
to govern their own homelands in Nicaragua with substantial autonomy, still
appear to deeply mistrust the Sandinistas.

At the assembly to be held next week, a debate that could become heated is
expected over the failure of Indian leaders to safeguard their people's
interests, but a partial settling of accounts between rival leaders, who have at
times violently opposed each other, is also seen as a possibility.

To allow the Indian assembly to be as free as possible, American officials have
secured permission for two top Miskito leaders who were exiled under C.I.A
pressure to visit Indian refugee camps in the last month in preparation for the
decisive assembly.

One leader, Steadman Fagoth, was backed by the C.I.A. but was later dropped
after he publicly boasted of having executed opponents and after evidence
emerged that his men had tortured prisoners and kidnapped recruits and
opponents.

The other newly returned leader is Brooklyn Rivera. The C.I.A. reportedly
supported a ban on his entry to Honduras for the last four years because he
sought peace talks with the Sandinistas and because he denounced other rebel
leaders as fascists and killers.

But in the last two weeks Mr. Rivera toured Indian refugee camps with State
Deparment support, along with Mr. Fagoth and Wycliff Diego, a Miskito leader
backed by the United States. In an interview, Mr. Rivera said he had apologized
for feuding with rival leaders rather than finding ways to unite his people.

''If we unify, the resistance will go ahead,'' Mr. Rivera said. ''But each of us
bears responsibility for this, and the people are going to judge us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              248 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Pirate Attacks on Vietnam Refugees Fall Sharply

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 31


Vigorous police work in southern Thailand has sharply reduced pirate attacks on
Vietnamese refugees fleeing their country by boat, diplomats and relief-agency
officials say.

The attacks by seagoing criminals, including Thai fishermen, have been one of
the most unpleasant aspects of a refugee exodus in which uncounted lives have
been lost at sea.

Of 60 boats of Vietnamese refugees arriving in southern Thailand in the first
four months of this year, 17 had been attacked by pirates, according to
statistics compiled by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

''This is a horrible figure, but it is down dramatically,'' a Western diplomat
said.

The 28 percent attack rate in the first four months of this year compared with a
47 percent rate in the same period last year. The rate has been declining
steadily since 1981, when 80 percent of all arrivals reported attacks.

In these attacks, refugees reported, men were often thrown into the sea and
women abducted to islands, where they were sometimes abused for days by a
succession of boatloads of pirates.

The United Nations figures showed a 13 percent drop in reported rapes and a 60
percent drop in reported deaths of boat refugees from 1985 to 1986.

American diplomats attributed the downturn in the last 16 months to a new
emphasis on police work, rather than on oceangoing patrols. Both programs are
sponsored by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and supported by
the United States and other nations.

The diplomats cited statistics showing that the Thai authorities had arrested 65
people suspected of being pirates since the end of 1985, or more than in the
previous four years combined, when 30 people were arrested. Of these, 36
suspects were tried, convicted and sentenced to an average of 18.6 years,
according to Steven J. Kraus, the American Embassy reconsultant on boat
refugees. He said one man had been sentenced to death.

Mr. Kraus said the police in southern Thailand, with the encouragement of an
adviser from the American Embassy, were taking lessons in police procedures that
would upgrade their work.

Police work on piracy has been hampered by pressure from local power groups and
by the reluctance of refugees to jeopardize their chances for resettlement by
becoming involved in court cases.

Though the level of boat arrivals throughout Southeast Asia has remained roughly
constant this year, the number of boat refugees arriving in Thailand has risen
sharply, the officials said. Landings in Indonesia and elsewhere have fallen.

With the monsoon season about to begin, boat arrivals are expected to drop in
the coming months. #1,322 Arrived in May The United Nations reported that 1,322
Vietnamese refugees arrived in Thailand in May, The Bangkok Nation reported. It
said this was the highest number since 1981, when the figure reached more than
3,000.

For the first five months of this year, the United Nations reported, 4,067 boat
refugees arrived in Thailand. In all of 1986, 3,886 Vietnamese arrived by boat.
Relief agency workers said a small number of Cambodians had also started
arriving in Thailand.

Diplomats and aid officials said they could only guess at the reasons for the
increase in arrivals in Thailand. Some suggested that it could be related to a
slowdown in the Orderly Departure Program, in which refugees leave Vietnam by
plane after being screened by Vietnamese and American officials.

In a dispute over eligibility, the Vietnamese have cut off interviewing of
applicants by American diplomats since early 1986.

In recent months increasing numbers of boat refugees have begun following a
route that hugs the Cambodian shoreline and ends on the eastern coast of
Thailand.

This route is relatively free of pirates, aid officals said, and when these
arrivals are added to those in southern Thailand, the percentage who traveled
unharmed rises still further.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              249 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Christine Colby, an Account Executive, Marries John Peter Giraudo, a Lawyer

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 60, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 287 words


Christine Marie Colby and John Peter Giraudo were married yesterday at the Holy
Trinity Roman Catholic Church in the Georgetown section of Washington. The Rev.
John S. Enright performed the ceremony.

Mary Jennifer Bader was the maid of honor, and William Manning Muller was the
best man.

Mrs. Giraudo, the daughter of William Egan Colby of Washington and Barbara
Heinzen Colby of Arlington, Va., is an account executive at the New York public
relations firm of Hill & Knowlton. She graduated from the Immaculata Preparatory
School in Washington and cum laude from Tufts University. The bride was
presented at the 1978 International Debutante Ball and is a member of the Junior
League of New York.

Her father was Director of Central Intelligence under President Richard M. Nixon
from 1973 to 1976 and headed the Civil Operations and Rural Development Supports
program in South Vietnam from 1968 to 1971. He is presently an international
consultant in Washington.

The bride is a granddaughter of Mrs. Albert G. Boesel of Bethesda, Md., and the
late Karl A. Heinzen, president of the Bayer Aspirin Company in the 1930's.

Mr. Giraudo, the son of Mr. and Mrs. Peter Giraudo of San Francisco, graduated
from the St. Ignatius College Preparatory school in San Francisco, and summa cum
laude and Phi Beta Kappa from the University of California at Berkeley. He
received a bachelor of philosophy degree from Queen's College of Oxford
University and a law degree from the Hastings College of Law of the University
of California. He is an attorney adviser in the office of legal counsel of the
Justice Department in Washington. His father, who is retired, was a baker for
American Bakeries in San Francisco for 39 years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Christine Giraudo (Bachrach)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              250 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CROSSING THE LINE TO STARDOM

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3036 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD


TO DEFINE A MOVIE STAR IS almost impossible. To become one is equally difficult.

Fifty years ago, both were easier. A movie star was an actor or actress under
contract to Warner Bros. or Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, 20th Century-Fox or Paramount,
who had the top roles in three or four of the studio's big-budget movies each
year, the movies that cost $1.5 million and couldn't be made in less than eight
weeks.

In today's fragmented Hollywood, what is a star? No one even agrees on the
definition. If it is someone who can force audiences to buy tickets, Robert De
Niro is definitely not a star. If it is someone who is paid at least a million
dollars, the industry is chock-full of stars. Among the actors asking for $1
million or more are Don Ameche, Kim Basinger, Danny de Vito and Mickey Rourke.

''Tom Cruise can go into 10 bombs and it won't matter. Bette Midler can be in 18
failures and she's still a star because she lights up the screen,'' says Jeffrey
Katzenberg, chairman of Walt Disney Pictures, of the two actors who have made
the leap to genuine stardom in the last year.

''By stardom, people can mean actors who make over $1 million or actors who
guarantee you a certain box-office take or simply actors whose names are
familiar,'' says the producer and 20th Century-Fox studio executive, Laurence
Mark. Mr. Mark's own definition is ''someone I am consistently interested in
seeing on the screen. Some people are talented but they don't make your eyebrows
raise.''

Says James L. Brooks, the writer and director of ''Terms of Endearment,'' ''It's
an emotional connection that's made between the actor and the audience, either
an inner quality or extraordinary gifts.'' Mr. Brooks adds the one statement
about stardom with which everyone would agree: ''We all know it when we see
it.''

Who will be tomorrow's stars? A dozen top executives and producers were asked to
handicap the chances of 17 young actors: Matthew Broderick, Matt Dillon, Emilio
Estevez, Steve Guttenberg, C. Thomas Howell, Timothy Hutton, Rob Lowe, Madonna,
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Andrew McCarthy, Demi Moore, Judd Nelson, Sean
Penn, Elizabeth Perkins, Molly Ringwald, Ally Sheedy and Charlie Sheen. All of
them have already starred in at least one movie. Most of them are in the running
for the same roles, and indeed several have starred together as a group in such
films as ''The Breakfast Club,'' ''St. Elmo's Fire'' and ''About Last Night. .
.''

There was surprising unanimity among the executives and producers, the people
with sharp eyes for a fad or a trend who buy actors on today's open markets.
They were not questioning the talent of any of the actors; only whether they had
the special quality that makes a genuine movie star. To almost everyone, Rob
Lowe was too pretty. Timothy Hutton was too introverted. Sean Penn was too
self-destructive. Nor did they think that Judd Nelson, Emilio Estevez, C. Thomas
Howell, Ally Sheedy, Matt Dillon or Steve Guttenberg had the special qualities
necessary for stardom. On the other hand, Molly Ringwald was intrinsically
intriguing, said one. She demands that you watch what she's up to, said another.
Molly Ringwald, Charlie Sheen and Madonna were the three who were picked - not
quite unanimously - as most likely to become stars.

The executives agreed that some of the other actors' shots at stardom would
depend on the roles they were offered and the choices they made. They included
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, Matthew Broderick, Elizabeth Perkins, Demi Moore
and Andrew McCarthy.

Studio System

Even at the height of the studio system, Hollywood didn't always succeed at
turning rakish smiles or handsome profiles into movie stars. The audience, then
as now, could be fickle and headstrong and stubbornly resistant to drinking at
the trough of Hollywood hyperbole. Sam Goldwyn finally had to give up on Anna
Sten, who was to have been the new Marlene Dietrich. Instead, she earned the
nickname ''Goldwyn's Folly.'' And M-G-M made a tactical error by introducing
Deborah Kerr as ''Deborah Kerr, rhymes with Star,'' a mistake of demanding the
audience's love that took the English actress eight years and ''From Here to
Eternity'' to overcome.

Studios almost always failed when they tried to replace an existing star with a
newer model. Audiences wouldn't accept James Whitmore as a young Spencer Tracy
and only briefly tolerated Kim Novak as the new Rita Hayworth.

By and large, however, the formula worked.

The first step was to take an attractive young actor and shove him into as many
pictures as possible in as short a time as possible. Clark Gable had roles in 28
movies between 1931 and 1935. M-G-M put Mickey Rooney in eight movies in 1938.
When audiences balked at an early taste of the pungent Bette Davis, Jack Warner
kept flinging her back at them. Today, with no studios looking out for their
careers, young actors are lucky to appear in two movies a year.

A new actor who seemed promising was paired with his studio's major female
stars. In 1932, his first year at Paramount, Cary Grant was cast in seven
movies; his co-stars included Mae West, Carole Lombard, Marlene Dietrich and
Sylvia Sydney. A new actress was matched with her studio's male stars. Kim
Novak, who is often called the last studio-manufactured star (although that
dubious honor probably belongs to Sandra Dee), was paired with Frank Sinatra,
William Holden and Tyrone Power. Elizabeth Taylor made the celluloid transition
from child star to adult star at the age of 17 by playing Robert Taylor's wife
in ''The Conspirator.''

The rest was easy. Cradled in a seven-year contract, the star was taught
etiquette by the studio, renamed and given a new biography by the studio and
dressed by the studio, the roles as carefully custom-tailored as the clothes.
M-G-M kept Mickey Rooney as the lovesick high school student Andy Hardy until he
was 26 years old. That was what audiences and theater owners - who chose him as
the top box-office star of 1939, 1940 and 1941 - wanted. For M-G-M, Lana Turner
was the sophisticated girl and June Allyson was the girl next door. And Ava
Gardner was the love goddess who replaced Rita Hayworth and was in turn replaced
by Marilyn Monroe.

Things are different now. The seven-year contracts have been torn up and the
studio fan mail departments have been closed. And it's every man for himself.

The Front-Runner

It is 1:30 P.M. and Charlie Sheen is ravenous. Wearing black sweatpants and an
old T-shirt belonging to his brother Emilio Estevez, he hunches over the menu at
a Los Angeles hamburger joint. He chooses two hamburgers, clam chowder and
chicken wings, plaintively asking the waitress - she is aware of who he is and
he is aware that she is aware - to ''Bring food quick.'' It is a few days before
the opening of the blockbuster Academy Award-winning ''Platoon,'' in which he
plays a young college student molded in the crucible of Vietnam.

''Platoon'' was made by Hemdale and is being distributed by Orion. ''Ferris
Bueller's Day Off,'' in which Mr. Sheen played a short but arresting scene as a
street punk who taught Ferris Bueller's sister about love, was a Paramount
picture. In M-G-M's ''Red Dawn,'' he tried to defend the United States from the
Russians. He played a football hero in ''Lucas'' for 20th Century-Fox. Then came
''Three for the Road'' for Vista and ''No Man's Land,'' not yet released, for
Orion. Now he is back at Fox, starring in a film about the rise and fall of a
young stockbroker for ''Platoon'' director Oliver Stone in ''Wall Street.''

''Platoon'' has made 21-year-old Charlie Sheen's name recognizable to audiences
and allowed him to raise the asking price for his acting services to $1 million.
But Hollywood was aware of his potential more than a year ago.

''He was only on screen in 'Ferris Bueller' for three minutes and he damn near
stole it,'' says Ned Tanen, president of Paramount's Motion Picture Group.

Defining himself as ''5-foot-10-inches tall on paper'' and ''155 pounds soaking
wet with a pocketful of change,'' Charlie Sheen has a hulking presence and
watchful eyes. The son of Martin Sheen already notices a rustle when he enters a
room. Chain-smoking and chewing gum at the same time, he deftly imitates the
people who ''start whispering to one another'' when they see him.

Charisma's Role

It takes luck to become a star today, and a greater degree of luck than was
necessary when studios gave any pretty ingenue a half-dozen pictures in which to
prove herself. Luck and shrewdness. The right picture at the right time.
''Madonna's range is limited, but she's got a shot at stardom if she's lucky
enough to find a mainstream version of 'Desperately Seeking Susan,' '' says one
executive. After Tom Cruise's first major role, as a fanatic cadet in the 1981
movie ''Taps,'' he turned down numerous offers to play obsessed young men and
waited until he was offered ''Risky Business.''

''Through choices of material, careers happen,'' says Don Simpson, the
co-producer of the two ''Beverly Hills Cop'' movies. ''The gods used to be Louis
B. Mayer and Harry Cohn. There are no gods now. There's no studio executive or
producer alive today who has the power to make a star.''

Good luck isn't enough. Matt Dillon was showcased in ''Little Darlings,'' a
surprise box-office success. He followed it with starring roles in ''Tex,''
''The Outsiders'' and ''The Flamingo Kid.'' ''If he were going to be a star,
we'd know it by now,'' says one of the executives who handicapped the young
actors. ''He's had his shots,'' says another.

They agree that stardom has little to do with acting talent. The handicappers
often turned thumbs down by using the word ''interchangeable'' when referring to
some of the actors. While Disney's Mr. Katzenberg initially says Mr. Cruise is a
star because he is talented, he later admits that what he means by talent is
charisma. Nearly all of the dozen Hollywood experts speak of Timothy Hutton and
Ally Sheedy as enormously talented, but not charismatic enough to become real
stars.

That charisma or unique rapport with the audience can rarely be inherited. Of
all the children of movie stars - from Patrick Wayne and Peter Fonda to Sean
Flynn and Chad McQueen - who have tried acting, only Jane Fonda is a star of the
same magnitude, although a few, like Michael Douglas, have become serviceable
leading men.

Tom Cruise: Star

What Charlie Sheen is on the verge of becoming, Tom Cruise already is. Tom
Cruise became a star when ''Top Gun'' made $177 million at the box office last
year, and he solidified that victory by almost holding his own against Paul
Newman in ''The Color of Money.'' His voice on the telephone is soft and low. He
says ''Yes ma'am'' and ''No ma'am.'' Nearly everyone has mentioned his
politeness, but, from a movie star, it is, nevertheless, a shock.

He is 25 years old, and his asking price is $4 million a picture. Clark Gable's
last contract at M-G-M paid $7,200 a week. ''I'd much rather make my own
decisions,'' says Mr. Cruise. ''I like to make my own mistakes. After 'Taps'
came out, people saw me as a psychotic cadet. I was only offered those roles and
I wouldn't take them. I don't have a family to feed, and money isn't the reason
I became an actor. I would have held out as long as it would have taken.''

Mr. Cruise is next scheduled to co-star with Dustin Hoffman in ''Rainman,'' a
United Artists movie about two brothers. However, the project has been troubled,
and recently lost its director, Martin Brest.

What qualities, besides good looks, have propelled Tom Cruise?

''That guy has the most winning smile of anyone I have seen except Eddie
Murphy,'' says Mr. Katzenberg. ''His smile says, 'We're going to have fun.' ''
Adds Ellen Chenowitz, a casting director, ''He has that killer smile that
Nicholson and Redford have.''

''I don't worry about whether I'm making the right decision,'' says Mr. Cruise.
''I'm one to believe that everything I do is right, that I can make it right.''
That kind of confidence is part of Ms. Chenowitz's recipe for stardom. ''Actors
can't apologize for themselves,'' she says. ''You can't get the impression they
feel, 'I'm not really good. You don't want to see me.' ''

''Everything Tom does consumes him completely,'' says Mr. Simpson, who cast Mr.
Cruise as a cocky fighter pilot in ''Top Gun.'' ''He was our first and only
choice. When we were researching the story, we went to the naval base when the
sun was coming up. A quartet of flyers was walking towards us and they seemed
like a quartet of Cruises. He's a heterosexual Montgomery Clift. To be a teen
heartthrob you have to be nonthreatening in your sexuality. To cross over to
adult stardom, there has to be an edge. Tom Cruise is dangerous.''

Fortune's Hazards

To cross over to real stardom can also be dangerous - in an unexpected way.

''Actors used to make a living,'' muses Mr. Katzenberg. ''They got a paycheck
each week. Now they strike a fortune. It's like diving into the ocean and
finding a treasure chest. Bill Murray never has to work again and can live in
any life style he chooses for the rest of his life. So he has the weight of
'What Will Bill Murray Do Next and Will It Succeed?' on his shoulders.''

Under such internal pressure, some stars become incapable of making a decision.
Afraid to go back to work, they find themselves off the screen for years at a
time. Encrusted with both insecurity and self-importance, few have the carefree
recklessness that allows Jack Nicholson to accept small roles, secondary roles,
if the characters are interesting.

A look at the top box-office stars of the last 54 years is instructive. Each
year since 1932 Quigley Publications has polled the nation's theater owners.
Between 1932 and 1940, Shirley Temple led the list three times and the Top 10
was evenly divided between actors and actresses. It has been downhill for
actresses ever since. Between 1973 and 1976, Barbra Streisand was the only woman
to make the list.

This change in the status of actresses is at least partly because the core
moviegoing audience today is between 12 and 25 years old. Since this audience
prefers action-adventure movies and comedies with male stars, there are few good
roles for women. Thus Demi Moore is likely to have a harder struggle than Andrew
McCarthy, although the experts felt much the same about their chances at
stardom.

Although the Quigley poll most often reflects the popularity of an actor's
movies during a particular year - Michael J. Fox was in fourth place in 1985
because of ''Back to the Future'' and Prince was in eighth place in 1984 with
''Purple Rain'' - the list is most interesting in spotlighting the few stars who
have endured for decades. Mr. Fox, who has a major hit right now with ''The
Secret of My Success'' and recently won the coveted lead role in ''Bright
Lights, Big City,'' and Eddie Murphy, whose ''Beverly Hills Cop II'' is burning
up the box office, are certainly present-day stars. But only the future will
tell whether they will come near equaling Clint Eastwood, who first made the
list in 1968 and has been there every year since. Between 1949 and 1974 John
Wayne dropped off the list only once. Bing Crosby was No. 1 from 1944 to 1948
and didn't vanish until 1955.

There are fashions in movies and movie stars. Jack Nicholson, with his shark's
smile and anti-hero ways, was the perfect star for Watergate and the cynical
years that followed. Fox's Mr. Mark thinks one component of the very polite and
traditionally handsome Tom Cruise's success is ''a return by the nation to
traditional values.'' Matthew Broderick's combination of bravura and sweetness
would have been perfect during the years when Mickey Rooney was ruling the box
office. In 1987, he will not be able to surmount his boyish looks, according to
more than half of the handicappers.

Two things are certain: Since luck is unpredictable, the handicappers will be
wrong in more than one case. And by 1989, there will be a new crop of
candidates. One or two will become stars. A few will disappear. The rest will
work steadily in television movies or star in films whose success or failure
won't depend on them. A few will explode for a year or two and then fade.

With ''Saturday Night Fever'' and ''Grease,'' John Travolta was a bigger star
than Tom Cruise. ''But the public wasn't interested in seeing him grow up,''
says a movie executive. ''They liked him as king of the disco and as king of the
prom.''

THE NEXT CROP

It sometimes takes only one picture to trigger a career. It sometimes takes a
dozen. Waiting in the wings with good reviews or a few leading roles are:

Holly Hunter (in photo), who was most recently seen as the police officer who
desperately wanted a baby in ''Raising Arizona,'' has won a plum role for which
half a dozen top actresses yearned. She will star opposite William Hurt in James
L. Brooks's next film, as yet untitled, about tensions in a television newsroom.

Eric Stoltz, after losing his part in ''Back to the Future'' to Michael J. Fox a
few weeks after the movie began shooting, landed the leading role as a deformed
boy in ''Mask.'' He took off the mask to star in John Hughes's teen-age comedy
''Some Kind of Wonderful.''

Mary Stuart Masterson was seen this spring as the drummer girl who loved Eric
Stoltz's character in ''Some Kind of Wonderful'' and as an Army wife whose
husband goes to Vietnam in ''Gardens of Stone.''

River Phoenix played the sturdy leader of a group of 12-year-old boys in last
summer's surprise hit ''Stand by Me'' and Harrison Ford's son in ''The Mosquito
Coast.'' Now 16, he has just finished shooting ''Little Nikita,'' which stars
Sidney Poitier.

Lori Singer, who played the minister's daughter who wasn't allowed to dance in
''Footloose,'' is currently starring as the passive wife of a tobacco farmer in
''Summer Heat.''

John Cusack was first noticed as a college student who takes a cross-country
trip in ''The Sure Thing.'' He is currently starring in ''Hot Pursuit.''

Virginia Madsen, who was crowned Miss Strawberry Blossom of 1957 in the Home Box
Office movie ''Long Gone,'' will soon be seen opposite Tom Hulce in ''Slam
Dance.''  - A.H.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of films (pgs.1,42)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              251 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CLOUT ISN'T EVERTHING

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN; Martin Tolchin is a correspondent in the Washington
bureau of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 23, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 782 words



MAKING PUBLIC POLICY
A Hopeful View of American Government. By Steven Kelman. 332 pp. New York: Basic
Books. $19.95.

''WHEN people try to achieve good public policy, the result tends to be good
public policy,'' writes Steven Kelman, a professor of public policy and
government at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government. It is
one of dozens of provocative statements that come whirling out of ''Making
Public Policy,'' a stimulating, unrelenting attack on conventional wisdom and
one that could easily touch off the academic equivalent of a barroom brawl.

Mr. Kelman's major premise takes issue with assaults on government from both
right and left. Government has long served as an all-purpose scapegoat.
''Government is not the solution to our problem,'' President Reagan said in his
first inaugural address. ''Government is the problem.'' While the radical right
feared that government existed primarily to redistribute the nation's wealth and
impede economic progress, the radical left viewed government as a conspiracy
between the superrich and their political lackeys.

Mr. Kelman demurs. He believes that the American Government works. In the
''broad span'' of history, he notes, the nation has been spared secret police,
enjoyed extended prosperity and avoided widespread starvation. The United
States, he says, has ''absorbed multitudes of the wretched of the earth,
succeeded in assuring most people a decent old age, and saved a surprising
amount of the natural beauty on the American continent.'' Every year, government
teaches millions of children to read and protects public health and safety.
''Compared with our achievements, our problems and shortcomings seem trivial,''
Mr. Kelman writes. ''Although we should not give government all the credit for
this, we should not deny it any credit either.''

Government works, he argues, because there is an abundance of ''public-spirited
individuals . . . motivated by an honest effort to achieve good public policy.''
It is this public spirit, and not self-interest, that is the real driving force
behind our government. He notes that government efforts sometimes have
unintended consequences but adds that it would be ''perverse . . . to sup-pose
that our understanding of the world around us is such that we fail more often
than we succeed in choosing the correct means to achieve our ends.''

Mr. Kelman has little respect for what he calls ''the journalist's approach to
the policy-making process,'' which he says has a high degree of suspicion and
tends to view governmental decisions as sellouts to special interests. He holds
that ''the more important a policy is, the less important is the role of
self-interest in determining that policy.'' Self-interest may explain the
location of a new Federal building in Missoula, he says, but can it explain the
great upheavals of past decades? Of course, there are those who regard the
pressures generated by the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. and other great black
leaders as crucial to the civil rights victories of two decades ago, and those
who believe that student demonstrations ignited a national fury that ended the
Vietnam War.

Mr. Kelman lambastes the 1984 Grace Commission report on government waste; he
correctly describes it as ''perhaps the supreme monument to the perception that
the operating performance of government is horrendous.'' He says the report was
''mired in fraudulent classification and hopelessly sloppy research.'' One
example: the commission compared the General Services Administration to a
private insurance company and found that the Government ''employs 17 times as
many people and spends almost 14 times as much on total management costs.'' In
fact, the comparison was with an insurance company that owned a small fraction
of the number of buildings managed by the G.S.A., and the report mistakenly
listed as 200 ''individuals'' 200 ''property management firms'' that had many
people working for them. MR. KELMAN devotes much attention to how government
works, with chapters on the Presidency, Congress, the Supreme Court and the
bureaucracy. '' 'Clout' is the stuff of political journalism and of Washington
novels,'' he writes. This approach, he argues, obscures the substantive issues,
exaggerates the importance of money or threats and suggests that government
responds to outside pressures rather than to those within the institutions
themselves.

Mr. Kelman gives us an abundance of ideas to ponder. His frequently Panglossian
view is balanced by a postscript, what crude journalists might call the bottom
line. He ends the book with the observation: ''This is the only government we've
got.'' No argument there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              252 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By ALIDA BECKER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 301 words



STORIES IN ANOTHER LANGUAGE. By Yannick Murphy. (Knopf, $15.95.) The language of
Yannick Murphy's spare, stark vignettes is, for the most part, that of
childhood. And while she concentrates on depicting the shadows of violence, the
disingenuous flirting with taboos that can make these years distinctly
unpleasant, there is also a strain of longing underneath the harsh surfaces of
her fiction that usually keeps it just within range of our sympathy and
understanding. The most successful of these 17 stories, like ''Ball and
Socket,'' illuminate the web of love and sexual tension that must be broken by a
father and his growing daughter, or, like ''Believer in Death,'' explore the
tentative camaraderie of a mother and daughter who pass up Fourth of July
fireworks for a nocturnal foraging trip to the junkyard. But almost always there
is an unpleasant jolt of some kind: a sea of rats blocks the way to the dump; a
father-daughter stroll is interrupted by the discovery of a boy's body hanging
from a tree. Meant to be disturbing and provocative, Ms. Murphy's revelations,
especially in such brief scenarios, can also seem gratuitous. And yet, despite
their unevenness, the stories in this debut collection from a 24-year-old New
Yorker have a surprising assurance. More surprising is the ease with which Ms.
Murphy moves from down-home country landscapes to gritty city streets, then
highlights these characteristically American settings with glimpses of wartime
China, of bloody Saigon. Such bold dexterity suggests that, like the heroine of
''The Escape,'' a woman fleeing in a tightly sealed train from fighting in
Manchuria, this writer may be ready to pull down the boards that wall up the
windows of her prose, to try for a big picture instead of a handful of artfully
shocking snapshots.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              253 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SCIENCE FICTION

BYLINE: By GERALD JONAS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1265 words


I have never understood why people are attracted to horror movies that promise
to give the viewer nightmares. But Connie Willis's new novel, LINCOLN'S DREAMS
(Bantam, $15.95), literally gave me dreams -strange narrative fantasies that
left me with a not unpleasant sense of being on the verge of some important
revelation. As the book itself did.

Jeff Johnston, a researcher for a popular historical novelist known as Broun, is
introduced at a publishing party to a strange young woman named Annie, who has
sought psychiatric help because she cannot stop dreaming. Annie's dreams are
filled with violent images of the American Civil War, about which she knows
little. Her psychiatrist, a thoroughly believable bad guy who is also her lover,
is driving Annie crazy with his efforts to squeeze her distress into some
prefabricated Freudian box. But Jeff knows better, since the War Between the
States is Broun's obsession and his own meal ticket. From his detailed
researches into the lives and times of Abraham Lincoln and Robert E. Lee, Jeff
deduces that Annie is dreaming someone else's dreams; the experience (a kind of
haunting of the spirit) is killing her.

Ms. Willis's theme, as in her prize-winning story, ''Fire Watch,'' is the
persistent nature of time. The past is alive, not only in our memories, but in
some super-real sense, and we ignore its claims on us at our peril. Although the
tale is inherently sensational, its telling is anything but. The author recounts
extraordinary events in a homely, self-effacing prose that occasionally annoyed
me: I wanted more fire, more blood, more revelation. But Ms. Willis knows the
artful uses of frustration. In the end she withholds nothing -the identity of
the ''real'' dreamer, the reason for Annie's anguish, the motive for Jeff's
involvement.

The extensive Civil War lore (with its litany of battlefields and heroes on
horseback and body counts) is crucial to the development of the story, which
turns on the conflict between love and duty. Indeed, this is a love story on
more than one level, and Ms. Willis does justice to them all. It was only toward
the end of the book that I realized how much tension had been generated, how
engrossed I was in the characters, how much I cared about their fates. The
ending seems inevitable without being, in any sentimental sense, ''satisfying.''
Which is why, presumably, I found myself dreaming about it.

                                      *  *  *

TOOL OF THE TRADE (Morrow, $15.95) by Joe Haldeman is a sharply written thriller
based on a fantasy of power that most of us, I suspect, entertained at least
once or twice during childhood. What if you had the ability to control other
people's minds, to make them think and do exactly what you wanted? Would you use
such power for personal gain or for the good of all humanity?

Nicholas Foley, a professor of psychology at M.I.T., accidentally discovers a
mind-control device while conducting some experiments in hypnosis with his wife.
His immediate reaction is to hide the discovery from everyone (including his
wife). Foley has even better reasons than most to wonder whether the world is
ready for such a breakthrough; he is in fact a K.G.B. mole so successful in his
long masquerade as an American academic that he has grown unsure about where his
loyalty belongs.

Resisting the temptation to tinker with history, Foley sits on his invention for
years, using it only to snuff out an occasional mugger or dope dealer, who,
according to his eccentric sense of morality, deserves to die. When his hand is
finally forced by circumstance, he sets in motion an elaborate plan to save the
world. Unfortunately, Mr. Haldeman lets the details of this plan divert
attention from the fascinatingly flawed character he has taken some pains to
create. I found Foley's ambivalences and hesitations far more intriguing than
the slam-bang wish-fulfillment ending.

                                      *  *  *

Brian W. Aldiss is the author of the magnificent Helliconia trilogy and a fine
history of science fiction (recently revised under the title ''Trillion-Year
Spree''). In THE YEAR BEFORE YESTERDAY: A NOVEL IN THREE ACTS (Franklin Watts,
$16.95) he looks back on his personal history as a writer of science fiction.
The bulk of his new book consists of reworkings of novellas that he first
published in 1958 and 1965. They are presented within a framework that purports
to be a metaphysical murder mystery set in a contemporary world in which Nazi
Germany won World War II.

The protagonist, a Finnish composer, finds the body of a young woman near his
home; in her knapsack are two paperback books belonging to the genre of
''Maybe-Myths . . . in which many unlikely things are supposed to have happened
in the past or the future.'' He reads the stories, which treat the great science
fiction themes of telepathy and intelligent aliens in the never-look-back manner
of the pulp magazines of a generation ago. Both stories have wildly improbable
happy endings; part of their charm in this context is Mr. Aldiss's wistful
wonder over the fact that he (and, by implication, we) could ever have taken
such juvenile stuff seriously.

Curiously, it was the framework story, obviously meant to provide a comment on
the meta-fictional nostalgia, that I had trouble taking seriously. I was neither
amused nor edified by the nude ''mad scene'' that the composer's wife plays out
for a police captain who believes he is possessed by a reindeer. At one point
the Finnish composer calls the old-fashioned ''Maybe-Myth'' he has just read an
''impossible diversion.'' I for one am willing to leave it at that.

                                      *  *  *

The 11 stories in THE JAGUAR HUNTER (Arkham House, $21.95) by Lucius Shepard are
all travel stories of a sort. Several take place on an all-purpose Caribbean
island called Guanoja Menor, where reality is a flexible category subject to the
distortions of nonstop drinking, drugs and mixtures of African, aboriginal and
modern magics. These stories, like the others in this strong collection, exhibit
a dazzling surface of hallucinogenic special effects that can get in the way of
the author's purpose, which, I gather, is to explore the human animal in
extremis.

Mr. Shepard is most successful in two stories that re-create the horrors of
Vietnam in only slightly surrealistic Central American settings. If you wonder
whether the narrative freedom of science fiction can add anything to an
evocation of modern jungle warfare (where high technology self-destructs in
impotent rage at what it cannot control), read ''Salvador'' and ''R & R.'' Less
successful are such stories as ''The Jaguar Hunter'' and ''The End of Life as We
Know It,'' which draw the contrast between civilized decay and primitive vigor
so broadly that they end up patronizing what they set out to celebrate.

Only one story in the collection, ''The Man Who Painted the Dragon Griaule,''
promises a change of mood, with a scene-setting paragraph that begins: ''In
1853, in a country far to the south, in a world separated from this one by the
thinnest margin of possibility, a dragon named Griaule dominated the region.''
The dragon is alive but unmoving, the man who paints it literally covers its
body with paint (in order to kill it), and the world of this quietly lyrical
fantasy turns out to be no less violent (and no less real) than the other worlds
of Lucius Shepard.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              254 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEADLINERS;
Speaking of Running

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 113 words


After nearly four years of rumored political candidacies in Michigan, Virginia,
Tennessee and New York, Peter M. Dawkins, a much-decorated Vietnam War general
who left the army to become an investment banker, announced last week that he
would run for office - in New Jersey. Mr. Dawkins said he would seek the
Republican nomination to oppose incumbent Democratic Senator Frank R. Lautenberg
next year. A West Pointer who won both a Rhodes scholarship and the Heisman
Trophy, college football's highest honor, Mr. Dawkins picked a state that
already has a onetime sports star and Rhodes scholar in the Senate - Bill
Bradley, a former Knick forward and Princeton all-American.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Peter M. Dawkins

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              255 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

HEADLINERS;
Speaking of Vietnam

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 118 words


California State Assemblyman Tom Hayden, who as a campus firebrand two decades
ago flung brickbats over the war in Vietnam, chose not to be on the receiving
end last week. Mr. Hayden canceled his scheduled commencement speech at San Jose
State City College after groups of Vietnamese students threatened to disrupt the
proceedings. ''This was a decision made in consideration of those people who
should graduate without the threat of violence and disruption,'' said Bill
Schulz, a spokesman for Mr. Hayden. Tip Nguyen, a San Jose attorney who helped
plan one of the anti-Hayden demonstrations, accused the Santa Monica Democrat of
having ''supported the North Vietnamese in the conquest of South Vietnam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 21, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A short article about Tom Hayden in The Week in Review on June 7 misstated the
circumstances surrounding the cancellation of a speech he was to have made at
the San Jose City College commencement on June 5. The appearance by Mr. Hayden,
a California Assemblyman who was an activist during the Vietnam War, was
canceled by the college, because of fears that the ceremony would be disrupted
by what it called ''outside groups.''

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tom Hayden

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              256 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A Woman in Foreign Service Who's a Hard Act to Follow

SECTION: Section 4; Page 28, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 350 words



To the Editor:

Anthony Lewis writes about the Senate stoppage of the nomination of Melissa
Wells as Ambassador to Mozambique (column, May 19). He asserts, in effect, that
she is simply another of Senator Helms's numerous targets of opportunity in his
effort to make this country's Foreign Service march in his ideological lockstep.

Ms. Wells is, however, not simply yet another U.S. diplomat unfortunate to draw
the Senator's wrath. In 1966, I succeeded her as vice consul on the placid
island of Trinidad, where she was both legend and hard act to follow. I
subsequently followed her career.

When I joined the Foreign Service in 1961, there was a scattering of women in my
class. In 1964, I had a soft posting to Montreal, where, to my naive surprise,
my fellow junior officers were predominantly female. I was told by a male
colleague that it was hoped that the young female Foreign Service officers would
fall in love, marry and drop out. Even before this, I had warned female friends
that for them the Foreign Service would prove a dead-end job. Trinidad, like
Montreal, was a posting where, unlike Vietnam and much of the world, there was
little hardship or endemic violence that would serve to promote your career.

I suspect that when both Ms. Wells and Senator Helms are out of government, her
determination not to be permanently shunted aside by the Foreign Service will
outshine the foreign policy accomplishments of the Senator. More than any
person, Melissa Wells opened up Foreign Service postings in tension-ridden,
hence promotion-prone areas. She was our Ambassador to the swampish
Guinea-Bissau and an Ambassador at the United Nations, and she subsequently
represented that organization saving lives in prostrate Uganda. Meanwhile, other
Foreign Service women have taken increasingly important roles in representing
America abroad. In great part, they have Ms. Wells to thank.

In contrast, one can read through the diplomatic lists of virtually all foreign
capitals and, looking under ''U.S.S.R.,'' find nary a woman.

RALPH E. HAMIL
  New York, May 19, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              257 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BIKERS BRING DOLLARS, NOT DEBRIS, TO RESORT

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 887 words

DATELINE: LAKE GEORGE, N.Y., June 6


More than 20,000 motorcyclists politely stormed the village of Lake George this
weekend, appropriating every curbside parking space in its two-mile downtown
strip, occupying most of its motel rooms and leaving behind, when the exhaust
cleared, millions in revenue.

From Connecticut and Ohio, Tennessee and Quebec, they rode to this resort town
about 200 miles north of New York City to participate in the largest gathering
of touring motorcyclists in the country, Americade '87.

''At first there was some anxiety,'' said Pat Collins, executive director of the
Lake George Convention and Visitors Bureau, describing the reaction of the town
five years ago, when it was asked to be the host of the five-day event, which
has been held here each year since.

''As soon as you say motorcycles you think of Marlon Brando in 'The Wild One'
and leather jackets,'' she said. ''But these are good people. They're what I'd
call your Madison Avenue bike rider.''

Sally Soto, a neonatal intensive-care nurse from Levittown, L.I., who trades
hospital whites for biker's blacks each weekend when she tours with the Over the
Hill Gang, agreed. ''There's this throwback image to the Hell's Angels and the
Pagans,'' she said. ''It's hard to shake the image of being tough, but these are
all respectable people.''

Even Malcolm Forbes, who last month hosted a gathering where Elizabeth Taylor
was the guest of honor, made it to this party. Mr. Forbes, the publisher of
Forbes magazine, arrived Friday on his new, red, made-in-America Harley
Davidson.

''Americade is doing more for the image of motorcyclists than any other event,''
proclaimed Mr. Forbes who, like most of the bikers here, is over 40, graying,
sports no tattoos and looks as menacing as, at this point, Mr. Brando himself.

Unlike his fellow sojourners, however, Mr. Forbes came with his own corporate
entourage, recreational vehicle and helicopter. Airborne on Saturday morning, he
was able to view the ''living logo'' live - 3,000 motorcyclists rendering the
Americade '87 signature in the beach parking lot.

Two Weeks of Calculations

It took two weeks of computer calculations to determine how many motorcycles
were needed to form the logo, with volunteers spending another seven days to lay
the design in paint and tape on the asphalt.

''This is like history,'' said Sterling Robinson 42, a transit worker from
Brooklyn, as he idled his bike in the parking lot, waiting to take his place
along the thin pink line. ''Ten years from now you can point to the picture of
this and say you were right there, at the tip of the eight in '87.''

After two hours of exquisite choreography, the logo was assembled and
participants were asked to smile for the cameras, which were aloft in light
aircraft. Then, revving their engines, they pulled out two abreast along Beach
Road, under an inflated arch in the shape of a tire, to Lake George's main drag,
Canada Street.

There, for an hour, as traffic was closed to pedestrians and other vehicles,
they showed off their bikes, riding back and forth. It was an innovation, said
Bill Dutcher, the Americade Inc. president, that allowed for simultaneous
viewing and parading.

Mr. Forbes was there, as was Bob Moore, a Bell Laboratories supervisor from
Naperville, Ill., on his fully ornamented Kawasaki. There were contingents from
the Christian Motorcyclists Association, a Vietnam veterans' group, the Michigan
Dressers and the Peacemakers, a squad that liked to test its horns.

Delmont (Cowboy) Estes of Seymour, Conn., a member of the Retreads, a national
group for over-40 riders, was also there with his wife, Tina, astride their
metallic green 1972 Harley. Mr. Estes, attending his third Americade , is
something of a celebrity at the rally.

He won the ''Best Decorative Lighting'' trophy for his ornately illuminated
bike, with its graduated tiers of red taillights in the back, and narrow orange,
red and purple stalagmites around the perimeter of the whole bike.

While perhaps more zealous than most, Mr. Estes was not alone in ''dressing up''
his motorcycle. Almost every machine that pulled into Lake George last week had
been ''customized,'' with chrome or pin stripes or stereo systems that get
louder as the engine accelerates.

For those who felt the urge to outfit their bikes or themselves further, there
were vendors selling motorboat trailers, sheepskin saddles, windshield etching,
leather chaps and side cars.

Curt Peircey, a Connecticut state trooper from Watertown, Conn., and chairman of
the Northeast section of the Blue Knights, an international motorcycle club for
members of law-enforcement agencies, bought a miniature horse trailer to pull
behind his Honda Interstate.

Morris Benjamin, 73, a retired welder from Loch Sheldrake, N.Y., who recently
won a trophy for oldest rider at a rally in Middletown, N.Y., bought a straw
cowboy hat. Beverly Barscht, a backseat rider from Sterling Heights, Mich., who
wears Harley Davidson earrings, Harley Davidson finger rings, Harley Davidson
pins and Harley Davidson pendants, bought Harley Davidson jewelry.

Mike Demilo, of Gilette, N.J., bought nothing but heartache. Although his ticket
for the 1987 Honda Gold Wing motorcycle door prize was selected Friday night,
Mr. Demilo was not present for the drawing and forfeited the $10,000 bike.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of motorcycle participating in the festival at Lake George
(NYT/Nancie Battaglia)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              258 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NANCY REAGAN SAYS HEARINGS HAVE NOT AFFECTED PRESIDENT

BYLINE: By STEVE LOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 475 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM, June 8


Nancy Reagan, in her first public comments on the Iran-contra affair since the
Congressional hearings began a month ago, expressed concern today about the
effect of the case on her husband's Administration but said it had not yet
affected the President.

Speaking to reporters traveling with her from Venice to Sweden, where she is
observing Swedish drug-abuse programs, Mrs. Reagan discussed a range of topics,
among them how she views her role as First Lady and her husband's Presidency.

Mrs. Reagan was greeted warmly this afternoon by a high school assembly and
community drug counselors in a Stockholm suburb. But there were about 200
demonstrators outside the high school, carrying banners saying, ''U.S. Trade in
Arms Funds Contra Rebels,'' ''Stop Star Wars,'' and ''Nancy Go Home.'' #90
Protesters Arrested This evening, the Swedish police arrested 90 demonstrators
outside the Grand Hotel, where Mrs. Reagan is staying, after some of the
protesters threw stones at patrol cars. There were no injuries reported, and no
damage to the hotel.

Earlier, in discussing the Iran-contra affair, Mrs. Reagan said she had closely
followed news reports of the Congressional hearings.

''I read about it in the papers,'' Mrs. Reagan said. ''I see it on the nightly
news.''

Although Mrs. Reagan said she did not think that the Iran-contra affair would
ultimately overshadow the achievements of her husband's Presidency, she did
express concern about the effect of the case.

''It certainly is too bad it happened,'' Mrs. Reagan said. ''You hate to have
people out there doing things you don't know about. But you have to look at the
overall picture of what he has accomplished.''

''And it's been so long since we've had an eight-year presidency and there's
just so much that he's done,'' she added.

Asked whether the Iran-contra affair had affected her husband, Mrs. Reagan said
no.

Swedish Success Against Drugs

Sweden was selected for Mrs. Reagan's tour as a nation that has waged an
effective fight against drug abuse through national prevention campaigns and
community treatment programs. Accordingly, her visit is a measure of
international recognition of a Swedish success story.

Though not an official visit, Mrs. Reagan's trip does bolster the United States
diplomatic efforts to improve Swedish-American relations. Neutral Sweden's
outspoken opposition to the Vietnam War rankled Washington in the past, and
Stockholm's aid to the Reagan Administration's enemies, like Nicaragua, has
tended to keep relations cool.

But since he arrived in late 1985, Gregory J. Newell, the United States
Ambassador to Sweden, has tried to revive the dialogue between the two
countries, and Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson is scheduled to meet with
President Reagan in Washington in September, the first such official state
mission in two decades.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              259 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SHACKS OF LAOTIAN REFUGEES OFFEND MINNESOTA NEIGHBORS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 36, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words

DATELINE: ROSEMOUNT, Minn., June 8


Some residents say shacks built by Laotian refugees who farm in this
east-central Minnesota community are embarrassing and should be replaced.

Jim Benson lives near the shacks built of tree trunks and sheets of canvas along
County Road 71. He said he and his neighbors wanted the shelters ''to add to the
neighborhood, rather than make it look like a Southeast Asian village.''

But Nana Gill, who with her husband, John, rents 100 acres to about 200 refugee
families, said if there was cause for concern, it went beyond the shelters. ''I
think there is a problem in our neighborhood, and it deals with racism,'' she
said.

Shelters Torn Down in Fall

Refugees have tended small gardens and one-acre plots in the Rosemount area for
the past five years and each year they have built temporary shelters. Most are
torn down in the fall.

But this year, neighbors say there are more shelters and they are more shabby.
Five shelters face County Road 71 on the Gill farm. A half-mile south, three
face the road on a farm belonging to Wayne Groth.

Last month, vandals knocked down three shelters on the Gill property with a
four-wheel-drive vehicle. A car owned by a refugee also was damaged.

''If white families built the huts, I don't think they would have been knocked
down,'' Mrs. Gill said.

Neighbors deny ill feelings toward the refugees. They say they are concerned
only about the unsightliness of the huts. .

''Goodness, they are good people,'' Mr. Benson said. ''They don't give any
trouble to neighbors with theft or trespassing.''

The refugees are Hmong, a Laotian mountain people who supported the American
forces in Vietnam and fled their homeland after the Communist takeover. They
live in Minneapolis and St. Paul, rent the farmland and use the shacks for
shelter from sun or rain.

''The people out here really need them badly, especially when it rains,'' said
one of the refugees, Mai Vang, a University of Minnesota student who puts
herself through school growing vegetables. ''Usually, a relative drops them off,
and they have to stay outside six or seven hours.''

Mr. Benson, a computer company executive, said the shacks are ''an embarrassment
when other executives and employees come out - you shouldn't have to apologize
for your neighborhood.''

He and several other residents told the City Council last week that the shelters
are unsightly and should be replaced with what Mr. Benson called something
''Americanized.''

Building Codes Do Not Apply

The City Council took no action. City building codes do not apply to to such
small structures, and most buildings used for agricultural purposes do not
require construction permits.

This year, for the first time, the University of Minnesota is renting land to
refugees at its research center site in Rosemount. Two shelters are set along
County Road 42, but they are obscured by a grove of trees and a dip in a field,
says Al Imhoff, the center's superintendent.

''I had seen the buildings on 71 in former years and know how terrible they can
look,'' he said. No one has complained to the university about the shelters.

The Gills and Mr. Groth have agreed to ask the refugees to improve the
appearance of their shelters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              260 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 10, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, JUNE 10, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1076 words



International    A3-15

 At the Venice summit, the leaders of the seven major industrial democracies
issued a declaration endorsing freedom of navigation in the Persian Gulf. It
fell short of the Administration's wishes for a stern warning to Iran.      Page
A1

 The President is suffering setbacks at the seven-nation summit conference in
Venice, according to American and other participants. Officials said no
noteworthy economic policy proposals were likely.     A1

 News analysis: The Venice summit was predicted to have had ''important
developments'' by the White House chief of staff. But other key aides to
President Reagan sounded a good deal more defensive, especially in private.
A10

 News analysis: Important questions about the Iran-contra affair remain
unanswered. Precisely what President Reagan knew and did will not be known until
Rear Adm. John M. Poindexter and Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, testify.     A1

 Fawn Hall testified about details of how she helped Col. North alter, shred or
remove documents implicating him in the Iran-contra affair. It was her second
day of testimony.     A15

 In Britain, the Labor Party leader has used stinging sarcasm as a penetrating
weapon against Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's self-assurance. But Neil
Kinnock's combativeness counts for only so much.     A1

 Accusations stir protests in Panama

A3

 Iran and Iraq cautious in Gulf

A3

 Bangkok journal

A4

 South Korea acts on new president

A5

 Pope speaks of homeland's past

A6

 East Berliners cry ''Gorbechev''

A7

 A de Gaulle condemns Barbie

A8

 Rome explosions shake embassies

A10

 First Lady views drug plan

A13

 Abrams is backed by Shultz

A14

 Cuba to send prisoners to U.S.

A15


National    A18-29

 2,4.8,q>In a victory for property owners, the Supreme Court ruled 6 to 3 that
owners have a constitutional right to compensation if they are temporarily
deprived of reasonable use of their land by government regulations.     A1

 Court rules on extraditions

A26

 Allegis Corporation's head resigned. After a special meeting in New York, the
diversified company's board instructed its financial advisers to develop a plan
for selling off its rental car and hotel subsidiaries.    A1

 Antitrust violations were charged against a California subsidiary of Waste
Management Inc. and two smaller companies. They were charged with setting prices
and conspiring to eliminate competition in the trash hauling business.     A1

 Joseph Biden will run for President. Pledging that he would challenge Americans
to rise above ''the mere accumulation of material things,'' the Senator from
Delaware announced his candidacy for the Democratic nomination.     A18

 The payoff for genetic engineering is within sight after a decade of research
and testing. The first products created by genetic engineering are now on sale
despite a series of technical and regulatory setbacks.     D1

 The growth of county governments has shifted power away from local governments,
public officials say. In West Palm Beach, Fla., the county government has been
superimposed over a complex matrix of jurisdictions.     A18

 Details about the AIDS testing plan that would require tests of all Federal
prisoners and would-be immigrants are uncertain, and many practical,
administrative and legal problems have to be worked out, experts say.      A29

 The fate of women in courtrooms is often decided on the basis of factors that
seem to many experts to be irrelevant: The company they keep, their sexual mores
and how they talk, dress and handle their emotions.     C1

 Vietnam war deserter returns

A19

 $1 billion fund would preserve lands

A20

 Arctic refuge study challenged

A21

 Catholics giving less to church

A22

 Support for air transport bills grows

A25

 Killer-rapist executed in Louisiana

A27


Washington Talk    A24



Bush's presidential rivals resent vice-presidential advantages

Networking at the poker table

Regional    A29, B1-6

 2,,q>Teachers cannot be tested for drugs unless there is a ''reasonable
suspicion'' of drug use, New York State's highest court ruled. The unanimous
ruling is likely to sharply limit drug testing of public employees in New York.

    A1

 Secret tape recordings of John Gotti, the reputed boss of the Gambino organized
crime family, discussing reorganization plans shortly after he obtained control
of the Mafia group have been obtained by Federal prosecutors.    B1

 A breakthrough on an ethics code for state officials in New York has been
reached by Governor Cuomo and leading legislators. The development does not mean
there is agreement on a complete ethics bill.     B2

 A former professor pleaded guilty to mailing valentine boxes of poisoned
chocolates to a former colleague and a Federal judge. Dr. John Buettner-Janusch
faces up to 40 years in prison.    B3

 The illegal dumping of asbestos by New York City landlords is increasing
because of a new law regulating its disposal, city officials said. Since April
1, when the ordinance went into effect, 130 infractions have been found.     B1

 Revillon Inc. must pay $2 million in sales taxes and penalties to New York City
and State. The internationally known furrier pleaded guilty to one count of
conspiracy and two counts of falsifying records.     B6

 A woman who had an abortion because of the erroneous advice of her physician
can seek damages for the emotional trauma of the abortion, which she regarded as
sinful, New York's highest court ruled.     B2

 An AIDS victim who bit an officer of the New York Police Department last week
has been charged with felony assault and reckless endangerment. The woman had
been arrested as a prostitute by the officer.     A29

 Street racing a concern on L.I.

B1

 Kean visits burned pier

B2

 Woman slashed in Brooklyn

B3

 Goetz defense move rejected

B3

 Regan estimates big city surplus

B4

 Memorial for Antony Tudor

B6

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              261 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 10, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BANGKOK JOURNAL;
So Seductive a Country and So Close to Vietnam

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1008 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


People here tell the story of Morgan Adams, an American diplomat who resigned
''for unexplained reasons'' and now lives in Thailand among opium warlords and
beautiful women, rejecting what he calls the regimentation of life in the United
States.

Adams is the hero of a new adventure novel called ''Missing by Choice,'' the
product of the imagination of a real American diplomat, Maurice M. Tanner, who
is himself about to retire and put down roots in Thailand.

The fictional Adams is a swashbuckling version of the hundreds of Americans who
have chosen to make their homes in Thailand for reasons they too sometimes find
hard to explain.

The expatriates include diplomats, Vietnam War veterans, journalists, language
teachers, relief agency workers and successful businessmen.

Some are what another American diplomat, Joseph McBride, calls ''Thailand
junkies,'' attracted to this country's easygoing pace of life and its ethic of
pleasure.

A Special Poignancy

Many others are the last holdovers of America's involvement in Indochina, people
depicted by one resident as ''still hovering around the edges of Vietnam, unable
to get on with their lives.''

It is such people, shut out of a land they cared about but unwilling or unable
to leave it behind them, who give this group of American expatriates a special
poignancy.

A few of them have found jobs that will keep them close to Vietnam while they
wait for wives or fiancees who are still hoping for exit visas.

''I think I have adjusted to the fact that it might happen or it might not,''
said a 33-year-old relief agency worker whose fiancee has been trying to leave
Vietnam for a decade. ''No fairy-tale endings are expected or demanded.''

''I do not consider myself one of the walking wounded of Vietnam or living in a
twilight zone trying to recapture the past,'' he said, asking that his name not
be printed.

But he said, ''There are a lot of veterans who have difficulty putting their
lives back together, especially if they left children back in Vietnam.''

''What happened to America as a nation happened to these individuals in varying
ways,'' he said.

'A Good Second Best'

Mr. McBride, who was evacuated by helicopter from the embassy in Saigon on April
30, 1975, called Thailand ''a good second best'' to the country where he said he
spent his formative years.

''Sooner or later I'll go back to my old district in the delta,'' he said. ''
Vietnam is still the one thing that grabs the attention of people like me. What
went wrong? What could we have done?''

On that same day in 1975, the day Saigon was taken by the Communists, William
Mann, already retired from the Army and living in Bangkok, was on his way to the
South Vietnamese capital to visit the bars on Tu Do Street.

''We just kept on flying,'' he said. ''We couldn't land. It was too late.'' ''To
tell you the truth, I didn't much care for Vietnam,'' Mr. Mann said. ''I like
the easy way of life here. The Thais don't let anything worry them, and after a
while you get to be the same way.''

Another veteran, a 41-year-old New Yorker who asked not to be identified,
described very different feelings.

Late at night, in a bar called Lucy's Tiger Den, he talked of his determination
to lead a mission to rescue friends who are missing in action in Indochina.

''I'll crawl back there on my hands and knees - you know the feeling?'' he said.
''It sounds crazy, but it can be done. Sometimes I think I'll just get myself a
little suntan and blend right in and walk across.''

Rendezvous for Veterans

Lucy's is a rendezvous for Vietnam veterans and overseas construction men who
moved on from lucrative contracts in Vietnam to jobs in the Middle East.

This is where you find the would-be adventurers like Bo Gritz, who led an
unauthorized and fruitless search for missing Americans in Laos in 1983.

The bar's owner, A. J. Rydberg, known as Tiger, sets the tone each night with a
monologue of reminiscences about his days as an ironworker.

According to his account, his roots in Thailand go back to 1971, when he arrived
here from Vietnam, ''got drunk for 54 days straight, married Lucy somewheres in
the middle of it'' and went into the bar business.

Ken McGee, a helicopter pilot, said: ''As soon as I get to Bangkok, I throw my
bag in the hotel and come down to Lucy's. I've run into hundreds of people I
haven't seen since Vietnam.''

He added, ''Once you're over here, it's dead back in the United States.''

Veterans also gather at the four chapters of the Veterans of Foreign Wars in
Thailand, a country where someone can live well on a military pension.

''This is not a country to go to seed in,'' Mr. Tanner said. ''You go to seed in
a hurry, because life's too easy. It's too easy to pay for the next whisky and
the next girl.''

'Travelers of the World'

Mr. Tanner said he planned to retire here with his Thai wife and to write more
stories about Morgan Adams.

''We're the travelers of the world, the people without a home,'' said Mr.
Tanner, whose links are not with Vietnam but with Thailand, where he has lived
for 13 years.

''We find ourselves with a foot in both cultures,'' he said. ''I take part in a
village ceremony with my mother-in-law, and the next night I'll be in a
diplomatic reception in Bangkok.''

He added, ''I suppose I've never felt more of a stranger in my life than I did
at my high school reunion in Phoenix.''

The relief official who is awaiting his fiancee said his work with Vietnamese
refugees had helped him to put his own situation into perspective.

He said it had also chastened him on behalf of his country, where the war's
aftereffects, including the unresolved cases of servicemen missing in action,
are far less severe than those in Vietnam.

''Hearing the refugees' stories day after day, I realized that my story was not
a classic tragic romance,'' he said.

''Being separated from the place or the people you love, being smaller than the
events that shaped you, is a normal human experience for many people around the
world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of A.J. Rydberg, the owner of Lucy's Tiger Den, which is a
hangout for Vietnam veterans and other expa triates who have chosen to make
Thailand their home (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              262 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 10, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM DESERTER COMES BACK TO U.S.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 463 words

DATELINE: QUANTICO, Va., June 9


A Vietnam War deserter who spent 17 years in Australia was taken to a military
base here tonight after he returned to the United States to surrender, hoping to
visit his sick father in Vermont.

Douglas Beane, a private first class in the Marine Corps, arrived at Quantico
Marine Base tonight and was restricted to quarters until he speaks with the
magistrate on the base, said Staff Sgt. Eric Stradford.

The 39-year-old native of Rochester, Vt., arrived this morning at Los Angeles
International Airport after a flight from Sydney, Australia, and was met by
military guards.

Mr. Beane was then brought to this base near Washington. A Marine Corps
spokesman, Capt. Craig Fisher, said Quantico officials would decide the
disposition of his case, which could range from discharge to court-martial.

Mr. Beane went absent without leave Feb. 28, 1970, two weeks before his tour of
duty was to end. At the time he faced seven charges that included dealing in the
black market and threatening to kill another marine.

He made his way to Australia, where he married and had two sons. His wife,
Karen, said he lived under a false name and worked as a cook and farm laborer.
The Marines have said he served primarily as a cook and guard in Vietnam, but
his decorations included the Combat Action ribbon.

Wanted to Visit Fathere

While afraid of the consequences of returning to America, he wanted to visit his
father, Donald. Donald Beane, who lives in Rutland, Vt., is said to be disabled
with circulatory ailments and other problems.

In a telephone interview with a Vermont television station Monday night, the
younger Mr. Beane said he hoped the Marines would allow him to see his parents.
''My hopes are that they will take into consideration the time,'' he said. ''I
want to see my family. I would like to see my parents, at least.''

His mother, Christine, said she was delighted her son was coming home but was
worried about the legal repercussions. In an interview last December, Mrs. Beane
recalled her son as ''just a young kid from Vermont in a foreign nation at
wartime under a lot of pressure. ''He was one of the smallest players in a big
black market ring,'' she said. ''He was scared and ran. It was survival.''

Captain Fisher said Mr. Beane could be free in 21 to 30 days if officials decide
to discharge him. Technically he could face the death penalty if convicted of
desertion, but the captain said, ''The likelihood of that is probably pretty
remote.''

Mr. Beane had tried to re-enter the United States in December but was arrested
when he applied to the American Consulate for a passport. Australia's highest
court blocked his extradition in April, ruling the arrest warrant invalid and
saying he had not committed any indictable offense in Australia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              263 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 10, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: The Republican Campaign;
Bush's Rivals Resent His Advantages

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1283 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 9


''Discrimination!'' says Senator Bob Dole. ''Preferential treatment,'' complains
Representative Jack F. Kemp. ''Equal opportunity!'' demands Alexander M. Haig
Jr. The object of their ire? George Bush.

What angers Mr. Dole and the other Republican Presidential hopefuls is what they
are describing as Mr. Bush's ''imperial'' use of the office of the Vice
Presidency in his campaign for the Presidency, coupled with the fact that
numerous state Republican organizations are controlled by Bush supporters. As a
result, they say, Mr. Bush is accorded treatment as the most-favored candidate,
and his rivals are left fuming.

''Bush controls the state party in New Hampshire and Iowa and Michigan and
Florida and many other states, and he's going to get preferred treatment,'' Mr.
Dole said in an interview. ''I don't think it's right. I think it says something
about discrimination. We all run around and say we shouldn't discriminate, but
we're doing it ourselves.''

Mr. Dole, who narrowed Mr. Bush's lead in most polls in recent weeks, says he is
disturbed at the way the Vice President's campaign has played hardball,
especially against him. In Des Moines last month, for example, at a regional
Republican gathering, Mr. Bush arrived in an Air Force jet, was heralded by a
school band playing ''Ruffles and Flourishes,'' then proceeded to give a
prime-time Saturday luncheon speech. Other contenders were given inconvenient
15-minute slots, with Mr. Dole making his remarks on Sunday morning ''at a time
when everybody ought to be in church,'' he said.

''Actually I got on right after the Jimmy Swaggart program,'' Mr. Dole said with
a laugh. ''We were allowed inside the city limits as long as we didn't touch
anything.''

Mr. Dole's comments were coldly and angrily dismissed by the Bush campaign.

''There's no evidence of the Vice President getting any preferential treatment
simply because he hasn't,'' said Lee Atwater, the Vice President's campaign
manager. ''These charges from Senator Dole are very unfortunate because I think
he's done a good job of hiding his mean streak so far in this campaign. However,
I always felt it would emerge sooner or later. What you have here is the first
bitter taste of sour grapes in the 1988 Presidential campaign.''

After making the comment, Mr. Atwater said he hoped the campaign would now
proceed with all the Republican contenders adhering to their party's so-called
''11th commandmant - speak no ill of Republican candidates.''

But others were just as critical as Mr. Dole. One of the most vocal, former Gov.
Pierre S. duPont 4th of Delaware, criticized Mr. Bush's travels aboard Air Force
2, surrounded by Secret Service agents and aides, and his lack of debate against
any Republican rivals. ''He's lived in that cocoon for almost eight years,'' Mr.
duPont said. ''I was out the other day in Allison and Hampton and Mason City,
Iowa,'' he said. ''I was in coffee shops and county courthouses listening to
people talk about the problems of their community. I said, 'How does George Bush
get information from the wisdom of people in towns like that.' Inside the cocoon
he cannot get that kind of information. I don't care whether he speaks at
luncheons or what time he speaks. I just want him to talk - talk about real
issues and participate in the debate, talk about where the country ought to be
going. He's just not doing it.'' John Buckley, a spokesman for Mr. Kemp, said
the New York State legislator felt strongly about the ''preferential treatment''
given to Mr. Bush ''from the party at the leadership conferences they've had
around the country.''

''It made a certain amount of sense a year ago,'' Mr. Buckley said. ''But now
that Bush's Presidential campaign has raised several millions of dollars and he
has organizers in many states, there can no longer be the pretense of him going
to party events only in the guise of Vice President and not in the guise of a
Presidential candidate. Sooner or later an equalization of the candidate's
status has to occur or there'll be an exhibition of party favoritism which would
be unfair.'

And Dan Mariaschin, a spokesman for Mr. Haig, said: ''Haig says there ought to
be a level playing field. He says if we're all in this together there ought to
be equal opportunity for all - not a half hour for one and 15 minutes for the
others.'' In Des Moines, Mr. Haig grumbled that Mr. Bush received top billing at
the ''cattle show'' and the other candidates were obliged to ''come out of the
cattle chute for 15 minutes apiece.''

Similar complaints were voiced in March in Nashua, N.H., at the first of six
gatherings featuring the Republican Presidential contenders. Mr. Bush secured a
billing apart from the others by serving as a keynote luncheon speaker to party
activists. The others were given ''two to five minutes'' to speak by the
Governor, John H. Sununu, a leading Bush supporter. (''A true conservative will
lean to the two minutes,'' Governor Sununu said at the time. ''Those a little
more liberal will go to three or three and a half.'') Mr. Dole was not amused.
''Bush didn't want to share the platform with us,'' he said. '' 'Don't let
anybody else in. This is my show. I'm the Vice President. I'm the front runner.'
''

What plainly bothers his rivals is the Vice President's natural advantage of
using his important role to advance his career to President. The trappings of
the Vice Presidency -the Boeing 707, the elaborate Secret Service protection,
the limousines, helicopters and advance staff -evoke an image of power,
especially compared to the humdrum ways in which most candidates traipse around
New Hampshire and Iowa.

Mr. Bush expects to have raised $7 million to $8 million by the end of June,
while Mr. Dole's aides project that his campaign will have gathered $3 million
by then. Mr. Dole has an additional $2 million left over from his last Senate
campaign that can be applied to his Presidential drive.

Fred I. Greenstein, a Presidential scholar at Princeton University, said there
was hardly anything unusual about the Vice President using his office to seek
the Presidency.

Shades of Nixon and Humphrey

''What's unusual is that the races are more open so that there are more people
to make the complaints,'' he said. The two most recent Vice Presidents to
campaign for the Presidency while in office were Richard M. Nixon and Hubert H.
Humphrey.

''What Nixon did for four years in the second Eisenhower term was the same kind
of thing Bush has done,'' Professor Greenstein said. ''He used the office to
build up an enormous state and local indebtedness by speaking at fund raisers
and being available to the party stalwarts around the country. Nobody really
challenged him in the primaries, although there were some rumblings by Nelson
Rockefeller and some interest by Barry Goldwater.'' Mr. Nixon won the nomination
but lost the 1960 election to John F. Kennedy.

Eight years later, Mr. Humphrey also used the power of the Vice Presidency to
gain the Democratic nomination, despite wide opposition at a time when the party
and the nation were divided by Vietnam. ''The fact that Humphrey was able to use
the office and build up grassroots support really gave him the inside track,''
Professor Greenstein said. Mr. Humphrey lost the 1968 election to Mr. Nixon.

Despite the harsh comments about Mr. Bush by the prospecticve Republican
candidates, perhaps the underlying question is what would happen if the situaton
were reversed and Mr. Dole was Vice President and seeking the Presidency.

''Would I do it if I had the chance?'' said Mr. Dole. ''I'm undecided.'' He
laughed and made it plain that he probably would do the same thing as Mr. Bush.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vice Pres. George Bush (NYT/Fred R. Conrad)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              264 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 10, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Justice Dept. Official Chosen By Reagan for Pentagon Post

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 152 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 9


President Reagan today nominated Kenneth Bergquist, a Justice Department
official, to be the new Assistant Defense Secretary in charge of special forces
operations, the White House announced.

Mr. Bergquist, a highly decorated Army veteran of the Vietnam War and a former
intelligence officer of the Central Intelligence Agency, would head the
Pentagon's division on Special Operations and Low Intensity Warfare.

Senate approval is required for his appointment to head the effort ordered by
Congress last year to coordinate special forces operations among the military
services to deal with terrorism and other military problems.

Mr. Bergquist, 42 years old, is currently a Deputy Assistant Attorney General in
the office of legislative affairs at the Justice Department. He is a former
Deputy Assistant Army Secretary, a graduate of Stanford Univerity and holds a
law degree from the University of Texas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              265 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 10, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Documentary Adviser Sues Writer for Libel

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 195 words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va., June 9


Samuel A. Adams, a consultant on the CBS documentary that provoked a libel suit
by retired Gen. William C. Westmoreland, has filed a $75 million libel action
against the writer Renata Adler.

Mr. Adams, a former C.I.A. analyst who was a defendant in General Westmoreland's
suit, charges that he was defamed by two articles Ms. Adler published in The New
Yorker magazine. The articles, which later were published by Alfred A. Knopf as
a book, ''Reckless Disregard,'' criticized CBS's defense against General
Westmoreland's lawsuit.

Ms. Adler's writings portrayed the documentary ''The Uncounted Enemy'' as
''dishonest'' and accused Mr. Adams of encouraging other CBS witnesses to lie at
the trial.

Rosalyn Mazer, a Washington attorney, said through a secretary that officials at
The New Yorker and Ms. Adler had not seen the complaint and would not comment on
the lawsuit filed here in United States District Court.

The CBS documentary charged that while he commanded United States forces in
Vietnam, General Westmoreland ordered subordinates to lower their estimates of
enemy troop strength. The Westmoreland suit was settled out of court before the
trial ended.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              266 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 11, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AFTER A SLOW START, AIDS BOOKS ARE COMING OUT IN A RUSH

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words


Book publishers were slow to sign up books on AIDS after the disease came to
public notice in 1981, but now they are making up for lost time.

Big commercial publishers, obscure little presses, religious publishers,
homosexually oriented presses, university presses and organizations ranging from
the American Management Association to the National School Boards Association
have all either published books or research papers on the deadly disease, or are
about to do so. While most are nonfiction books aimed at adults, some are aimed
at younger readers, and there is also a growing body of AIDS-related fiction.

What's more, the books have begun to sell. ''A few months ago only a couple of
AIDS books had notable sales,'' said Mary Lilja, a spokeswoman for B. Dalton.
''Now we're suggesting that our stores display them separately.''

Many books are by people who have contracted acquired immune deficiency syndrome
or whose spouses or lovers have died from the disease. There are many others on
prevention, on the legal and social issues, on alternative healing therapies and
at least two on a macrobiotic approach to prevention and cure.

Michael Denneny, a senior editor at St. Martin's Press, said he was struck by
the contrast between books about AIDS in the mid-1980's and books about Vietnam
in the 1970's.

More Than 130 Titles Found

''Back then the publishing world didn't want to hear about a book on Vietnam,
they were convinced nobody wanted to read it and it wouldn't sell,'' he said.
''But publishers have responded quite well to this crisis. There may soon be as
many books about AIDS as about cancer.''

A recent survey by Publishers Weekly turned up more than 130 books and
bibliographic references about AIDS, and more are on the way. But information
about the medical, legal and political aspects of AIDS is accumulating so fast
that publishers are scrambling to keep up. Some are rushing new books to press
to avoid being obsolete on the day of publication, others are revising and
updating books published as recently as six months ago. Many publishers and
authors are adding a chapter or afterword to books that were published before
AIDS was identified.

In the latter category are the paperback editions of such well-known books as
''Illness as Metaphor,'' by Susan Sontag (published by Farrar, Straus & Giroux
in 1978), and ''The Joy of Sex'' and ''More Joy of Sex'' by Alex Comfort (Pocket
Books).

Simon & Schuster is in such a hurry to get out ''The Real Truth About Women and
AIDS,'' by Helen Singer Kaplan, that it began copy editing the manuscript
immediately after it arrived last week. It will also skip galleys and go
straight to press, hoping to publish within 30 days. The accelerated publication
schedule is dictated by the book's timeliness, but also by the fact that this
month Pantheon Books is publishing ''Advice for Life: A Woman's Guide to AIDS
Risks and Prevention,'' by Chris Norwood.

University Presses Jump In, Too

Even university presses are moving to benefit from the current interest. Yale
University Press, for example, accelerated by one month its fall publication
date of ''AIDS and the Law: A Guide for the Public,'' a collection of papers
edited by Harlan Dalton and Scott Burris.

While the book went through the same editorial process as all Yale titles, in
that it was read by an outside authority and approved by the publications
committee, the press hopes it will sell beyond the university community. Toward
that end, the book, an examination of the legal issues raised by AIDS, will
carry a blurb from Abigail Van Buren, author of the ''Dear Abby'' column.

Several other university presses -including Harvard, Oxford, Rutgers, the
University of California and the University of Pittsburgh - have recently
published books about AIDS, or will soon do so. Most consist of papers or
proceedings presented at various scholarly meetings.

''University presses have to look at the problem in a larger context than just
today's headlines,'' said Marian Neal Ash, an editor at Yale University Press.
''We are interested in books that will have a longer life than books that many
commercial presses will publish.''

One of the first books on AIDS was ''AIDS: The Epidemic,'' edited by Dr. Kevin
Cahill, published in 1983 by St. Martin's Press. ''The papers were complied soon
after a conference on AIDS at Lenox Hill Hospital,'' said Mr. Denneny, the St.
Martin's editor who signed up the book. ''They wanted to get it out quickly so
they could bring the problem to public attention, and the book then was used as
the basis for Senate hearings.''

Pitfalls in the Subject

Mr. Denneny, who may have published more books on AIDS than any other editor at
a commercial house, said there were pitfalls in publishing books on a subject so
little understood and unsettled. ''You can be overtaken by events,'' he said.
''And many of the books are pretty similar. We have looked for books that are
practical and have a different angle from the others.''

While St. Martin's still has nonfiction AIDS books in the publishing pipeline -
one of which, ''And the Band Played On,'' by Randy Shilts, about the politics of
AIDS, will be published this October - Mr. Denneny has begun signing up novels
and poetry. ''Almost every gay writer I know is trying to deal with AIDS in some
fashion,'' he said.

In September, Atheneum Publishers will publish ''Safe Sex,'' by Harvey
Fierstein, three one-act plays that appeared briefly on Broadway. Next year St.
Martin's will publish ''The Valley of the Shadow,'' by Christopher Davis, a
novel in which both main characters have AIDS, and ''Love Alone: 18 Elegies for
Rog,'' by Paul Monette, about the author's lover, who died from AIDS.

Mr. Monette will also be represented this fall on the Harcourt Brace Jovanovich
list with ''Borrowed Time,'' a chronicle of his lover's death. This month Crown
Books is publishing ''When Someone You Know Has AIDS,'' by Leonard J. Martelli
with Fran D. Peltz and William Messina. According to the publishers, Mr.
Martelli has AIDS and his roommate has just died of the disease.

One of the biggest books on the subject is expected to be ''AIDS: The Ultimate
Challenge,'' by Dr. Elisabeth Kubler-Ross, the author of ''On Death and Dying,''
with Mal Warshaw. The book is scheduled for publication by Macmillan in January,
with a first printing of 100,000 copies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              267 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A BIZARRE DEAL DIVERTS VITAL TOOLS TO RUSSIANS

BYLINE: The following article is based on reporting by David E. Sanger, Clyde
Haberman and Steve Lohr and was written by Mr. Sanger.

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 4156 words


Early in 1983 a team of Japanese engineers from the Toshiba Machine Company
arrived in Leningrad, the center of Russian shipbuilding since Peter the Great,
and was whisked through the back gate of the heavily guarded Baltic Shipyard.
There they painstakingly assembled more than $17 million worth of
computer-controlled machine tools used to make ship propellers.

Over the next 18 months the engineers returned to the Soviet Union about half a
dozen times. Working alongside computer specialists from a state-owned Norwegian
company, they fine-tuned the four imposing machines, each of which stands two
stories high and weighs half a million pounds. As part of the deal, the Soviet
Union even obtained a five-year service agreement.

To the Japanese and Norwegian customs officials who allowed the equipment to be
shipped, this was just another aggressive business deal, and the export licenses
appeared in order. Instead, investigators in three countries have now concluded,
the sale was one of the most egregious diversions of high-technology products to
the Soviet Union in a decade.

A detailed reconstruction of the sale, based on interviews in the United States,
Europe and Japan, shows how readily the export control system broke down. The
interviews revealed that the governments involved depended heavily on the
truthfulness of companies that were also under pressure to satisfy a major new
customer: the Soviet Union. Moreover, the government inspectors appeared to lack
the technological sophistication to challenge the companies' claims about the
capabilities of equipment being exported.

The equipment is high on the list of technologies that the Western allies and
Japan bar from export to the Soviet bloc, and intelligence officials say the
machinery is already making it far easier for the Soviet submarine fleet to
elude detection. The Navy says it will cost the United States $1 billion or more
to undo the damage.

''When you strip it all away,'' said Stephen D. Bryen, the head of the Defense
Department's Office of Export Administration, ''these people did terrible damage
for the sake of making just one more sale.''

Since the diversion became known, the political impact has been widespread.

American outrage over the incident has caused severe friction among three close
military allies - the United States, Norway and Japan. The Pentagon charges that
Japan permitted the technology to get away, then dragged its feet for a year
when presented with evidence of the diversion. Nor do the Americans fully
believe the results of Norway's investigation, which concluded that the
country's involvement was limited to the work of one renegade employee.

Last month two officials of the Japanese company and a British employee of the
Norwegian company, Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk, were arrested, and more arrests in
Japan are expected. Meanwhile, the president of Toshiba Machine and two other
top company officials have resigned. Norwegian officials, who fear they could
lose a major contract with the United States military, have dismantled part of
Kongsberg.

A Japanese Complaint, Too

Like the Norwegians, Sugiichiro Watari, chief executive of the Toshiba
Corporation, complained in an interview in New York this week that his company
has been treated unduly harshly. Mr. Watari said the giant electronics company,
which owns 50.8 percent of Toshiba Machine, should not face sanctions now being
debated on Capitol Hill - a ban on shipments to the United States and a loss of
military contracts - because of the actions of a subsidiary.

''I was also misled by Toshiba Machine,'' Mr. Watari said.

Although many details about the diversion have emerged, questions remain about
the handling of the case. For one, despite the fact that the huge machines were
shipped directly to the Soviet Union, Western intelligence agencies appear to
have missed key clues about what was happening.

Illegal exports to the Soviet Union or its allies are nothing new. What makes
this case so unusual, according to investigators, is not only the size of the
deal but also its business-as-usual quality. There is no evidence of large
payoffs, and there seems to have been little effort to disguise the equipment's
destination by sending it through third countries.

Even motives appear unusual for a case of this sort: Toshiba and Kongsberg
employees apparently wished simply to bolster their ailing companies rather than
to profit personally.

Trying to Gauge the Damage

Assessing the actual damage to national security is difficult. Reagan
Administration officials assert that it was nearly irreparable because it will
cost the Soviet Union far less to produce quiet propellers with the new machines
than for the United States to develop advanced sensors to make up for the loss.

''What's frightening is not how good the Soviets are today,'' said Norman
Polmar, a naval analyst and author, ''but how quickly they are improving.''

Other experts counter that the Defense Department is overdramatizing the loss,
perhaps to bolster its case in Congress for submarine development projects and
improvements in antisubmarine warfare. Mere acquisition of the tools, they point
out, does not itelf allow the Russians to turn out new propellers. Advanced
computer design technology, extensive testing and strict quality controls are
all needed to fully exploit the equipment.

But no one disputes that the loss was a serious breach of Western security, and
it was accomplished with remarkable ease. Following is an examination of the
diversion, based partly on information provided by investigators that could not
be independently verified. In some cases, there are still discrepancies between
accounts provided by officials of different countries.

Vital Technology, From a Catalogue

The case dates from late 1979 or early 1980. According to intelligence
officials, that was not long after the Russians may have been warned by John A.
Walker Jr. (who pleaded guilty in 1985 to passing Navy secrets to the K.G.B.)
that the positions of Soviet submarines were being given away by propeller
noise.

A Soviet foreign trade organization, Tekmashimport, contacted Wako Koeki, a
small Japanese trading firm with offices in Moscow. Japanese police who have
reconstructed the dealings say they believe that at least three suspected K.G.B.
agents were involved: Igor A. Osipov, who was vice president of Tekmashimport;
Anatoly P. Troitskiy of the closely linked Industrial Machine Export-Import
Corporation, and Vyacheslav A. Sedov, a vice president of the External Science
and Technology Exchange Corporation.

According to investigators, Mr. Osipov told Wako Koeki that he needed to import
large, numerically controlled machine tools, precision instruments that can
reduce by months the long process of making a propeller. Mr. Sedov apparently
was not directly involved in the negotiations, but an assignment in Tokyo in the
1960's gave him experience in dealing with Japan.

Negotiations in Moscow

Within months, Wako Koeki approached Toshiba Machine, and soon Ryozo Hayashi, a
Toshiba executive, traveled to Moscow to negotiate the deal. Toshiba Machine, in
the minds of many experts, was a strange choice because the company is not
generally considered a major competitor in that part of the machine tool market.
But Toshiba's catalogue contained exactly what the Russians wanted: an MBP-110
propeller milling machine, a $4 million to $5 million model.

The machine dwarfs its operators, as two giant arms swivel from a crossbar to
carve and shape propellers that can be more than 30 feet in diameter, far larger
than any current Soviet submarine could need.

From the Soviet viewpoint, the machine's key attraction was its nine
independently controllable axes, meaning that it could be twisted and turned in
a number of positions critical to making sophisticated propellers. Under the
regulations adopted by Cocom, the coordinating committee of Western allies and
Japan that sets export rules, no machine tool with more than three independent
axes is to be exported to the Soviet Union or its allies.

Package Approach Avoided

Toshiba could have provided the entire package wanted by the Soviet Union - the
machine tool plus a computer and software to run it. But for reasons that still
mystify investigators, Moscow insisted that the computer controllers, the
''brains'' that operate machines, come from Kongsberg Trade, the marketing arm
of Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk.

Soon the Russians were negotiating with Bernhard John Green, a 49-year-old
British national who was Kongsberg Trade's sales manager. Mr. Green is described
by Kongsberg officials as a ''competent and hard-working employee'' with no
previous record of misconduct since joining the company in the mid-1970's.
Because of turmoil in Kongsberg at the time, the company officials said, he was
without any real supervision.

Some American officials say they suspect that Mr. Green, who could not be
located for comment, may have been a Soviet agent. But Norwegian officials
disagree. ''His motivation, he says, was to get the sale for a business that was
in desperate shape,'' said Tore Johnsen, who heads the Norwegian investigation.
''And we have found nothing to indicate that he is not telling the truth about
why he did what he did.''

The Dawning Of Deception

The deal was sealed in Moscow on April 24, 1981, with the signing of two
contracts.

The first, calling for the delivery of four unspecified milling machines, along
with service and spare parts for five years, was between Tekmashimport and C.
Itoh & Company, Toshiba's standard export broker and one of Japan's largest
trading houses.

''C. Itoh handles pretty routine stuff that doesn't raise any warning flags,''
one American investigator said, explaining why Wako Koeki, which deals
extensively with Vietnam and other Communist nations, was paid a finder's fee
and dismissed. ''This was the beginning of the concealment effort.''

The contract was witnessed by the export manager of Toshiba Machine, according
to officials of Toshiba's corporate parent.

The second contract was with Kongsberg Trade for slightly more than $2 million,
enough for a NC-2000 numerical controller, the computer that guides the system,
and a service agreement.

With the signings, Toshiba and Kongsberg began a series of deceptions to obtain
export licenses, needed to get the equipment past Japanese and Norwegian customs
officials.

On May 19, in Tokyo, Toshiba applied to the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry for a permit to ship a machine called a TDP 70/110. In a detail
apparently overlooked by the Japanese authorities, the model appears to be
mentioned nowhere in Toshiba's sales brochures over the past several years.
Toshiba said the tool was limited to two axes, well within the Cocom rules.

A Civilian Purpose Stated

The machinery, Toshiba said, was going to be used for a civilian purpose -
improving the electric power utility in Leningrad.

None of the trade ministry's 30 export control inspectors, who review 200,000
applications a year, questioned the permit. Apparently customs did not notice
that the machine shipped was a different model from the one listed on the export
permit.

A senior Japanese official in the Foreign Ministry explained recently that the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry had simply trusted that a company
with which it had long and close ties was telling the truth.

''This is the first case where the trust relationship between industry and
government completely collapsed,'' the Foreign Ministry official said. ''Here,
we had a case in which the Japanese family-like relationship was abused.''

A year later Mr. Green applied to the Norwegian Trade Ministry to export a
numerical controller that Kongsberg specifically manufactures for Soviet-bloc
trade because it can be used only in less sophisticated two- and three-axis
milling machines. In fact, investigators say, Mr. Green had made an oral
agreement with the Soviet Union - an agreement not found in the written contract
- to ship a variant of the computer that could control a nine-axis machine. The
difference between the two models lies in microscopic circuitry; no customs
official would be able to tell the difference.

A Navy in Search Of Quieter Subs

In interviews, Toshiba has maintained that few of Toshiba Machine's employees
knew the true power or use of the equipment shipped to the Soviet Union and that
officials at the parent company were completely unaware of the transaction. But
investigators in the United States say that if Toshiba executives were in the
dark it is because they averted their eyes.

By late 1982, when the first milling machine was shipped, virtually everyone in
Japan's shipbuilding and machine tool industry knew two things about the Soviet
Navy: It was in search of Western equipment, and it was rapidly making its
submarines quieter.

Japan had just recently been embarrassed by a major technology diversion. In
April 1982 Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger handed Japan's Defense
Minister a spy satellite photograph of the Soviet aircraft carrier Minsk under
repair in an 80,000-ton floating drydock built by Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy
Industries. Mr. Weinberger asked his Japanese counterpart, Soichiro Ito, to
''consider what this picture means.''

Attitude on Export Rules

''The Japanese had no respect at all for the Cocom restrictions,'' said Mr.
Bryen, who has been one of the leading critics of Japan's role in the machine
tools episode. ''In the drydock case, the Secretary made it clear this stuff has
to stop.''

Japanese officials in the United States respond that their country is a strong
advocate of export controls, but they maintain that the United States is
frequently alarmist about the severity of high-tech diversions.

At the time of the Toshiba deal, it was also common knowledge that the Soviet
Union had embarked on a major initiative to catch up with American ''quieting''
technology, the key to making any submarine fleet safe from detection.

''For a long time the Soviets didn't seem to give a damn about the noise
radiated by their submarines,'' said Ira Dyer, an acoustics expert and professor
of ocean engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. But in each
generation of Soviet submarines - particularly the new Sierra and Akula classes
- the giant power plants that propel Soviet submarines have grown quieter.

Thus, it was hardly surprising that Soviet engineers turned to other telltale
evidence of a submarine's whereabouts: two distinctive sounds generated by
propellers.

When Blades Churn Water

The first is cavitation, sounds created as moving propeller blades cause
pressure changes in seawater. These sounds are particularly discernible when a
submarine is moving fast and near the surface.

The second distinctive sound consists of blade tonals, caused as the propeller
cuts through the wake created by appendages on the submarine's hull, such as the
conning tower, the stabilizers and the rudders.

''These seem like small things, but they make a huge difference,'' Professor
Dyer said. ''One watt of acoustical energy coming out of the propeller of a
submarine in the Strait of Gibraltar can be heard off the coast of Virginia.''

The United States Navy has spent tens of millions of dollars to reduce
cavitation and blade tonals, chiefly through highly classified propeller
designs. Most involve an odd number of overlapping blades, turned into a rather
convoluted shape. Although the specific designs are classified, many of the
underlying principles are contained in public literature.

No Chance For Sightseeing

For years the Navy has produced propellers at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard
with numerically controlled machine tools that eliminate many quality control
problems. It was exactly those kinds of machines that Toshiba began shipping to
Leningrad, in pieces, starting in December 1982.

By the summer of 1983 all the machines were in place, though there is now a
dispute about their exact whereabouts. American intelligence officials insist
that all four are at the Baltic Shipyard, on the edge of the Gulf of Finland.
(That facility has primarily produced surface ships, but submarines are
constructed at a neighboring shipyard.) Japanese and Norwegian officials say
that only two of the machines are in Leningrad and that they do not know the
location of the other two. Some naval experts suggest that Moscow sent them to
shipyards on the opposite coast, perhaps at Vladivostock on the Sea of Japan.

In either event, the engineers who installed the equipment over a period of
months in Leningrad say security was tight during the operation.

'Constantly Being Watched'

''We were constantly being watched by the K.G.B.,'' a Toshiba Machine technician
told police investigators a few weeks ago, in an account in the Japanese press.
Each day, he recounted, the group was driven through the rear gate of the
shipyard and, later, directly back to a Leningrad hotel.

''We didn't have time even for sightseeing,'' he complained.

Toshiba's engineers were not alone. Two Kongsberg employees also made four trips
from Norway to Leningrad during the fall of 1983 and spring of 1984, apparently
to install the control system and software for the Toshiba machinery. In June
1984 the Norwegian company made a last visit to improve the software and reduce
the time it took to mill a propeller.

Investigators disagree about whether top officials of Kongsberg knew, or should
have known, about the deal. More than half a dozen Kongsberg employees were
interviewed, including technicians who traveled to Moscow. But last week the
Norwegian police let the statute of limitations on the diversion expire without
pressing further charges.

Comments by Norwegians

''Green is the only one who went through the whole deal,'' said Mr. Johnsen,
Norway's chief investigator in the case. Added Jens C. Width, senior vice
president of marketing for Kongsberg, ''This is very different from Toshiba's
involvement, where top management was aware of what's happening.''

American officials, noting that Kongsberg is essentially run by Norway's Defense
Ministry, say it is inconceivable that the company's leadership was unaware of
any sensitive shipment to the Soviet Union. On Capitol Hill and at the Pentagon
there have been calls for more arrests and dismissals.

Norwegian officials respond that most of Kongsberg's top officers at the time
were dismissed last year because of the company's troubled financial condition.

''It doesn't make sense to punish people who were not responsible,'' said Arve
Thorvik, the economic counselor for the Norwegian Embassy in Washington.

Inside Leningrad While Spies Slept Despite the fact that the true use of the
milling equipment was only faintly disguised, the equipment shipments, the
falsified export licenses and the many visits to Leningrad apparently all went
undetected by Western intelligence agencies until last year. Now investigators
cannot even agree about how the scheme was finally uncovered.

According to the Japanese, the break came in December 1985, when Kazuo Kumagai,
the Moscow office manager of the Wako Koeki trading firm, told officials of Wako
and Toshiba Machine that he would disclose the story of the illegal exports
unless he was paid to remain silent.

When he got nowhere, he carried out his threat by writing a letter to Cocom in
Paris. That information was sent to the United States and eventually relayed to
Japan.

At Toshiba, Mr. Watari said the Toshiba Corporation had never received a threat
from Mr. Kumagai, but he said he could not speak for Toshiba Machine, the
subsidiary.

American Version Differs

Pentagon officials tell a very different story. They say there was no letter to
Cocom that they are aware of; instead, a series of clues, which they will not
describe, led them to discover the deception and inform the Japanese. ''It was
more a case of putting together a Chinese puzzle,'' Mr. Bryen said.

Outside intelligence experts say the first clue may have come from Navy
listening posts, where operators detected fainter sounds emitted from new Soviet
propellers.

The Pentagon makes no effort to dispel that conjecture. Other experts contend
that it is too soon for many of those propellers to have been installed on
operating submarines.

In any event, the Japanese investigation barely moved forward throughout 1986. A
Japanese Foreign Ministry official explained that Toshiba Machine was widely
believed when it told MITI it had merely shipped two-axis machines.

''We really couldn't believe that a reputable company like Toshiba could do such
a thing,'' the official said. Another Japanese official added that ''the
Americans did not apply much pressure'' until Mr. Bryen and Fred C. Ikle, the
Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, went to Tokyo last December and described
the deception in detail. Japan asked for more documentation, and it was not
until Mr. Weinberger complained directly to Japan's Defense Minister that a full
investigation began.

Explanations Fall Apart

Under further questioning, explanations offered by Toshiba Machine executives
began to crumble. ''Initially Toshiba Machine maintained that this was a
two-axis machine that could not be converted into anything more complex,'' Mr.
Watari said, but ''later they said it was possible'' to convert the machine to
nine axes.

Early last month, soon after Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone was briefed about
the incident before a visit to Washington, Japanese police raided Toshiba
Machine's offices and carried away heaps of paperwork. On May 15 Toshiba
Machine's president, Kazuo Iimura, resigned, a move Mr. Watari says he demanded.

After days of interrogation, Mr. Hayashi and another Toshiba Machine executive
were arrested. Half a dozen more arrests are expected.

Last Friday two more Toshiba Machine executives - Yasuhiro Matsuzaki, the head
of oversea operations in 1982, and Goro Yasuda, head of the machine tool divison
at that time -also resigned.

Tokyo's Tough Sanctions

Meanwhile, Japan has imposed relatively tough sanctions. Toshiba Machine has
been ordered to suspend all exports to 14 Communist countries for a year. The
company said last week that as a result, it expected losses of $100 million in
its present fiscal year. C. Itoh, the trading firm, was banned from machine tool
exports to Communist nations for three months.

''Short of driving Toshiba into bankruptcy, I think they were the toughest
sanctions we could take,'' a Foreign Ministry official said.

In the United States, the parent Toshiba company is trying to block a growing
movement on Capitol Hill to ban the import of its products for a year or more.
Meanwhile, the Pentagon has delayed awarding contracts to Toshiba and Kongsberg,
including a $100 million order Toshiba is seeking to provide the Air Force with
portable computers.

Pentagon officials say neither company should expect to sign contracts until
responsibility for the loss is sorted out. ''This time,'' one Pentagon
investigator declared, ''we are going to hang these people in public.''



The Trail of the Propellers

1.   In early 1980 Soviet officials contact the Moscow office of a small
Japanese trading firm in search of automated propeller manufacturing equipment.
Soon executives of Toshiba Machine Company, C. Itoh & Co. and Norway's
state-owned armaments manufacturer, travel to the Soviet Union and sign
contracts on April 24, 1981. Though the order does not specify model numbers, it
is for four giant milling machines that are illegal to export to the Soviet
bloc.

2.   In Tokyo and Oslo, company officials file export license applications with
false model numbers and claimthat the Japanese machinery and Norwegian computers
are legal to export. No one challenges the claims. In December 1981, Toshiba
begins shipping the machines; at least two go directly to the Baltic Shipyard in
Leningrad. In 1982 Kongsberg ships software - not covered by restrictions in
place at the time - directly to Leningrad. It sends the ''numerical
controllers'' for the milling machines to Toshiba in Japan, perhaps to hide
their ultimate destination.

3.   Technicians from Toshiba Machine and Kongsberg travel back and forth from
Japan and Norway to Leningrad about half a dozen times to install the equipment,
with the last trip in June 1984 to upgrade the software. In December 1985, by
the Japanese account, a disaffected Japanese employee writes to Cocom, the
organization of Western allies and Japan that governs export controls, revealing
the shipment's true nature. The data are dismissed in Japan. It takes more than
a year before a full investigation is begun at the insistence of the United
States, which says it uncovered the scheme.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of type of propeller-blade milling machine sold to Russia
(Toshiba Machine Company catalogue); Photo of Bernhard John Green, who police
say headed Kongsberg's role in diversion (AP) (Pg. D10); Photo of Kazuo Iimura,
former president of Toshiba Machine Company (AP) (Pg. D10); Diagram shows how
the propellers went from Moscow to Olso and Tokyo, and then to Leningrad (Pg.
D10)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              268 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 13, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Marine Deserter Held in Jail

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 72 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 12


Pvt. Douglas G. Beane, who spent the last 17 years living in Australia after
deserting from the Marine Corps in Vietnam, has been ordered held in jail until
his case was settled, the Corps announced today. The 39-year-old marine, who
returned to the United States voluntarily to visit his ill father, will be
confined to the brig at the Quantico, Va., Marine Base pending a possible
court-martial, a Marine Corps statement said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              269 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET STUDIES SATELLITES TO CONVERT SOLAR ENERGY FOR RELAY TO EARTH

BYLINE: By WILLIAM J. BROAD

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1621 words


The Soviet Union is drawing up plans to build huge satellites in orbit that
would convert sunlight into electricity for cities and industry on Earth, senior
Soviet scientists and American experts say.

It would use the giant new rocket it has developed to get the satellite
components into orbit.

The idea was developed in the United States in the 1960's and 70's but was
abandoned as too costly and environmentally controversial.

In recent weeks the goal of solar power satellites has been hailed by Guri I.
Marchuk, head of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, and by other Russian officials
discussing uses of the giant new rocket.

The ambitious plan comes after years of quiet Russian research.

Full Development by 21st Century

Western experts say the plan apparently has several stages. The first is
creating space-based solar reflectors, basically big mirrors, to bounce sunlight
to Earth for lighting at night. The second is putting together in orbit the huge
satellites that turn sunlight into energy. The third is constructing antennas on
the ground to receive energy from these satellites, feeding electricity into the
power grid.

Current plans are believed to call for deploying the first phases in the 1990's,
with full development early in the next century. Soviet officials have provided
few specific details of the solar plan.

''The ultimate goal is to beam energy back to earth'' for conversion into
electricity, said Nicholas L. Johnson, an expert on Soviet space programs at
Teledyne Brown Engineering in Colorado Springs. ''They also talk about using
reflectors in space to light cities and farms.''

Specter of Military Use Raised

Peter E. Glaser, vice president of Arthur D. Little Inc. in Cambridge, Mass.,
and a developer of the solar-power satellite idea, said the Soviet program
marked a new phase in the race to conquer the heavens.

''Power is a prerequisite for anything you do in space,'' he said. ''Proceeding
with solar power satellites will give them a number of options. They're planning
all kinds of moves, years ahead of us.''

William R. Graham, President Reagan's science adviser, said the solar initiative
might not be entirely peaceful. ''There's no strong division in their large
projects between the civilians and the military,'' he said. ''A substantial
power capability in space is something they could put to many uses.''

Some experts say solar-power satellites could threaten the space-based arms and
sensors proposed for President Reagan's plan for a defense against missiles.

The solar satellites being discussed go far beyond the small arrays of solar
cells currently used on spacecraft. They would be huge floating platforms
covered with solar cells that convert sunlight into electricity.

Noting that the initiative is so far mostly talk, experts said it would take
years to see how aggressively the Russians pursue their solar goals. If pursued
vigorously, the Russian solar plan could become a prime justification for the
giant new rocket, whose exact rationale has mystified some Western experts.

The rocket, Energia - ''energy'' in Russian - thundered from its launching pad
at the Baikonur Astrodrome near Tyuratam in Kazakhstan on May 15. Western
experts said it might be used to loft Russian space shuttles, large space
stations or planetary probes. Defense Department officials said it could deploy
space weapons.

More Powerful Than Shuttle

The 220-foot rocket can lift payloads greater than 100 tons - at least four
times the power of the American space shuttles.

A few days after Energia's test flight, Dr. Marchuk told Tass, the official news
agency, that the new rocket would permit such Russian achievements as ''the
placement of experimental solar power plants in orbit,'' paving the way for the
''industrialization'' of space. Other officials echoed his comments.

Although the Russians have seized the initiative, the idea of solar-power
satellites originated in the United States in the late 1960's, their invention
usually being credited to Dr. Glaser.

By the mid 1970's, the system was envisioned as having 60 satellites, each one
55 square miles in size - an area the size of Manhattan - in stationary orbits
22,300 miles above the earth. Covered with solar cells, the satellites would
beam the energy back to Earth in the form of microwaves that would be picked up
by antennas, converted back into electricity, and fed into the nation's
electric-power grid. A single solar satellite, or ''sunsat,'' was seen as
generating the power equal to one to ten nuclear power plants.

After $20 million in studies by the Government, and much criticism by
environmentalists who feared damage to the Earth's atmosphere and wildlife, the
idea foundered in the early 1980's, at least in part because of its projected
construction cost. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration put the
bill at $500 billion to $800 billion, while the National Academy of Sciences in
1981 estimated it would take $3 trillion over 50 years, calling it ''by far the
largest, most costly and most complex'' project ever envisioned by man.

As enthusiasm for solar satellites waned in the United States, it waxed in the
Soviet Union, where engineers and scientists worked with vigor to investigate
the options.

In 1984, Pravda, the newspaper of the Communist Party, reported that research
was under way to use huge orbiting reflectors for the nighttime lighting of
Soviet cities and fighting crop-damaging frosts on farms. A test project at the
Moscow Institute of Avionics, it said, was creating a 440-pound test payload
that would unfold in space to create a reflector with a working area of about
1,200 square feet. It said full-scale reflectors could be in routine use by
1990's.

'A Power Plant in Outer Space'

Early in 1985, Soviet scientists announced a project called ''Star Electricity''
aimed at building by the end of the century a ''power plant in outer space
working on solar energy.'' On Jan. 25 in an international English-language
broadcast, Radio Moscow said: ''The panels of the solar batteries of that
powerful plant will be placed on a territory equal to that of a small town.
Units of the plant will be brought to space by spacecraft and assembled by teams
of astronauts.''

Leonid Leskov, a Soviet scientist, told a Russian radio interviewer in 1985 that
''we are not yet ready to create this kind of power installation,'' citing the
need for further research on solar cells. But he added that such platforms could
be common in the 21st century.

In the February 1985 issue of Space Policy, a British publication, Dr. Leskov
elaborated on the project's rationale: ''The operation of these space giants
does not require the consumption of natural power resources and will not affect
the environment in any major way: hardly any microwave radiation is absorbed in
the atmosphere, and the efficiency of its transformation into the electric
current is 90 percent.''

Dr. Leskov added that ''the success and the scale of implementing this program
will depend on the design of carrier rockets.''

Last month, when Dr. Marchuk of the Soviet Academy of Sciences linked the new
rocket to solar-power satellites, he zeroed in on the more ambitious Russian
goal of lofting solar cells rather than just passive reflectors. The satellites,
he said, would have ''a wide area of solar-cell batteries.''

In interviews, Western experts said such a system might have several stages of
development in space before microwave beams were directed through the Earth's
atmosphere toward antennas on the ground. For instance, beams might first be
used to power industrial processes aboard Soviet space stations and then to fuel
space tugs moving payloads between orbits.

The experts also said orbiting solar satellites and reflectors could have uses
in both peace and war. Mr. Johnson of Teledyne Brown noted that reflectors
''could light up a battlefield at night.'' In the 1960's, the American military
considered lofting space reflectors for use in the Vietnam war.

Dr. Glaser of Arthur D. Little said active solar satellites could be viewed as a
considerable military threat, one that ''might undo'' Mr. Reagan's plan in which
space-based sensors and weapons are meant to destroy enemy missiles. Dr. Glaser
said that, without international participation in the Soviet project, the West
might never know if some solar satellites carried powerful, hidden lasers aimed
at antimissile battle stations.

The Soviet quest to convert sunlight into electricity on a large scale in space
showed long-range vision, Dr. Glaser said. ''They're playing the normal chess
game,'' he remarked. ''Our moves tend to be four years. NASA's game plan at this
time is about one year long.''

Soundness of Plan Questioned

Other experts said the solar idea is economically and environmentaly unsound,
and that the West showed wisdom in abandoning the quest. Birds that repeatedly
flew through the microwave beam, for instance, might be harmed.

John E. Pike, director of space policy for the Federation of American
Scientists, a private nonprofit group in Washington, disagreed, saying the
West's failure to develop solar satellites reflected a lack of planning.

''The big barrier to 'sunsats' in the United States was that there was no
civilian institution that could take such a large risk, or plan over such a long
period of time,'' Mr. said. ''It was too long for NASA, and too risky for
private utilities. The Soviets have longer horizons, and big projects are very
much in the Russian tradition. With a centralized Government like that you can
engage in projects that are beyond the scope of civilians in decentralized
societies like the United States.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Soviet Union's new giant rocket, Energia (page 30)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              270 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Made in Thailand: New Films About Vietnam

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 19, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 645 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


Vietnamese street signs are popping up all over Bangkok these days as two
American film companies follow each other around town, part of a new wave of
movies set during the Vietnam War.

''They take one neighborhood, dress it in Vietnamese, strike it, and we move
in,'' said Marsha Robertson, a spokeswoman for one of the productions.

What is notable about the films is that despite the street signs and a few
conical hats, neither has much to do with Vietnam. One is a comedy, and the
other a detective story. Together, they suggest that the war has lost much of
its emotional freight for a new generation of Americans, and that after the
Academy Award-winning ''Platoon,'' Vietnam is now in.  ''It certainly makes a
colorful background for a cop story,'' said Alan Barnette, the producer of the
detective film ''Saigon,'' being made by 20th Century-Fox.

''It's 60's nostalgia,'' said William Dafoe, who plays a plainclothes policeman
tracking a murderer through the streets of the city.

The other movie, ''Good Morning, Vietnam,'' is a comedy about a manic Armed
Forces Radio disk jockey, produced by Walt Disney Touchstone Pictures.

'' 'Platoon' has opened Vietnam as an area to do now,'' said Mark Johnson, the
producer of ''Good Morning, Vietnam.''

Among the half-dozen other Vietnam films are ''Hamburger Hill,'' a combat story
filmed in the Philippines; ''Hanoi Hilton,'' about prisoners of war, and ''Full
Metal Jacket,'' a drama directed by Stanley Kubrick.

David Butler, who wrote ''The Fall of Saigon,'' a book about the final days of
South Vietnam, said the key element in both moviemaking and publishing was the
coming of a younger audience for whom the war is less controversial. ''Vietnam
intrigues the yuppie generation,'' he said, ''but it doesn't torture them.''

The two movies now being filmed in Thailand are being made by people with no
experience or expressed personal commitment to Vietnam.

''I flunked my physical,'' said Christopher Crowe, the writer and director of
''Saigon.'' ''All of us flunked our physicals in those days.''

Mr. Johnson said of his crew and cast: ''None of us was in Vietnam. We know
about it second-hand, or from the 6 o'clock news.''

Asked what the film hoped to say about one of America's most traumatic periods,
Mr. Johnson said, ''Nothing original, not in any broad sense.''

The film makers' approach to historical details reflects their distance from the
subject. ''Every once in a while, someone says: 'For God's sake, why bother to
change the street signs. Nobody knows the difference between Thai and Vietnamese
anyway,' '' Mr. Johnson said.

Alan Dawson, a journalist who covered the war and is now a technical adviser on
films made in Thailand, said, ''These guys come to Thailand and they think
they're in the middle of Vietnam already.''

'A Sympathetic Light'

Some Vietnamese extras in the cast complained that their suggestions about
authentic costumes were ignored. At least one Vietnamese sign on the set was
misspelled.

''One thing we do offer,'' Mr. Johnson said. ''We are the first movie to portray
the Vietnamese in a very sympathetic light.''

This sympathy was not evident in the recent shooting of a scene in which one of
the few Vietnamese actors in the film excitedly warns the leading character,
played by the comedian Robin Williams, of a terrorist attack. ''You could have
learned your English from Tonto,'' Mr. Williams's character says.

Mr. Williams said a more raucous comedy, called ''Laughing War,'' was scheduled
to begin filming here shortly. ''As soon as we leave, they're coming in,'' he
said. ''They'll buy the props from us.''

Yet he voiced concern that the United States, particularly its veterans, may not
be ready for a comedy about this war. ''Sometimes I worry about it,'' he said.
''What would be offensive to them? Is it too much? Is it too little?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              271 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Vows a Cambodia Exit Despite Effect on Guerrillas

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 21, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 95 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, June 13


Vietnam will honor a promise to pull its 140,000 troops out of Cambodia by 1990
even though that is likely to lead to a stepped-up guerrilla war against the
Phnom Penh Government, officials here say.

Maj. Gen. Tran Cong Man, an army spokesman, indicated Friday that Vietnam might
then draw up a defense treaty committing it to defend Phnom Penh against attack
by foreign forces.

General Man said the fledgling army of the Vietnamese-backed Government would be
able to cope with ''probable'' stepped up activities by the Khmer Rouge, the
largest guerrilla group.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              272 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONSERVTIVES SEEK INQUIRY ON LEFTIST FUNDS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 35, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 272 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 13


Two conservative groups are urging Congress to investigate left-wing fund
raising as vigorously as the private conservative organizations under
investigation in the Iran-contra affair.

Officials of the National Conservative Political Action Committee and the
Council for Inter-American Security said Thursday that they had assembled
evidence of possible tax violations by groups supporting Marxist rebels in El
Salvador and the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua.

''Now that Round 1 of the Iran-contra hearings is over, it is time for Congress
to focus on abuses by the left,'' L. Brent Bozell 3d, president of N.C.P.A.C.,
said at a news conference. ''An almost identical scandal has occurred under the
guise of humanitarian aid to the victims of violence in Central America.''

'Kangaroo Court in Progress'

He added, ''There is a kangaroo court in progress as star-struck members of
Congress attempt to destroy the Reagan doctrine while purposely ignoring
subversive efforts by some Americans to help overthrow a duly elected democracy
in El Salvador.''

L. Francis Bouchey, president of the Council for Inter-American Security,
described what he said were ''a few links in a network that developed during the
Vietnam War and which uses tax-exempt funds to promote a particular agenda.''

Mr. Bouchey said he was particularly concerned that investigators in the
Iran-contra affair had focused on the activities of Carl R. Channell, a
conservative fund-raiser. Mr. Channell pleaded guilty in April to participating
in a conspiracy to defraud the Government by soliciting tax-exempt funds to arm
the Nicaraguan rebels.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              273 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW ZEALAND'S NUCLEAR AVERSION

BYLINE: By CHARLOTTE EVANS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 784 words

DATELINE: WELLINGTON, New Zealand


NEW Zealand's ban on nuclear arms and nuclear-powered ships is now a matter of
law, not just Government policy, and the issue is certain to be a major one in
national elections expected in the next few months.

The ban, which has strained relations between Wellington and Washington, became
law by a 39-to-29 vote of Parliament 10 days ago, codifying the policy that has
been in effect since Prime Minister David Lange's Labor Government was elected
three years ago on a pledge to make New Zealand nuclear-free.

The legal ban is an important symbol for antinuclear militants here, who see it
as an example for the world. And although the economy will certainly be the
overriding election issue, the jubilation of antinuclear activists was tempered
by the knowledge that a victory by the opposition National Party over Labor in
the elections would almost certainly mean repeal of the new law.

The leader of the National Party, Jim Bolger, called passage of the law ''an
exercise in futility'' and said it did not make any contribution to arms control
and did not guarantee that New Zealand would be immune from nuclear weapons.

Further, he said, it pushed aside the views of the many New Zealanders who are
disturbed by the country's status in ANZUS, the mutual defense alliance with
Australia and the United States. Because of the nuclear-weapons dispute, the
United States has said it no longer feels obliged to come to New Zealand's aid.

But while the ban has provoked official trouble between the United States and
New Zealand, it has not resulted in anti-Americanism. Indeed, an American living
outside the diplomatic community here might never hear of the nuclear issue at
all, in contrast to the daily ribbing Americans took from New Zealanders when
their boats were doing well early in the America's Cup races.

The official American view of the dispute was reflected recently by the
commander in chief of the United States Pacific Fleet, Adm. James Lyons, who
said, ''I would find it very difficult to ask men and women of the fleet to
fight for a country which won't even let us visit in peacetime.''

While the Labor Government of Prime Minister Lange is adhering to its
no-nuclear-ships policy, it does not check what kind of weapons may be aboard
American planes that are allowed in and out of a base at Christchurch that is
involved in an Antarctic research program called ''Operation Deep Freeze.'' That
American program is worth about $10 million a year to New Zealand.

Whatever their view of American nuclear power and ships, New Zealanders
acknowledge that America has immense influence on the their daily lives, and
talk about the United States is more likely to be about its television programs,
movies and books than about the atomic issue.

New Zealand has two television channels, and its programming includes ''The Bill
Cosby Show,'' ''The Wonderful World of Walt Disney,''

''M*A*S*H*,'' and ''Dallas.'' All the big American movies come here, and local
stage companies produce such Broadway plays as ''Children of a Lesser God'' and
''I'm Not Rappaport.''

A Wellington-based company has just completed the casting for ''Are You Lonesome
Tonight?'' which is billed as a tribute to Elvis Presley.

Interviews with visiting American celebrities are given prominent display here.

Making it, to many New Zealanders, means making it in America.

Bob Jones, a financier, won headlines not long ago when he bought the building
at 44 Wall Street. So did Neil Finn, who became the first Kiwi, as New
Zealanders call themselves, to have a song - ''Don't Dream It's Over'' - on the
American top 10 pop music chart.

''American values are now an integral part of our culture.'' said Mattie Wall, a
public relations consultant in Wellington, who returned to New Zealand last year
after two years as vice consul in New York.

''All the changes in New Zealand in the last three years have moved us toward a
greater Americanization in a loose sort of way,'' she said.

''There's an increase in competition, an increase in recognizing ambitions,
impatience, speed, material wealth.''

At the same, she said, her generation had inherited as a result of American
participation in the Vietnam war, ''an innate skepticism and cynicism about
America's foreign policy motives and its capacity for being sensitive.''

''I think they're a bloody marvelous people,'' said Bill Godfrey, president of
the Ex-Vietnam Services Association, comprising veterans who fought in the
Vietnam War. ''One thing that's overlooked is that you can look anywhere in the
world today and there are two big brothers. One is flying the hammer and sickle
and the other is flying Old Glory. You takes your choice.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of New Zealand Prime Min. David Lange (Contact/Frank Fournier)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              274 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Headliners;
Coming Home

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 143 words


Years after the United States ceased to prosecute a war in Vietnam, it continues
to ponder the prosecution of errant warriors of that era. Last week, there arose
the question of what to do about Douglas Beane, who deserted the Marine Corps 17
years ago while serving in Vietnam. Mr. Beane, who was at the time facing
charges of dealing in the black market and threatening to kill another marine,
took off for Australia, where he married, had two sons and worked as a cook. He
was arrested by military policemen after he flew from Sydney to Los Angeles with
the intention, he said, of visiting his ailing father in Vermont. A Marine Corps
spokesman said the disposition of charges against Mr. Beane could range from a
discharge to a court-martial. If officials decide to discharge him, the
spokesman said, Mr. Beane could be free in three or four weeks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Douglas Beane

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              275 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DON'T COUNT OUT CONSERVATISM

BYLINE: By Irving Kristol; Irving Kristol is editor of The Public Interest.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3953 words


THE OBITUARIES FOR THE ''REAGAN revolution'' are already being published. A Time
magazine cover story reports that ''there are signs of a fundamental change in
the nation's political weather . . .'' Even Mikhail Gorbachev has casually
referred to Ronald Reagan as a lame-duck President, though why the Soviet leader
should be so eager to make unprecedented concessions in order to negotiate an
arms-control agreement with such a President is left unclear. Perhaps Mr.
Gorbachev sees something that American news magazines do not - namely, that
whatever the follies of ''Irangate,'' or the vagaries of the electoral cycle,
the basic conservative trend will persist, and that this is as good a time as
any to strike a bargain.

This distinction between the electoral cycle and the basic political trend is
crucial. In modern democratic politics, any administration, whether liberal or
conservative, is likely to accumulate enough discredits to become vulnerable.
There is no doubt that the Reagan Administration has reached this condition. The
interesting question is how much difference it would make if a Democrat is
elected in 1988 - an eventuality that is still far short of a foregone
conclusion. Will such a President be able to reverse the conservative trend that
brought Ronald Reagan to office? Or will he become a prisoner of that trend?

Consider the example of the Eisenhower Administration -a popular, two-term,
ostensibly conservative one. What were its enduring conservative
accomplishments? None comes readily to mind. The basic liberal trend that
dominated American politics between 1932 and 1972 rendered the Administration
impotent, even though President Eisenhower had a Republican Congress for part of
one of his terms.

Mr. Reagan, by contrast, has vigorously aligned himself with a basic
conservative trend that has established new parameters for American politics,
regardless of how people may vote in any particular election. This trend
incorporates low marginal tax rates, a slower rate of growth in Government
spending, an explicit endorsement of ''traditional values'' and a more assertive
(as against reactive) foreign policy. No Democratic successor is going to be
able to ''turn the clock back.'' Liberal Democrats who indulge in such a fantasy
are comparable to conservative Republicans who, for some three decades, dreamed
of a repudiation of Franklin D. Roosevelt and his ''abominable'' New Deal.

There are, to be sure, many conservatives who complain that Reagan, so far from
reinforcing a basic conservative trend, has inadvertently helped frustrate it,
that he talked a better revolution than he has enacted. Another way of putting
it is that his ideological, innovative conservatism has often remained on the
level of rhetoric, while in practice he perpetuated an older, more risk-aversive
brand. Certainly his three chiefs of staff - James A. Baker 3d, Donald T. Regan
and Howard H. Baker Jr. -have never been claimed by ideological conservatives as
their own. And the same has been true of his Secretaries of Defense, State, and
the Treasury. Indeed, aside from William J. Bennett at Education and Jeane J.
Kirkpatrick at the United Nations, this is an Administration populated at its
highest levels by people for whom the very idea of a ''conservative revolution''
is so alien as to be incomprehensible.

However, not all revolutions in politics are dramatic, sweeping events. It is
altogether possible that a future historian will define the Reagan years less as
a ''conservative revolution'' than as the first critical stage in the evolution
of a conservative majority in American politics. This would take into account
that Mr. Reagan was the leader of a party with roots in the ''pragmatism''
-philistinism, some would call it - of the business community, a party that had
little use for ideas in general. Mr. Reagan himself shares that posture on
occasion. His attitudes and instincts are of a nature that would easily suit an
articulate conservative ideology, but the transition from instinct to policy is
one that he has always found it difficult to make.

On the other hand, it is no accident that Ronald Reagan chose a noted biographer
of Theodore Roosevelt to be the official historian of his Administration.
Clearly, he sees himself as belonging, in some sense, to an activist Republican
tradition, and one moreover whose ''conservatism'' is not wholly orthodox. Our
ideological conservatives, lamenting opportunities lost, tend to underestimate
the significance of the accomplishments of the Reagan years.

But the accomplishments are there, and they have had the effect of reshaping the
American political context. Above all, they have more or less foreclosed the
possibility of a liberal future for American politics.

TAKE, FOR INSTANCE, the issue of economic policy. Our liberal economists affirm
two propositions about what is called ''Reaganomics.'' First, that the good
recovery we have seen over the last five years is a ''normal Keynesian
recovery,'' resulting from the fueling of the economy by deficit spending. They
assert this blandly, ignoring the fact that not a single liberal Keynesian
economist is on record as ever having anticipated such a recovery. Instead, they
all foresaw a new outburst of inflation resulting from those ''irresponsible''
cuts in marginal tax rates. Their own talk was about the imminent necessity of
wage and price controls; they were very wrong about that, too. In truth, it is
hard to recall a time when the majority of our most eminent economists were so
radically at odds with the economic realities.

The second liberal proposition is to the effect that this ''normal Keynesian
recovery'' is actually a sham, a house of cards built on a wild accumulation of
debt by Government, business and consumers. That the second proposition
contradicts the first seems to have escaped notice. In any case, liberals have
been predicting an economic collapse for a long while now. Following their lead,
the news media keep on suggesting that we must be on the brink of calamity. This
view is especially persuasive since it coincides with what old-fashioned,
non-Keynesian fiscal conservatives have preached for decades about the horrors
that await us if we fail to balance the budget. Liberals used to poke fun at
such ''economic primitivism.''

But what if these dismal prophecies turn out to be true? On this score, liberal
economists exercise a discreet silence. Even the most innovative of liberal
thinkers talk vaguely about a greater degree of governmental ''direction'' of
the economy. It is assumed that, somehow or other, a liberal economic policy
exists which can cope with high inflation, high unemployment and an economy that
is not only slack but in disarray. But about specific, substantive, plausible
solutions liberal economists are mute.

After all, if it is the budget deficit that creates an economic crisis, one
cannot really increase Government spending to ''stimulate'' the economy. And if
one increases taxes to reduce the deficit, that will surely depress the economy
further. A tax increase may be justified if an economy is ''overheated,'' not if
it is languishing. And if the rate of inflation seems to be running up, the
Federal Reserve Board will have to ratchet up interest rates, which will further
depress the economy.

In short, if the liberal critics of ''Reaganomics'' are correct, the next
administration, whatever its political complexion, will have no alternative but
to impose a program of harsh austerity, accepting drastic cuts in Government
spending, along with higher interest rates and greater unemployment. We would,
in fact, have to do to ourselves what we have been recommending to Brazil,
Argentina and Mexico.

But it is possible, of course, that this liberal critique and its doomsday
scenario are wrong, and that the next administration will inherit an economy
that will trot along pretty much as it is today -not doing badly at all, though
not doing so very well either. What will a Democratic economic agenda look like
then? It is easy to talk about a tax increase that will allow an expansion of
Government spending on social programs, but that is easier said than done. A 30
or 40 cent increase in the gasoline tax - the favorite idea of liberal
economists - runs up against a stone wall by virtue of the fact that the Speaker
of the House is from Texas, an oil-producing state. An increase in income-tax
rates would have to reach deep into the middle classes in order to achieve any
significant revenues, and would be perceived as politically disastrous. Even
cuts in the military budget would be minimized by an arms-control agreement on
nuclear forces -now apparently in sight -which are less costly than conventional
weapons and conventional forces.

What it comes down to is that, at worst, a liberal Democratic administration
would find itself presiding over an economic disaster area. At best, it would
preside over the working out of ''Reaganomics,'' just as would a Republican
administration. In other words, there is no distinctive, workable, liberal
economic agenda - a sure sign that the basic trend is inhospitable to the
liberal outlook.

THE SAME CONDITION holds in the area of foreign policy, though the currently
intense debate over Nicaragua befogs that reality. Arms control is no longer a
liberal issue. The controversy being engendered by a Reagan-Gorbachev treaty is
already equally divisive among liberals and conservatives. Too, since such a
treaty would lead to a defining of the limits for any Strategic Defense
Initiative, that issue is likely to move to a back burner. We shall probably end
up with partial arms control and a partial S.D.I. Even the ''Reagan doctrine''
is not going to be repudiated. The United States is not going to cease
supporting the people of Afghanistan. Nor is it going to stand aside to permit
the Marxist regime in Angola to crush, with the aid of Cuban troops, a genuinely
popular rebellion that already controls about one-fourth of the country.

Which leaves Nicaragua. The intense propaganda of organized pro-Sandinista
groups and the general liberal detestation of the contras obscure the fact that
American options in Nicaragua are limited. Even the most liberal members of
Congress are on record as saying that should the Sandinistas receive
sophisticated military equipment from the Soviet Union, the United States would
have to intervene. Liberal Democrats have persuaded themselves that this is less
likely to happen if an American administration were to disband the contras and
make friendly gestures, especially involving economic aid, to the Sandinistas.
This merely demonstrates how tenacious wishful thinking can be, since the Carter
Administration followed this approach, offering $75 million in economic
assistance, to no avail. The Sandinistas much prefer to be dependent on Soviet
eco-nomic aid than on American, just as Castro's Cuba does. To think otherwise
is to insult their profoundest ideological convictions.

So Nicaragua is going to represent a problem for American foreign policy, no
matter whether we have a liberal or conservative administration. Either the
Sandinista regime will collapse because of its own economic follies - which is
possible but unlikely - or, at some point, an American President will feel it
necessary to intervene. This is especially the case if the dissolution of the
contras is followed by renewed guerrilla activity in El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras and Costa Rica - which is, alas, very probable. One is reminded that,
while Theodore Roosevelt carried a big stick, it was Woodrow Wilson who sent
American troops into Mexico.

THE AREA OF SOCIAL policy, which liberals have properly called their own for
half a century now, is equally unpromising to liberal idealism. There is by now
a consensus which transcends ideology that welfare reform should be directed not
only against poverty, but also against dependency, that welfare should become
''workfare.'' In most other respects, a liberal social policy is inhibited both
by a paucity of new ideas for dealing with crime, drugs, education, housing,
etc., and by budgetary constraints. True, liberals in Congress at the moment are
busy increasing the minimum wage and are moving to extend medical coverage to
the entire working population, while dumping the costs of this generosity on the
private sector. Both programs are senseless as well as liberal, since they will
simply make hiring people more expensive for business and will consequently
generate somewhat higher unemployment. But the effects on the economy as a
whole, though negative, are not likely to be massive.

There is one social issue, however, which has liberalism today very much on the
defensive. That is AIDS. The typical liberal response at the moment is to
emphasize compassion and sex education. Compassion will always be in order, of
course, but it will not constitute a policy. Neither will condoms, which have
had such little impact on teen-age pregnancy - and not for lack of sex education
either. To listen to some of the more ardent enthusiasts for sex education, one
would think that learning to use a condom is as complex as learning to use a
computer. It isn't. It's very easy to learn how to use a condom and one doesn't
have to go to school to do so. One does, however, have to remember to use it at
the appropriate time -which turns out not to be so easy.

The advent of AIDS signals a radical constriction of the ''sexual revolution,''
with which American liberalism has had such intimate relations. As the Harvard
Law School lecturer Steven Stark, a former campaign aide to President Carter,
has put it, ''[The Democrats] are traditionally identified as the party of moral
license.'' It is easy to forecast that Americans are going to become a lot less
permissive and somewhat more puritanical -more ''cautious'' is the way the media
will put it - with regard to sexual behavior. Though it is impossible to grasp
at this time all the ramifications of the AIDS epidemic, it is also impossible
to doubt that conservative predispositions among the American people will be
strengthened. The strict separation of sexual privacy and public morality, a
cardinal liberal tenet, will be very difficult to maintain.

ALL OF THIS TESTIFIES to the impasse that American liberalism now finds itself
in, and to the fact that a political climate inhospitable to the liberal mode of
thinking is still with us. But it constitutes negative evidence. Are there not
some independent reasons for believing that ''the Force'' is with American
conservatism?

Well, yes. To begin with, there is the interesting socioeconomic fact that the
industrial working class, together with its trade unions, is a shrinking factor
in American life. The potential political significance of this fact is weighty.

Today, only about 16 percent of the American labor force is made up of
blue-col-lar, industrial workers - and that percentage is declining. It is not
the case, as some think, that our industrial base is temporarily distressed. The
shrinkage has been going on for more than a decade now, even though our
industrial production (as distinct from industrial employment) is no lower today
than it was 10 years ago. We just don't need all of those industrial workers,
and will apparently need fewer every year.

So far, attention has been focused on the pains caused by this transition -
pains that are real enough, even if they can only be alleviated, not ''cured.''
But there are larger meanings implicit here. White-collar workers or service
workers generally tend either not to be unionized at all, or not to be involved
in the kind of ideological trade unionism - with its overall social-democratic
agenda - that has traditionally characterized much of the industrial working
class. Whatever their income levels, men and women in the service sectors are
more inclined to think of themselves as middle class rather than working class.
This does not necessarily prevent them from voting for liberal candidates, but
it makes it a lot easier for them to identify with conservative politics.

One should not leap to the assumption that the American industrial working class
is in the process of vanishing from the political scene. Like farmers (now less
than 3 percent of the population) they will remain a very influential ''interest
group,'' their attention and energy directed to their most pressing economic
concerns. But, along with their trade unions, they will no longer be a major
component of a liberal coalition committed to ''social change.'' And this is
bound to have a consequential effect on the ideological climate in which
American politics lives and breathes.

AT THE OPPOSITE pole from such socioeconomic considerations is the ''war of
ideas,'' where conservative writers and thinkers have been consistently, if
slowly, gaining ground. There is no doubt that conservative and neo-conservative
along with some neo-liberal writers are today the more interesting of the breed.
(Neo-liberals are included because for the most part they are bashful,
equivocating neo-conservatives.) The most original writings on social policy in
these past years have come from Charles Murray, on economic policy from George
Gilder and a nucleus of ''supply-siders,'' on education from Allan Bloom. These
writings are ''controversial,'' which means they help define the intellectual
agenda.

Talent attracts talent, in social thought as in physics or mathematics, and the
increasing number of talented young conservative writers on public affairs is
straining the resources of the magazines that publish them, the institutions
that house them and the foundations that support them. This is frustrating and
exasperating for the individuals and institutions involved, but it is a sign of
conservative health, not of conservative decline.

In the area of foreign policy, the spectrum of discourse has shifted so
decisively to the right that whole portions of the liberal vocabulary have, to
all intents and purposes, been forgotten. Who today looks on the United Nations
and other such international organizations as reliable instruments of American
foreign policy? Who seriously declaims on the virtues of ''international law''
among a ''world community of nations'' as a relevant solution to American
foreign-policy problems? The entire outlook once designated as ''liberal
internationalism'' is a shambles, with even NATO coming under critical scrutiny.
Our State Department is still committed to this outlook, but everyone else now
talks about our ''national interest.'' It is the conception of our ''national
interest'' that sets the terms for all our debates on foreign policy.

Specifically, the debate centers on the issue of whether it is in our national
interest to attempt actively to shape the future world order by the use of
American power; or, instead, to create an America that provides an example to
humanity so splendid as to move other nations toward an emulation of our model.
This last approach has been an integral part of traditional American
isolationism, and it is fair to say that it is becoming the dominant theme of
liberal thinking on foreign policy. But there are some crucial differences
between the older isolationism, which still has adherents in middle America, and
the current liberal version.

To begin with, the traditional isolationist is highly nationalistic, thinking
the United States to be too good a nation to get involved in a corrupt,
un-American world. Liberal-isolationism today disapproves of ''excessive''
nationalist fervor, and believes the United States is too radically imperfect to
play a constructive role in world affairs. Similarly, traditional isolationism
has always approved of a strong defense establishment - it is inconceivable, for
instance, that traditional isolationists would find any reason to be hostile to
the Strategic Defense Initiative. In contrast, current liberal isolationism
prefers social spending to defense spending, and detests the S.D.I.

Perhaps most important, traditional American isolationism was never totally
isolationist. It regarded the Western Hemisphere as a predestined ''sphere of
influence'' for the United States, accepted without cavil the import of the
Monroe Doctrine, and saw no problem in projecting American power in the
Caribbean and Latin America. Essentially, that isolationism was opposed to
''entanglements'' with the power politics of European nations. Even with regard
to the Pacific, it was never entirely averse to a modest extension of American
hegemony.

So, despite the confusion that now prevails in public attitudes toward American
foreign policy, it seems probable that liberal isolationism is so profoundly
against the American grain as to have little real purchase on the future. It is
President Reagan's activism that has appropriated the spirit of American
nationalism - an activism that makes us ''stand tall,'' as the saying goes. It
is this kind of activism that is gradually supplanting both traditional
isolationism and traditional internationalism. The American people approved the
invasion of Grenada, while liberals deplored it. They approved the bombing of
Libya, while liberals mocked it. In general, they seem approving of unilateral,
decisive military intervention when our national interest might be served by it.
They certainly do agree that there ought to be ''no more Vietnams.'' But it is
as easy to draw activist-nationalist inferences from that proposition as
liberal-isolationist ones. And one does sense that the American people are
inclined to do the former rather than the latter.

WHAT THE REAGAN Administration has not been able to do is articulate any kind of
comprehensive conservative viewpoint. This is an Administration that from the
beginning has been a transitional affair, but has lacked the self-consciousness
to know it. That was bound to be the case because it is a Republican
administration. The Republican Party even today is primarily wedded to the
fiscal conservatism of the business community and shares its aversion to any
kind of governmental activism - or, indeed, to any kind of ideological
conservative enthusiasm. It is predominantly a party that is happy to benefit
opportunistically from the rising tide of evangelical Christianity, but is a lot
more comfortable in the board room than in church. It is a party that approves,
for commercial as well as nationalist reasons, of a large military
establishment, but cannot be bothered to engage in any hard thinking about how
to use it. And it is a party that, when in office, always finds itself
floundering in one squalid financial scandal after another - it does, after all,
take money (as distinct from sex) seriously.

But the times-they-are-a-changing, and Ronald Reagan has been the political
catalyst for that change. There is now in Congress, and infiltrating the party
on the local level in state after state, a new breed of conservative activists
who will claim to be heirs to the Reagan legacy but in truth are much more than
that. They have set their sights on a reformation of the Republican Party and of
American conservatism -which is why they are regarded by traditional Republicans
with such suspicion and apprehension. They are still an amorphous, if powerful,
tendency rather than a clearly defined faction with a coherent program. But no
one who observes closely what is happening to the Republican Party and American
conservatism today can doubt that the Force is with them. And while that Force
is the authentic Reagan legacy, it will have to be defined and implemented by a
future conservative administration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              276 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: JUNE 14, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1488 words





                                                      Weeks
This                               Last                  On
Week                               Week                List Fiction

 1                                    1          2           MISERY, by Stephen
                                                            King. (Viking,
                                                            $18.95.)
                                                             Injured and
                                                            drugged, an author
                                                            is held captive by
                                                            a
                                                             psychotic fan.

 2                                    2          5           THE HAUNTED MESA,
                                                            by Louis L'Amour.
                                                             (Bantam, $18.95.)
                                                            Unraveling the
                                                            mystery of
                                                             Indian cliff
                                                            dwellers who
                                                            vanished centuries
                                                            ago.

 3                                    3          13          FINE THINGS, by
                                                            Danielle Steel.
                                                            (Delacorte,
                                                             $18.95.) The
                                                            vicissitudes of a
                                                            son of the 60's on
                                                            his
                                                             way to the 80's.

 4                                    5          19          WINDMILLS OF THE
                                                            GODS, by Sidney
                                                            Sheldon.
                                                             (Morrow, $18.95.)
                                                            The nightmarish
                                                            experiences
                                                             that befall a
                                                            woman and her
                                                            family after her
                                                             appointment as
                                                            Ambassador to
                                                            Rumania.

 5                                    4          5           HEIRESS, by Janet
                                                            Dailey. (Little,
                                                            Brown, $17.95.)
                                                             Two sisters, one
                                                            legitimate, one
                                                            not, vie for their
                                                             father's affection
                                                            and fortune.

 6                                                        1  PALE KINGS AND
                                                            PRINCES, by Robert
                                                            B.
                                                             Parker.
                                                            (Delacorte,
                                                            $15.95.) Spenser on
                                                            the trail of
                                                             a major
                                                            Northeastern
                                                            cocaine ring based
                                                            in a small
                                                             New England town.

 7                                    6          10          THE LADIES OF
                                                            MISSALONGHI, by
                                                            Colleen
                                                             McCullough.
                                                            (Harper & Row,
                                                            $12.95.) An
                                                             Australian town at
                                                            the turn of the
                                                            century.

 8                                                        1  EMPIRE, by Gore
                                                            Vidal. (Random
                                                            House, $22.50.)

                                                            Turn-of-the-century
                                                            Washington, seen
                                                            from the
                                                             point of view of a
                                                            young woman
                                                            newspaper
                                                             publisher.

 9                                    7          20          THE EYES OF THE
                                                            DRAGON, by Stephen
                                                            King.
                                                             (Viking, $18.95.)
                                                            A fairy tale,
                                                            complete with an
                                                            aged
                                                             king, two princes,
                                                            an evil wizard and
                                                            a mouse.

10                                    8          10          TEXASVILLE, by
                                                            Larry McMurtry.
                                                            (Simon &
                                                             Schuster, $18.95.)
                                                            From the 50's to
                                                            the 80's in
                                                             Thalia, Tex. - a
                                                            sequel to ''The
                                                            Last Picture
                                                            Show.''

11                                    9          46          RED STORM RISING,
                                                            by Tom Clancy.
                                                            (Putnam,
                                                             $19.95.) The West
                                                            tries to stave off
                                                            the Russians in
                                                             World War III.

12 *                                                      1  THE TIMOTHY FILES,
                                                            by Lawrence
                                                            Sanders.
                                                             (Putnam, $18.95.)
                                                            A Vietnam vet
                                                            turned detective
                                                             checks out dubious
                                                            entrepreneurs for
                                                            Wall Street
                                                             firms.

13                                   10          12          DESTINY, by Sally
                                                            Beauman. (Bantam,
                                                            $19.95.)
                                                             The 30-year
                                                            romance of a couple
                                                            with diverse
                                                             backgrounds and
                                                            ambitions.

14                                                        1  MORE DIE OF
                                                            HEARTBREAK, by Saul
                                                            Bellow.
                                                             (Morrow, $17.95.)
                                                            The many-faceted
                                                            relationship of
                                                             the 35-year-old
                                                            narrator and his
                                                            uncle, a famous
                                                             botanist.

15                                   17          37          THE PRINCE OF
                                                            TIDES, by Pat
                                                            Conroy.
                                                             (Houghton Mifflin,
                                                            $19.95.) Complex
                                                            family
                                                             relationships in
                                                            South Carolina and
                                                            New York City.

                                                      Weeks
This                               Last                  On
Week                               Week                List Nonfiction

 1                                    1          7           THE CLOSING OF THE
                                                            AMERICAN MIND, by
                                                             Allan Bloom.
                                                            (Simon & Schuster,
                                                            $18.95.) A critique
                                                             of liberal arts
                                                            education during
                                                            the past 25 years.

 2                                    2          2           CULTURAL LITERACY,
                                                            by E. D. Hirsch Jr.
                                                             (Houghton Mifflin,
                                                            $16.95.) The
                                                            information -
                                                             geography,
                                                            history,
                                                            literature,
                                                            politics - that you
                                                             need to read with.

 3                                    4          5           HAMMER, by Armand
                                                            Hammer with Neil
                                                            Lyndon.
                                                             (Putnam, $22.95.)
                                                            The autobiography
                                                            of the
                                                             octogenarian
                                                            industrialist and
                                                            philanthropist.

 4                                    3          16          COMMUNION, by
                                                            Whitley Strieber.
                                                            (Beech Tree/
                                                             Morrow, $17.95.) A
                                                            professional writer
                                                            tells of the
                                                             visits of
                                                            ''intelligent
                                                            nonhumans'' to his
                                                            home.

 5                                    5          10          LOVE, MEDICINE &
                                                            MIRACLES, by Bernie
                                                            S.
                                                             Siegel. (Harper &
                                                            Row, $17.95.) A
                                                            surgeon stresses
                                                             the importance of
                                                            the patient's mind
                                                            and emotions
                                                             in treating
                                                            serious illness.

 6                                    6          28          A DAY IN THE LIFE
                                                            OF AMERICA.
                                                            (Collins
                                                             Publishers,
                                                            $39.95.) The nation
                                                            on May 2, 1986, as
                                                             recorded in
                                                            pictures by 200
                                                            photojournalists.

 7                                   10          2           THE DIFFERENT
                                                            DRUM, by M. Scott
                                                            Peck.
                                                             (Simon & Schuster,
                                                            $16.95.) A
                                                            psychiatrist's
                                                             prescription for
                                                            peace.

 8                                    7          6           GLORY DAYS, by
                                                            Dave Marsh.
                                                            (Pantheon,
                                                             $18.95.) Bruce
                                                            Springsteen in the
                                                            1980's; an account
                                                             written with the
                                                            rock star's
                                                            cooperation.

 9                                    8          10          HOLD ON, MR.
                                                            PRESIDENT! by Sam
                                                            Donaldson.
                                                             (Random House,
                                                            $17.95.) A White
                                                            House television
                                                             correspondent
                                                            comments on his
                                                            assignment and
                                                             the ways of the
                                                            news media.

10                                    9          4           GRACE, by James
                                                            Spada.
                                                            (Dolphin/Doubleday,
                                                             $17.95.) The
                                                            private and public
                                                            lives of Princess
                                                             Grace of Monaco.

11 *                                                     14  INTIMATE PARTNERS,
                                                            by Maggie Scarf.
                                                             (Random House,
                                                            $18.95.) Changing
                                                            patterns in love
                                                             and marriage.

12                                   11          9           THIS 'N THAT, by
                                                            Bette Davis with
                                                            Michael
                                                             Herskowitz.
                                                            (Putnam, $17.95.)
                                                            The actress's
                                                             memories and
                                                            opinions.

13 *                                 16          3           BEVERLY, by
                                                            Beverly Sills and
                                                            Lawrence
                                                             Linderman.
                                                            (Bantam, $19.95.)
                                                            Memoir of a singer,
                                                             mother, wife,
                                                            impresario and
                                                            good-will
                                                             ambassador.

14                                   15          17          THE FITZGERALDS
                                                            AND THE KENNEDYS,
                                                            by
                                                             Doris Kearns
                                                            Goodwin. (Simon &
                                                            Schuster, $22.95.)
                                                             From the Boston
                                                            slums of Irish
                                                            immigrants to the
                                                             White House: three
                                                            generations of a
                                                            family.

15 *                                 12          18          THE FATAL SHORE,
                                                            by Robert Hughes.
                                                            (Knopf,
                                                             $24.95.)
                                                            Australia, from
                                                            penal colony to its
                                                            gradual
                                                             emergence as a
                                                            flourishing nation.

                                                      Weeks
This                               Last                  On
Week                               Week                List Advice, How-to and
                                                            Miscellaneous

 1                                    1          92          WEBSTER'S NINTH
                                                            NEW COLLEGIATE
                                                             DICTIONARY.
                                                            (Merriam-Webster,
                                                            $14.95.) A
                                                             standard reference
                                                            work in a 1983
                                                            revision.

 2                                    4          2           WOMEN MEN LOVE,
                                                            WOMEN MEN LEAVE, by
                                                             Connell Cowan and
                                                            Melvyn Kinder.
                                                            (Clarkson N.
                                                             Potter/Crown,
                                                            $18.95.) Why men
                                                            are drawn to
                                                             some women and
                                                            desert others.

 3                                    2          2           THE DIET
                                                            PRINCIPAL, by
                                                            Victoria Principal.
                                                             (Simon & Schuster,
                                                            $17.95.) A
                                                            television star's
                                                             guide to
                                                            nutrition.

 4                                    5          33          THE FRUGAL GOURMET
                                                            COOKS WITH WINE,
                                                             by Jeff Smith.
                                                            (Morrow, $16.95.)
                                                            Recipes to be
                                                             prepared at
                                                            moderate cost.

 5                                                       13  WEBSTER'S NEW
                                                            WORLD DICTIONARY.
                                                             (Simon & Schuster,
                                                            $16.95.) The Second
                                                            College
                                                             Edition of a
                                                            standard work,
                                                            updated in 1982.


 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

FIASCO, by Stanislaw Lem. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$17.95.) A ship from Earth nears the planet Quinta in this ambitious, cautionary
vision of the future, but finds it isolated by a ''machine war-sphere,'' a
fantastic projection of the Strategic Defense Initiative, in which machines
fight one another without direction from their (possibly extinct) creators.

MOSCOW 2042, by Vladimir Voinovich. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $16.95.) The
Soviet emigre satirist imagines an anti-Utopia, a zany Moscow of the next
century, where his protagonist - also a writer of satires - receives a hero's
welcome from throngs who have studied his books without reading them.

A YELLOW RAFT IN BLUE WATER, by Michael Dorris. (Holt, $16.95.) Three women of
three generations, living on an Indian reservation in Montana, are the
characters and the narrators of this beautifully realized three-part novel of
opportunities lost, love resisted, grudges held.

ALVAREZ: Adventures of a Physicist, by Luis W. Alvarez. (Basic Books, $19.95.)
The zestful memoirs of the physicist who received a Nobel Prize for his work on
bubble chambers but is now best known for his asteroid-impact theory of dinosaur
extinction.

NEW YORK 1930: Architecture and Urbanism Between the Two World Wars, by Robert
A. M. Stern, Gregory Gilmartin and Thomas Mellins. (Rizzoli, $75.) The idea of
New York as an icon of American culture is the real theme of this fundamentally
romantic, lavishly illustrated, 847-page avalanche of a love letter.

LIFE AND DEATH IN SHANGHAI, by Nien Cheng. (Grove Press, $19.95.) Nien Cheng, a
wealthy Shanghai woman accused of spying for the West, recounts her fierce
struggle against solitary confinement and torture by Red Guards as she reflects
on the giant step backward that was, to her, the Cultural Revolution.

WHO KILLED PALOMINO MOLERO? by Mario Vargas Llosa. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$14.95.) Evil's blinding power and the vivid ambiguities of reality underlie a
detective story about a 1950's murder in the Peruvian sticks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              277 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHARADE AT MALACANANG PALACE

BYLINE: By DAVID HOWARD BAIN; David Haward Bain is the author of ''Sitting in
Darkness: Americans in the Philippines.'' An updated edition has been issued
recently in paperback.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1018 words



THE FOUR DAYS OF COURAGE
The Untold Story of the People Who Brought Marcos Down. By Bryan Johnson.
Illustrated. 290 pp. New York: The Free Press. $19.95.

AS Far Eastern correspondent for The Toronto Globe and Mail, Bryan Johnson has
been in and out of the Philippines for some seven years; his wife is Filipino,
he is fluent in Tagalog, and he has developed an enduring interest - almost an
obsessive partisanship, as he himself would admit - in Philippine affairs. Now
Mr. Johnson has produced what may well be the best book on the Ferdinand
Marcos-Corazon Aquino election campaign and on the ''People Power'' that toppled
a tyrant, a narrative reminiscent of that Vietnam-era classic, Michael Herr's
''Dispatches,'' but without the hallucinations.

Relying on his own campaign reportage, on post-revolution interviews with some
90 key participants and on Filipino memoirs published in Manila last year and
not easily available here, the author has clarified one of the most myth-ridden
events of recent times. What is particularly important is that Mr. Johnson
explodes last year's enduring fantasy that the besieged President Marcos showed
a ''humane restraint'' in not ordering his troops to attack his Defense
Minister, Juan Ponce Enrile, and his Deputy Chief of Staff, Gen. Fidel Ramos,
and their military and civilian supporters gathered at two army posts on the
outskirts of Manila. The world is now familiar with countless Gandhiesque scenes
last February when civilians blocked Mr. Marcos's armored personnel carriers and
wheedled battle-hardened combat troops into passivity.

As these scenes of courage were recorded, a desperate Ferdinand Marcos sat in
his command post at Malacanang Palace, issuing a series of attack orders to a
heavily armed marine brigade, helicopter gunships and jet planes. Each of Mr.
Marcos's orders to strike -which would have resulted in thousands of casualties
-was ignored. The marine commander, Col. Braulio Balbas, drew up within spitting
distance of the military installation Camp Crame but was appalled when ordered
to fire artillery at the rebel compound and its protective civilian masses;
instead of shooting, he backed off and dissimulated over the radio until he knew
it was too late for him to be replaced. Helicopter pilots also refrained from
firing on the crowds; they landed at Crame and joined the rebels. F-5 jet pilots
also defected - but only after disabling Mr. Marcos's remaining loyalist fighter
planes as they were being readied on the runway for a sortie against Camp Crame.

Aside from his predilection for neat Hollywood scenarios, why did President
Reagan repeatedly hail Mr. Marcos for not permitting ''bloodshed or civil
strife''? And why did his State Department - which had monitored all loyalist
and rebel radio traffic in Manila and actually had the best overview - cooperate
in the charade? The answer may be found in a secret bargain struck after the
Marcos entourage was conveyed by United States helicopters (his own pilots had
deserted days before) to Clark Air Base. As Mr. Johnson tells it, Mr. Marcos
threatened to return to his home province in northern Luzon (which would plunge
the nation into civil war) if his historical image, at least, was not
reburnished. Bizarrely, Defense Minister Enrile thereby broadcast a grateful
statement about the deposed President's civility - which was taken up by all
United States officials. Now Mr. Marcos's peaceability is officially used as a
rationale for stalling Filipino inquiries into the vast wealth he removed from
his nation.

After the dictator was gone and Corazon Aquino was President, much was said
about American encouragement of People Power. With this book, this egregious
myth also can now be laid to rest. After the author provides an inside view of
the abortive coup against Mr. Marcos - the one masterminded by so-called
''reformist'' colonels in the military, which was uncovered on Feb. 22, 1986,
and which ultimately led to the defection of Mr. Enrile, who was probably
involved, and General Ramos, who probably was not - Mr. Johnson shows
convincingly that an American Embassy official actually tipped off Mr. Marcos to
the colonels' planned incineration of Presidential security forces and the
installation of a military junta. After the betrayal, other United States
officials continued to tread cautiously, despite their personal inclinations to
favor Mrs. Aquino or the military rebels. Ambassador Stephen Bosworth curtly
refused Mr. Enrile's pleas for support, steering a conservative course that
embittered the Filipinos. The trouble-shooter Philip Habib, dispatched to
persuade Mrs. Aquino to accept defeat as President, provoked only a cynical
rebuff. The author relies on numerous unnamed ''insiders'' to reconstruct much
of this diplomatic chapter but it rings true. Subsequent American attempts to
recast events in a more favorable light seem weak in comparison. In the final
analysis there will be some American heroes who are absent from Mr. Johnson's
book, particularly moderates in the State Department who struggled to wrest the
Philippines policy from ideologues in the White House. But far too many are
taking much too much credit for what was essentially a Filipino victory. MR.
JOHNSON'S book is replete with similar revelations, all told in exceptionally
vivid prose: Jaime Cardinal Sin's neat sidestepping through the minefield of
Vatican directives to stay out of the fray; Imelda Marcos's floor-pounding
tantrum at the Cardinal's feet; tough-guy Enrile's tearful scenes when he was
sure his rebels were about to be overrun; Cable News Network's disclosure of
Mrs. Aquino's hiding place, which could have unleashed an assassination squad
had Mr. Marcos been tuning in.

In an epilogue, Mr. Johnson succinctly covers the first shaky year of the Aquino
administration. Despite all the personality conflicts, the coup attempts, the
economic pitfalls left by the Marcos kleptocracy, and the broken-down peace
negotiations with Communist and Moslem rebels, the author is cautiously
optimistic. He strikes, I think, the right tone.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Juan Ponce Enrile, former Philippines' Defense Minister (From
''The Four Days of Courage'')

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              278 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FLUNKING OUT OF THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE

BYLINE: By ABIGAIL McCARTHY; Abigail McCarthy's books include the novel
''Circles: A Washington Story.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 453 words



FIRST LADIES
By Catherine Breslin. 429 pp. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company. $16.95.

TURN back the clock to 1980, indulge the fantasies of the loyalists who long for
a return of those ''born American royal'' to the White House, and still come to
terms with what actually happened. Catherine Breslin, the author of the novels
''Unholy Child'' and ''The Mistress Condition,'' has managed this unlikely feat
in an ingeniously plotted story.

The candidates wear thin fictional disguises. Democrat Roy Bob Talbott is the
incumbent President; his running mate is Senator Larry Devlin of the famous
Devlin clan, which has already produced a 20th-century President. The Republican
contender, former Governor Dan Sterling, who has come to politics by way of
Hollywood, wins the popular election by two million votes but his ticket fails
to get the necessary majority in the Electoral College. In accordance with the
12th Amendment, the House of Representatives must now choose the President, each
state delegation having one vote. The Democratic Senate, meanwhile, chooses
Devlin as Vice President by a simple majority. Following the provisions of the
12th and 20th Amendments, Devlin becomes acting President. His incumbency is
temporary but long enough to bring us to the brink of negotiations with Vietnam
to salvage a ravaged Cambodia.

The intriguing possibilities inherent in this constitutional crisis and the
Vietnam-Cambodia scenario are, it seems to me, somewhat vitiated because Ms.
Breslin plays out the situation from the points of view of the First Ladies of
the title - the temporary First Lady, beautiful Robin Devlin, and the potential
First Lady, Priscilla (called Prilla) Sterling. Robin is red-haired, an amateur
but gifted painter and a sobered alcoholic whose political reconciliation with
her husband threatens her sobriety and stability. (The gritty scenes of her
battles against her addiction are among the best in the book.) The intended
likeness to Joan Kennedy is, of course, unmistakable. So is the parallel between
Nancy Reagan and the unsympathetically portrayed Prilla, ''sixty if she was a
day,'' who knows that there isn't a mortal thing she wouldn't do to get her
husband to the White House.

The roman a clef is an accepted form of fiction, but it has its tricky aspects.
When the characters are too close to their real-life prototypes they have no
rounded reality of their own. And when families evoke as much interest as, for
instance, the legendary real-life originals of the Devlins do, it is difficult
to know where fictional license stops and exploitation begins. Often Ms.
Breslin's material smacks more of gossipy feature journalism than of creative
invention. Alas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              279 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FLIBERTY VS. GREATNESS FOR ALL

BYLINE: By DAVID M. KENNEDY; David M. Kennedy teaches American history at
Stanford University. He is the author of ''Power and Responsibility: Case
Studies in American Leadership.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1710 words



IDEOLOGY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY
By Michael H. Hunt. Illustrated. 237 pp. New Haven: Yale University Press.
$22.50.

ENTANGLING ALLIANCES WITH NONE
American Foreign Policy in the Age of Jefferson. By Lawrence S. Kaplan. 230 pp.
Ohio: The Kent State University Press. Cloth, $24. Paper, $14.50.

FOREIGN policies are like fingerprints. All countries have them, yet each is
unique.

''Every unhappy nation,'' Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. recently declaimed with a
flourish, ''is unhappy in its own way.''

Since the birth of the American Republic, the peculiarities of the American way
in foreign policy have excited the imagination. Summoned by Thomas Paine to
begin the world over again, the Americans were expected not only to ordain a
novus ordo seclorum at home, but to be innovators in the international arena as
well. But would the new order of the ages that the young United States aspired
to build compel a diplomacy that was pre-eminently isolationist or expansionist,
self-interested or idealistic, nationalist or universalist?

Michael H. Hunt, who teaches history at the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, has now entered this centuries-old debate, adding his voice to a
distinguished chorus that in recent years has included the diplomat George F.
Kennan and the historian William Appleman Williams. Like them, he believes that
''some of the central ideas in foreign policy are closely intertwined with
domestic political values and arrangements.'' Mr. Kennan has emphasized
Americans' unrealistic efforts to apply home-grown moralistic and legalistic
concepts to the international order. Mr. Williams portrays American foreign
policy as an organic outgrowth of the need to dispose of domestic economic
surpluses in overseas markets, and of a struggle to impose an apparently benign,
but ultimately exploitative, ''open door'' regime on the world economy,
especially on less developed countries. Neither Mr. Kennan nor Mr. Williams lays
much emphasis on isolationism - the nation's first foreign policy - as a factor
in 20th-century diplomacy. Curiously, neither does Mr. Hunt, though his book
seeks to demonstrate ''the remarkable continuity of our thinking on basic
foreign-policy issues.''

Mr. Hunt prudently acknowledges that policy as finally formed and implemented
can have multiple determinants, including a need for markets or resources, the
sometimes irrational whims of the electorate and the behavior of other nations.
But the burden of his argument is to assign primacy in the shaping of foreign
policy to ideology, which he describes as ''an interrelated set of convictions
or assumptions that reduces . . . complexities . . . to easily comprehensible
terms and suggests appropriate ways of dealing with'' them. Ideology, in short,
both shapes perceptions and prompts behavior.

Three ''core ideas'' of American political culture, according to Mr. Hunt, have
powerfully molded American diplomacy, and they form the heart of his analysis.
These ideas concern the questions of revolution, race and, most interestingly,
liberty.

The very success of their own revolution, Mr. Hunt argues, left Americans with
the unfortunate conviction that no revolution modeled on principles different
from those of 1776 could possibly be legitimate. Thus after some initial (and
sharp) debates about the merits of the French Revolution in the 1790's,
Americans for the most part united in reflexively condemning later revolutions
in Mexico, Russia, China and Cuba. Similarly, the upper-class white men who have
virtually monopolized foreign policy-making, Mr. Hunt suggests, have carried
with them into the international arena the smug assumptions about American
racial superiority that had been cultivated during centuries of domination over
Indians and blacks at home. They therefore consistently failed to take Latin
Americans or Orientals seriously and arrogated to themselves the right to
dictate to peoples of color in the Philippines, Hawaii and, ultimately, Vietnam.

On these points Mr. Hunt is neither particularly original nor incisive. His
technique consists of mechanically narrating familiar events through the prism
of antirevolutionism or racism, as the case may be, without ever making the
persuasive argument that these sentiments significantly shaped policy, rather
than being incidental rhetorical concomitants of policy.

On the subject of liberty, however, Mr. Hunt is supple and suggestive. Like many
historians before him, he plays on the contrast between Alexander Hamilton and
Thomas Jefferson, who, he says, held ''two antagonistic visions of America's
role in the world.'' Hamilton, convinced that men and nations alike were
''ambitious, vindictive, and rapacious,'' counseled a foreign policy of
''greatness.'' In a world inevitably ruled by self-interest and strength,
Hamilton argued, the young American Republic must centralize power in a robust
national Government (especially in the executive branch), gird itself for
sustained international struggle and vigorously expand both its territory and
its influence. Jefferson, concerned above all with preserving the supremely
precious but fragile revolutionary heritage of liberty, advocated ''a policy of
aloofness,'' requiring only a small consular corps and a minuscule military
establishment - arrangements that fitted well with his preference for minimalist
government. THE irony, of course, as Henry Adams long ago observed, was that
Jefferson as President muscularly exercised executive power to effect the
Louisiana Purchase, the largest single acquisition of territory in American
history. And he justified his action as necessary for the creation of an
''empire'' of liberty in North America. Thus in practice, the clash of
Hamiltonian and Jeffersonian principles seemed to count for little: an empire
for greatness or an empire for liberty was an empire all the same.

Still, as Mr. Hunt cogently relates, the opposing Hamiltonian and Jeffersonian
philosophies of foreign policy persisted in American political debate, coming
into especially sharp focus in the expansionist episodes of the Mexican War in
the 1840's and the Spanish-American War in the 1890's. Heirs of the Jeffersonian
tradition, like the Conscience Whigs who opposed President Polk's Mexican
venture and the Anti-Imperialist League that decried the annexation of the
Philippines, doggedly asserted ''the incompatibility of liberty with a foreign
policy that aimed for greatness.'' ''Goddamn the United States for its vile
conduct in the Philippine Isles!'' exclaimed the normally civil Harvard
philosopher William James. He was disgusted that the United States could ''puke
up its ancient soul in five minutes without a wink of squeamishness.'' IN each
of these episodes, what Mr. Hunt calls the ''imperial (or Hamiltonian)'' forces
prevailed. Their crowning triumph, as Mr. Hunt claims in the most intriguing and
provocative part of his argument, was not simply to defeat the forces of
liberty, but to co-opt them - to devise a rationale for an assertive foreign
policy that absorbed and even amplified the idea of liberty as the central
justification for the strategy of ''greatness.'' Setting limits on American
ambitions, said a senator in 1848, ''would be treason to the cause of human
liberty.'' Reinforced by racial and antirevolutionary sentiments, this fusion of
the concepts of liberty and imperialism had become high orthodoxy by the 20th
century, driving a foreign policy of unchecked self-righteousness and
potentially limitless scope.

Mr. Hunt passionately denounces this unholy ideological marriage, and brands the
Vietnam War as its most grotesque progeny. But in a sobering final judgment, he
acknowledges that it is a union sanctified by its incorporation of some of the
most venerable values in American political culture. ''A foreign policy no
longer chained to our current tribal misconceptions and vaulting ambition might
well be a better policy. However -and this is the crux of the matter - it would
also be policy without any supporting ideological base'' and ''it would
certainly be politically vulnerable.'' God help us, to paraphrase Woodrow
Wilson's war message of 1917, we can do no other.

If Mr. Hunt's examination of the conflation of liberty and greatness helps us
understand the ideological genesis of the Reagan Doctrine, with its open-ended
support for anti-Communist movements everywhere, Lawrence S. Kaplan's
''Entangling Alliances With None'' reminds us of the powerful persistence of
isolationist sentiment in our political culture, even down to the Strategic
Defense Initiative, with its seductive appeal to a ''Fortress America''
mentality. In his collection of graceful and insightful essays penned over a
quarter-century of reflection on the Jeffersonian legacy in foreign affairs, Mr.
Kaplan, professor of history at Kent State University, de-emphasizes both
ideology and the usual Hamilton-Jefferson contrast. Both men, he says, shared
from the outset a deep agreement that the overriding goal of early American
diplomacy was to protect the precarious national independence of the United
States from both British and French menaces. Policy proceeded not from
philosophical debate but from the stark and irreducible realities of the young
nation's geopolitical predicament. A feeble, fragmented and peripheral power,
the new United States strove desperately to put itself on a sound economic
footing and to secure its democratic experiment in a sometimes viciously
competitive and openly hostile world. In this situation, isolationism was not
simply an expression of cultural self-consciousness, but a shrewd and almost
unavoidable policy.

By inference, at least, Mr. Kaplan also suggests that in the making of foreign
policy the necessities of circumstance are no less compelling than the dictates
of political culture. As the invading Athenians replied to the protesting
islanders of Melos many millennia ago: ''The strong do what they can and the
weak suffer what they must.'' Thomas Paine and Ronald Reagan might both dream of
beginning the world over again. But both these books, and much ancient wisdom,
suggest how unhappily resistant the world of nations can be to even the noblest
assertions of the human will.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              280 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 17, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

For Asian Bloc, Old Issues and More Refugees

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 654 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, June 16


For more than half its 20 years, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations has
been preoccupied with Indochina, first over Hanoi's conquest of South Vietnam
and then over its invasion and occupation of Cambodia.

Today, the Foreign Ministers of the association's six nations - Thailand,
Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, the Philippines and Brunei - concluded another
annual meeting, this one in a luxury waterfront hotel in Singapore, the symbol
of Asean's economic well-being. Again, they called for a political solution in
Cambodia and an end to an unending influx of Indochinese refugees.

A few miles away along the same coast, 229 Vietnamese boat people were waiting
in the cargo hold of a French freighter, the Rose Schiaffino. Most of them were
young men and women in their teens and 20's, evidence that the concerns that
brought the association together have not changed and that a new generation of
refugees is coming.

Most of the refugees confined to the Rose Schiaffino as she undergoes repairs in
a dockyard were among more than 900 Vietnamese recently rescued in the South
China Sea. The ship, chartered by a French humanitarian organization, Medecins
du Monde, has made three mercy voyages since early April, pulling sick,
exhausted people from small wooden boats.

'One-Third Never Arrive'

''A lot of people are dying at sea,'' the Rose Schiaffino's captain, Michel
Pestourie, said, ''that is a fact. They tell us 2,500 leave by boat each month,
and one-third of them never arrive anywhere.''

Some young refugees, headed for new lives in Europe after being given French,
West German, Austrian or Swiss visas, said today that they had fled because
their parents' association with the former South Vietnamese regime was
preventing them from getting jobs or an education.

Some said they wanted to avoid being sent to agricultural work camps. Others on
the ship - a small, English Channel coastal freigher - said they were fleeing
military service for fear of dying in Cambodia.

Of the Indochinese issues discussed at the ministerial meeting here, it was only
on Cambodia, where about 140,000 Vietnamese troops - more troops than the Soviet
Union has in Afghanistan -continue to support a government that Hanoi installed
in 1979, that the Association found any cause for hope.

Indonesia's Foreign Minister, Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, announced today that he had
been invited to Hanoi to discuss some ''new elements'' recently contributed by
the United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, to the many
proposals already advanced by other parties looking for ways to negotiate an end
to the nine-year-old Cambodian conflict. Cambodian Seat at U.N. Mr. Mochtar and
others said they were confident that Prince Norodom Sihanouk's recent decision
to take a leave of absence from the presidency of the Coalition Government of
Democratic Kampuchea, the loose alliance of non-Communist and Khmer Rouge
guerrilla groups fighting Phnom Penh, would not hurt the coalition's chances of
retaining Cambodia's seat at the United Nations in the fall.

At a news conference this afternoon, ministers refused to say what Mr. Perez de
Cuellar's new ideas were, or what grounds there were for optimism.

But Mr. Mochtar and Thailand's Foreign Minister, Siddhi Savetsila, have recently
met with Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union, which
supports the Vietnamese militarily and economically. Both say they have told
Moscow that it will not be able to achieve the improved relations it is seeking
in non-Communist Southeast Asia until Vietnamese forces have left Cambodia.

''I think this message has clearly come across,'' Dr. Mochtar, who serves as
Asean's go-between with Vietnam, said today. But he said that he thought Moscow
had a limited influence in Hanoi and that ''the last thing you should do'' is
suggest that Vietnam would change a policy because of pressure from Moscow.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              281 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 17, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Once Again, Blindly Into the Breach

BYLINE: By Arthur Schlesinger Jr.; Arthur Schlesinger Jr. is professor in the
humanities at the City University of New York.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 957 words


President Reagan's pledge to ''protect the free world's oil flow'' by expanding
our naval presence in the Persian Gulf suggests a powerful itch to plunge us
into military action. It is also the latest manifestation of fallacious thinking
to which all superpowers succumb - the notion that we know the interests of
other countries better than they know their own interests.

For so far as anyone can tell, none of our major friends and allies favors the
policy the Administration is straining to pursue. Western Europe and Japan
depend far more than the United States does on the oil passing through the
Strait of Hormuz. But they have steadfastly refused to back Mr. Reagan's macho
adventurism -even though we allege it to be for their special benefit.

It is not even clear that the Arab governments are enthusiastic about raising
the military stakes in the area. Yet on we go, sublimely confident that we
understand the issues better than the nations most directly involved, most
directly threatened and most familiar with the territory.

This has happened before and it always leads to disaster. The most tragic
example was Vietnam, where American intervention was intended to rescue East
Asia from a Communist takeover. Given this selfless mission, President Lyndon B.
Johnson could never understand why the other members of the Southeast Asia
Treaty Organization would not send more fighting men to Vietnam in order to help
the Americans save their countries. In 1967, he sent Clark M. Clifford on a
mission to persuade the SEATO governments to increase their military
contributions.

As Mr. Clifford traveled from one capital to another, he soon recognized that
the SEATO governments did not see the Vietnam War as Washington did. They did
not agree with the American assessment of the threat or of the domino
consequences of a North Vietnam victory, and they were damned if they were going
to send more of their boys to Vietnam to be killed.

If the nations that knew the territory best did not see transcendent stakes in
the outcome of a civil war in Vietnam, Mr. Clifford concluded, why in the world
was America so heavily involved? Did we really know what we were doing? He
decided that we didn't, and the next year, when he became Secretary of Defense,
he did his best to end American involvement.

Central America is another example of the superpower fallacy. Our policy of
military intervention is designed to save the other countries from the wicked
Sandinistas. But most Latin American governments think that our policy of
militarizing the problem increases desperation and chaos and is far more likely
to promote than to check the spread of Marxist revolution.

If a Marxist Nicaragua is such a threat, it is a considerably more dire threat
to Latin America than to the United States. Latin American countries are far
more vulnerable politically and militarily than we are, they are closer to the
scene and vastly more knowledgeable about it and their leaders are just as
determined as the United States is on their behalf to resist their own
overthrow. Once again the people on the spot don't see the threat as
apocalyptically as we do, and once again we plunge on, idiotically confident of
our own infallibility.

Lebanon was another example, and the massacre of the marines should have shown
us forever the dangers of meddling in the Middle East, a part of the world with
which we have had a far smaller relationship than we have had with South America
and of which we have far less knowledge - a part of the world, moreover, so
bedeviled by ancient historic and religious hatreds that it defies not just
Western management but Western comprehension.

We didn't have the slightest idea of the mess we were getting into in Lebanon,
and now, raising the standard of invincible ignorance, we seem poised to plunge
blithely ahead into a larger mess in the Persian Gulf.

The Reagan Administration's recent antics show how little we know what we are
doing. The Iraqis attacked an American frigate and killed 37 sailors. Worse,
Iraq in 1984 initiated the policy of attacking ships in the Gulf, thereby
provoking Iranian reprisals, and over the last two years Iraq has attacked half
again as many ships as Iran.

Yet the Reagan Administration, instead of getting mad at the perpetrator,
rewards Iraq for its assault on the Stark by concentrating all its venom and
threats of retaliation on Iran - the very country to which only a short time
back our President was selling arms on the grounds of its supreme geopolitical
importance.

We can only speculate that our new policy is intended to punish the Iranians for
getting Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North (and Mr. Reagan) into all that trouble. The
prospect that the Persian Gulf might become a Soviet lake recurs as a talking
point, but obviously an enlarged Soviet presence would only make the Soviet
Union more than ever a target for Arab fear and Iranian rage.

''Almost all of America's friends in the Middle East, Europe and South Asia,''
Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, not heretofore renowned as a dove, has wisely written,
''are worried that a major commitment of U.S. forces would be dangerous to
American power as well as American lives. . . . Our allies and friends are much
more dependent than we are on Gulf oil, but do not feel an enhanced military
presence is necessary or desirable to protect their vital interests.''

So here we go again. What on earth do we think we are doing? What warrant does
experience give us for supposing that we know the interests of other countries
better than they know their own interests?

Let us rid ourselves of the superpower fallacy before the superpower fallacy
rids us of more American lives, American influence and American credibility.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              282 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 17, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WALTER HELLER, 71, ECONOMIC ADVISER IN 60'S, DEAD

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1082 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 16


Walter W. Heller, the chief economic adviser of Presidents Kennedy and Johnson,
died Monday of a heart attack at his second home, near Seattle, his office in
Minneapolis reported today. He was 71 years old.

''In many respects, he is a major contributor if not the father of modern
economic policy-making,'' said Alan Greenspan, who was President Ford's chief
economist and is now chairman-designate of the Federal Reserve Board. ''He
defined a lot of the terms and the issues. One might disagree with some of his
solutions but not with the questions he raised.''

Senator Paul A. Sarbanes, Democrat of Maryland, who is chairman of the Joint
Economic Committee of Congress, said that Mr. Heller, ''over many decades, made
a major contribution to the vigor and prosperity of our society.''

'Fascinating Public Discipline'

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said, ''When you were in a
room with Walter Heller, economics was never the 'dismal science' but a
fascinating public discipline alive with possibilities for hope and progress.''

Mr. Heller was best known for his single-minded and ultimately successful drive
in the early 1960's to enact sweeping cuts in personal and business income
taxes, and, after he left office, for development of the theory of revenue
sharing under which states and localities are deemed more efficient spenders of
Federal tax revenues than Washington.

Mr. Heller, trim and tall, at nearly 6 feet 4 inches, retired as a professor of
economics at the University of Minnesota last year but remained active. He was
planning to teach his introductory economics course in the fall and was still
writing and making consulting visits to Washington, as he did last week. He had
had a physical examination in recent weeks, his office at the university
reported, and was found to be in sound health.

President Kennedy appointed Mr. Heller, then an economics professor at
Minnesota, to be chairman of his Council of Economic Advisers in December 1960,
as the new President was preparing to take office. Mr. Heller remained in that
position until late in 1964, as President Johnson's chairman. He was a close
adviser to both, unlike most of his predecessors, and he called himself an
''educator of Presidents.''

Along with the late Arthur M. Okun and the late Otto Eckstein, and James Tobin
of Yale, Mr. Heller was a member of a constellation of liberal economists,
associated with Democrats and trained in the days of the New Deal, who dominated
economic policy-making throughout the 1960's.

They are often given much of the credit for defining the policies behind the
economy's prolonged stretch of largely inflation-free growth then, a period of
prosperity that the country has not matched since. The economy, Mr. Heller said,
ought to grow beyond the size it reached before a recession began and the
unemployment rate should fall by more than it rises in a recession. To help the
economy achieve such a performance, he urged tax cuts even if that meant some
deficit spending.

Insufficient Heed to Inflation

But the tax-cutting and deficit-spending theories - derived largely from those
of John Maynard Keynes, the British economic philosopher- paid insufficient heed
to inflation, and for a while, Mr. Heller publicly discounted incipient signs of
the problem. The virulent inflation that gathered speed in the 1970's turned
many economists away from Keynesianism and contributed to the rise of the
small-government, free-market, supply-side view of economics that President
Reagan popularized. Mr. Heller criticized the Reagan economics because of the
record budget deficits associated with them.

But he was candid, too, in faulting his own policies once he became aware of the
inflation associated with them. As early as 1964, fearing that inflation would
rise with the surge in Federal spending to pay for the war in Vietnam, Mr.
Heller reversed position on taxes. He appealed to President Johnson for a tax
increase, but the President rebuffed him.

''He was advising that we had to raise taxes to finance the Vietnam buildup,''
said George Perry, economist at the Brookings Institution and a close associate
of Mr. Heller's since the time Mr. Heller gave him his first job, as a junior
economist on the staff of the Council of Ecomomic Advisers. ''Johnson wouldn't
take the advice, and we ended up overheating the economy. That led to the
stubborn inflation of the 1970's and it put the economics of the 1960's into
disrepute.''

'Marvelous Brain-Picker'

Mr. Perry described Mr. Heller as a ''marvelous brain-picker'' who built a
lively staff of bright economists, all of whom contributed to the theoretical
underpinnings of President Kennedy's New Frontier and the Johnson Great Society.
''What came out,'' Mr. Perry said of the council sessions then, ''was better
than what went in.''

Mr. Greenspan said: ''If ideas Walter held were contradicted by evolving
evidence, he was quick to change. If Walter said something was black, it was
black. If it turned to white, he'd spot it first.''

Mr. Heller's personal economics, more than policy differences with President
Johnson, prompted his resignation. At the time he had three children in college
and a debt of $16,000.

He was born in Buffalo, the son of immigrants from Germany. He earned his
bachelor's degree at Oberlin College in Ohio, where he was Phi Beta Kappa, and
his master's and doctorates in economics from the University of Wisconsin. He
spent most of his career as a professor of economics at Minnesota, eventually
becoming chairman of the department of economics.

But he also followed a parallel career in government and consulting, working for
four formative years in the Treasury Department as a tax analyst. He wrote
frequently for the opinion pages of newspapers, served on the boards of
corporations and advised foreign governments. Of economists not in the
Government, Mr. Heller probably was seen in Washington more than any other. He
was here last week for a meeting at the Congressional Budget Office.

Mr. Heller's wife, the former Emily K. Johnson, died of cancer in July 1985
after many years battling lupus, a degenerative disease. He leaves a daughter,
Kaaren Heller Davis, who lives near Seattle and was visiting him when he became
ill, and two sons, Walter P., who is a professor of economics at the University
of California at San Diego, and Eric J., a professor of chemistry and physics at
the University of Washington in Seattle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              283 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 18, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, JUNE 18, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 954 words




International    A3-15



A Secord-Wilson financial link was cited by Congressional investigators. They
said a retired C.I.A. official would testify next week about the link between
Richard V. Secord and Edwin P. Wilson, who smuggled arms to Libya.    Page A1



Oliver L. North has refused to submit to private questioning by staff lawyers in
preparation for his public testimony before the Congressional panels
investigating the Iran-contra affair, the panels' leaders said.    A11



News analysis: South Korea unrest raises serious questions about whether the
Government can carry out an orderly transition of presidential power next winter
and a smooth Olympic Games the following summer.    A1



A guerrilla war in Suriname has been ravaging the isolated little country for
nearly a year, crippling its economy and threatening to destroy a distinctive
society of bush people.    A1

A Waldheim-Pope meeting is set, according to the Vatican and the Austrian
Government. They announced that President Kurt Waldheim would pay an official
visit to John Paul II in the Vatican next week.    A3



Major action against Toshiba because of the diversion of critical submarine
technology to Moscow was demanded by members of a Senate oversight committee.
    D1



Iran has the initiative in gulf

    A3



New names for Kuwaiti tankers

    A3



White nights in Russia

    A4



Reagan said to bar ABM talks

    A5



Soviet dismisses more generals

    A7



Shultz prods South Koreans

    A10



Reagan faults Latin peace plan

    A13



Cocaine finds a new route

    A15



National    A16-29, B9, B14



A compromise budget plan was agreed on by House and Senate Democratic leaders
that puts them on a collision course with the Republican White House over taxes
and Defense Department spending.    A1



The economy grew at a 4.8 percent rate in the first quarter, the Commerce
Department said. This figure, revised upward from earlier reports, showed
benefits from the declining dollar.    A1



Airline arms screening was faulted by the F.A.A. The agency said that 20 percent
of people carrying weapons aboard a plane were undetected by airline employees
screening passengers at boarding gates.    A1



News analysis: Howard H. Baker Jr. is under fire from some White House officials
over a series of mistakes including the impression that President Reagan's
performance at the Venice meeting was inadequate.    B14



Andrew Young will not be indicted by a Federal grand jury over allegations that
he might have sought to hinder an investigation into cocaine use among prominent
Atlantans.    A16

A judge berated the Pentagon for delaying for three years implementing a program
to open unused military facilities to the homeless and by spending most money
appropriated for it on military hardware.    A16



Dairy Queens are the hangout in rural Texas towns. Of the chain's 4,340
franchises in the contiguous 48 states about 800 are in Texas. Most are in towns
with populations such as 1,357 and 2,562.    A16



David S. Ruder was named by President Reagan to head the Securities and Exchange
Commission. He is a former dean of the Northwestern University Law School and is
known as an eminent securities lawyer and scholar.    D1



Dennis Hopper's new home in Venice, Calif., is a study in paradoxes: it is
surfaced in corrugated iron, and four windows are barred, yet it is surrounded
by a coy and pristine picket fence.    C1

The Provincetown Playhouse was celebrated at a conference that drew 200
scholars, dramatists, artists, writers and passionate students of a seminal
juncture in American cultural history.    C21



Undersea crater is discovered

    A17



Minnesota offers parental leave to mothers and fathers

    A20



Study says fewer blacks get doctorates in 5 Southern States

    A22



Presbyterians denounce bigotry against Moslems

    A24



Marine who fled Vietnam is charged

    A26



Victory leaves Denver mayor needing broad alliance

    A28



Bakkers vow to keep $1.3 million parsonage

    A29



Reagan undecided on veto of prosecutor law

    B14



Washington Talk    B10



Democratic control is no nirvana

Q.&A.: New member at the Fed

Regional    B1-8, B28



Race ties hAve been damaged by the virtual exoneration of Bernhard H. Goetz in
shooting four blacks, black politicians and civil rights advocates say. Benjamin
L. Hooks termed the verdict ''inexcusable.''    A1



Cabbies must have collars, sleeves and trousers or skirts that reach to
mid-thigh and have no holes, under a dress code given preliminary approval by
the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission.    A1



Students fared slightly worse in reading tests and slightly better in
mathematics than last year, according to the annual testing in New York City's
public schools, the Board of Education announced.    B3



Documents slow aliens' amnesty

    B1



Shelter plan advances, for now

    B1



Merchant Marine Academy changes

    B1



Surrogate motherhood bill withdrawn in Albany

    B2



Business group picks Straus

    B16



Officer cleared of corruption

    B3



Reactions to Goetz case strong

    B6



News analysis: Goetz verdict, urban issues

    B6



Jersey Bishops offer AIDS policy

    B9


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              284 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 18, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Successor for Top Marine

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 50 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 17


President Reagan announced Tuesday that he had selected Lieut. Gen. Alfred M.
Gray Jr. to succeed Gen. P. X. Kelley as Commandant of the Marine Corps. General
Gray, who will be 59 years old next Monday, is a combat veteran of Korea and
Vietnam who now commands the Marines' Atlantic Fleet forces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              285 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 18, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MARINE WHO FLED VIETNAM IS CHARGED WITH DESERTION

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 352 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 17


A marine who fled the Vietnam War to Australia in 1970 and returned to the
United States last week has been formally charged with desertion, the Marine
Corps said today.

If convicted of desertion the marine, Pvt. Douglas Beane, could be given the
death penalty. But Marine officials said there had been no decision on whether
to try Private Beane on the charges, and it was doubtful the maximum penalty
would be sought even if he was tried.

Private Beane, who spent his 40th birthday today in the brig at the Marine base
in Quantico, Va., is also charged with black market violations while serving in
Vietnam. He is accused of deserting in early 1970 to avoid the black marketing
charges.

Today's announcement gave little detail about the desertion, but it said Private
Beane first fled his unit on June 9, 1969. He was arrested in Vietnam on Feb.
12, 1970, and fled again 16 days later, apparently to Australia.

His Return Was Voluntary

Private Beane voluntarily flew to the United States from Australia on June 9 to
visit his sick father in Vermont despite an Australian court ruling that he
could be not be forced to return from Australia, where he lived for 17 years.

He was taken into custody by the Marines when he arrived at Los Angeles
International Airport, and was flown to Washington.

Defense Department officials said later that he could be court-martialed, or he
could simply be ordered out of the Marine Corps. He had less than a month to
serve when he left Vietnam.

Private Beane, who has a wife and two children in Australia, had announced in
advance that he would come home to see his father, Donald Beane, of Rochester,
Vt., who has a circulatory disease.

Private Beane, who is said to have lived as a nomad in Australia, applied for a
visa in December to visit his father. But he was still officially an American
citizen at the time, and Pentagon officials could offer no explanation on why he
sought a visa.

He was arrested by the Australian authorities at the request of the Defense
Department, but an Australian high court ruled in April that he could stay in
Australia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              286 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 18, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Will the Democrats Go British Labor's Route?

BYLINE: By Stuart E. Eizenstat; Stuart E. Eizenstat, a lawyer, was President
Jimmy Carter's chief domestic policy adviser.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1153 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The drubbing taken by the Labor Party in the British elections is the latest in
a series of recent losses by liberal-left parties in major industrial
democracies. They send a clear message to Democratic Party Presidential
candidates in 1980: Demonstrate that you can effectively manage the economy and
social welfare programs and that you have a firm national security policy.

In the principal countries of Western Europe with electorates most similar to
ours - West Germany, France and Britain - center-right parties have won
convincing victories throughout the 1980's.

In 1982 and again earlier this year, Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Party
wiped out the liberal Social Democratic Party, which had dominated West German
politics for years. In France last year, the Socialist Party was repudiated by
voters in favor of the conservative neo-Gaullist Rassemblement pour la
Republique. And, of course, in America the Democratic Party has lost both
Presidential elections in this decade.

Liberal or left-of-center parties generally were defeated because they were
perceived to have lost control of inflation and mismanaged the welfare state
(France) or because they were perceived as weak on national security issues
(West Germany) or for both reasons (America and Britain).

Voters did not elect right-of-center leaders to repeal the welfare state or to
promote a confrontational foreign policy. In West Germany, France, Britain and
America, conservative parties have been unable sharply to reduce social
benefits. The Reagan Administration has left the essential building blocks of
the New Deal and Great Society in place because of their broad public support.

But national resources have been limited by declining rates of real growth, and
voters have watched their personal incomes eroded by inflation. Those voters
want what liberal parties have failed to supply: economic growth with moderate
inflation and a more efficient welfare state.

In France, for example, President Francois Mitterrand stimulated the economy in
1981 in order to reduce high unemployment, much as the Carter Administration did
in 1977 and 1978, and thereby set in motion an inflationary spiral that led to
his Socialist Party's downfall.

The British Labor Party in this election promised a large-scale pump-priming
public-works bill to reduce double-digit unemployment, expansion of the National
Health Care Service and increased old-age pensions, to be paid for with higher
taxes - and was repudiated by middle-class voters.

Likewise, as the national security policies of liberal parties have changed in
recent years, the parties have lost the voters' confidence in their ability to
protect vital security interests.

In West Germany, the decline of the successful Social Democratic Party under the
former Chancellor, Helmut Schmidt, coincided with its abandonment of a strong
defense posture, exemplified by its encouragement of the deployment of Pershing
and cruise missiles, which had given credibility to its detente policy.

The defense policy of today's British Labor Party is a far cry from the moderate
and politically successful one of such past Labor Prime Ministers as Harold
Wilson and James Callaghan. The party's lurch to the far left on a platform of
unilateral nuclear disarmament sowed the seeds of its defeat.

While no Democratic Presidential hopeful has come close to taking such a radical
stance, the Democratic Party's national security posture is suspect. A decade
after Vietnam, the party is at risk of being perceived as today's
neo-isolationist party - a reversal of role from its internationalist attitude,
which dates from the days of Woodrow Wilson.

The very factors that led to Labor's defeat and to the defeat of the French
Socialist and West German Social Democratic Parties will confront the Democratic
Party as its Presidential nominating process begins in earnest.

With exceedingly low voter turnouts expected in early primaries and caucus
states, a premium is being placed on mobilizing the organized and activist
elements in the party, who are well to the left of average Democratic voters and
the nation as a whole.

Democratic hopefuls are sometimes driven by these activists into early
commitments on issues that become liabilities in the general election.

During the 1980 campaign, for example, obeisance to a ''nuclear freeze''
(despite a Soviet advantage in heavy missiles) and avoidance of any military
assistance to the democratically elected Government of El Salvador fighting
Communist insurgents became litmus tests. The 1984 Democratic platform virtually
precluded military efforts to keep the Persian Gulf open, a reversal of
President Jimmy Carter's pledge.

The old thesis that one must run left in the Democratic primaries and then move
to the center in the general election is shopworn, because, given the
commitments that must be made before the Democratic convention, it is difficult
to run as a centrist. Mr. Carter, the only Democrat elected President in the
last two decades, ran from the outset as a centrist candidate. Democratic
hopefuls are being asked to make a host of commitments, many meritorious, that
collectively will test their ability to manage the economy: the first increase
in the minimum wage since 1981, a rise in social spending to restore Reagan
Administration cutbacks, and added Federal personnel for agencies decimated by
reductions.

The party's candidates also will come under pressure to oppose a strong American
presence in the Persian Gulf, dramatically reduce defense expenditures in order
to rectify the excessive increases of the Reagan era and to avoid a forceful
role in Central America.

The party need not - and should not - become a pale carbon copy of the
Republican Party to succeed. Democrats should assert a constructive role for
government in making our nation more competitive and in helping lift the
disadvantaged into America's mainstream.

Our foreign policy should emphasize the projection of democratic values,
diplomatic and economic responses to regional problems and the imperative of
mutual and balanced arms limitations.

But if the Democratic Party in 1988 is to avoid the fate of the British Labor
Party in 1987, it must become a more centrist party on domestic and defense
issues.

We must demonstrate that we can manage the economy, reduce Federal deficits and
control inflationary pressures, that our welfare state can be more efficient as
well as more generous and that with governmental benefits must come
beneficiaries' responsibilities.

And we must convincingly demonstrate that we will protect America's interests
abroad and lead the free world with the full panoply of American resources -
diplomatic, economic and military.

A centrist agenda with a distinctive Democratic flavor is the only one that will
avoid the fate of the British Labor Party - three straight defeats in national
elections.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              287 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI'S PRESIDENT AND PREMIER OUT

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 428 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, June 18


Prime Minister Pham Van Dong and President Truong Chinh, the last founders of
the Vietnamese Communist Party still in power in Hanoi, were removed today by a
vote of the National Assembly.

Their departure ends more than half a century of unbroken party and government
leadership by colleagues and contemporaries of Ho Chi Minh.

The two men replaced today had resigned their party Politburo seats in December,
when Mr. Chinh was apparently also forced out as General Secretary of the
Communist Party. Mr. Dong had said publicly he wanted to retire.

Mr. Dong, who is 81 years old, was replaced as Prime Minister by Pham Hung,
formerly Interior Minister, and Mr. Chinh, 80, was succeeded as President by Vo
Chi Cong, a Deputy Prime Minister and former Agriculture Minister. Both newly
elected officials are in their mid-70's, and both had played major political
roles in North Vietnam's war against South Vietnam in the 1960's and early 70's.


New Party Chief in Charge

The choices were the least surprising of several possibilities that have been
discussed in the region since the Sixth Party Congress in December, when Nguyen
Van Linh was named the new party leader, putting him in the country's most
important job. Mr. Hung and Mr. Cong have ranked as No. 2 and 3 in the Politburo
hierarchy since then.

Foreign Ministers of the non-Communist Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
meeting here today with their counterparts from the United States, Canada,
Australia, New Zealand and the European Community, said they foresaw no new
policies in Hanoi as a result of the leadership changes.

Before the final steps in a yearlong political reorganization in Vietnam were
announced today, Secretary of State George P. Shultz told the annual conference
of the Asean nations -Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei and the
Philippines -that it was ''imperative to keep pressure on the Vietnamese to end
their occupation'' of Cambodia.

Mr. Linh, 71, the first party leader not to have been part of Ho's inner circle,
is considered an economic pragmatist who was apparently influenced by the
prosperity of the south while serving as Hanoi's top official there during the
war against South Vietnamese and American forces.

The election of Mr. Hung as Prime Minister suggests that Mr. Linh could be
meeting resistance from hardliners. Mr. Hung, a security expert who took command
of the Central Office for South Vietnam in 1967, stayed on after Hanoi's
conquest of Saigon in 1975, in a period when the policy of the unified nation
was to crush the south.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              288 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: VISITING THE CAPITAL;
MONUMENTS, PRESIDENTS AND BARBERS

BYLINE: By WARREN WEAVER Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 798 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 18


The capital, as glimpsed through the prism of its tourist guides, is a different
city from the one inhabited by the President, Congress and legions of civil
servants. The familiar buildings and monuments are all there, but the history
and politics dispensed aboard the buses that crisscross Washington this time of
year are something else again.

A visitor might expect that the names most frequently mentioned on a tour of
Washington would be President Reagan or one of his famous predecessors, such as
Franklin D. Roosevelt, or current celebrities, like Senator Bob Dole or Fawn
Hall. Instead, on the basis of two days aboard some of the city's more popular
tour buses, the name arising most is William Howard Taft.

The 27th President of the United States, remembered more by history for his
girth than his administration, gets mentioned because of the monument to his
son, Senator Robert A. Taft; because he also served as Chief Justice of the
United States, which no other president did; because his wife officially
received the Tidal Basin cherry trees from the Japanese, and because he lobbied
Congress for a separate Supreme Court building. No one else in American history
gets so many credits.

The President's Barber

Contemporary office-holders and politicians receive scant attention from the
tourist guides. President Reagan gets a rare mention when the bus passes the
hotel where his barber, Milton Pitts, normally practices. ''Every other
Thursday,'' the guide reports, ''Mr. Pitts goes over to the White House where he
cuts, dyes -whatever - grooms the President's hair.'' The tourists chuckle.
''Only Mr. Pitts knows,'' the guide adds.

Nancy Reagan also only gets an offhand reference, in an anecdote about
Republican women visiting the White House.

When the bus passes the heavily wooded Naval Observatory property on
Massachusetts Avenue where the Vice President's home is invisible, the guide
sums it up: ''Bush in the bushes.'' So much for the leading 1988 Republican
presidential candidate.

When the bus swings by the Senate Office Building named for Senator Philip Hart
of Michigan, now dead, the guide calls him ''the other Hart.''

At Lincoln Memorial

One of the major Washington tours mentions Franklin Roosevelt only when passing
his almost imperceptible memorial near the National Archives; the other does not
mention him at all. President Lincoln, very properly, gets a bus stop at his
memorial, but the guide observes only that the Emancipator has been the subject
of 8,600 books, a distinction in which he reportedly ranks second only to Jesus.

John W. Hinckley Jr., who tried to assassinate President Reagan six years ago,
gets more attention, identified both as tourists pass the courthouse where he
was tried and when they briefly sight the mental institution where he is
confined.

Washington tourist guides, it develops, are full of exclusive news tips. Driving
past the home of Walter F. Mondale, the former Vice President who was the 1984
Democratic candidate, the tour conductor announced flatly that Mr. Mondale was
moving back to Minnesota to run for the Senate again; the move is fact, but Mr.
Mondale has called future political activity ''highly unlikely.''

Passing the home of Senator Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island, one of the wealthier
lawmakers, the guide reported that 77 of the 100 current Senators were
millionaires. Official Senate records last month showed 23 members listing
assets of $1 million or more.

A Joke of Sorts

Some Washington commentary appears to be approved tourist fare. Both major tours
report that Woodrow Wilson is the only President buried in the city (at the
National Cathedral), although John F. Kennedy and Taft - there he is again -are
across the river in Arlington National Cemetery. Both report that there are 500
miles of shelves in the Library of Congress and 58,132 names on the Vietnam
Memorial. Both insist on recording that Frances Perkins, Secretary of Labor from
1933 to 1945, ''stayed in labor longer than any woman in history.''

Aboard the Tourmobile, one is told that men took the elevator when the
Washington Monument opened in 1888 but women were required to climb the 897
stairs. On the Gray Line bus, it is said that this resulted from a belief at the
time that ''men should not properly accompany women in an enclosure that small''
for the 12 minutes that the elevator took to rise 555 feet.

Guides for both lines proclaim Jefferson's versatility; in addition to his
service as Secretary of State, Vice President and President, Tourmobile praises
him as the inventor of ''the coat hanger and the swivel chair'' while the Gray
Line focuses on the claim that he introduced ''french fries, macaroni and
cheese, spaghetti, waffles and ice cream'' to the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of tour bus at Lincoln Memorial (NYT/Paul Saunders)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              289 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Turning the Persian Gulf Into a Bridge

BYLINE: By George W. Ball; George W. Ball was Under Secretary of State in the
Kennedy and Johnson Administrations.

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1251 words

DATELINE: PRINCETON, N.J.


The doctrinaire view of foreign policy demonstrated by the President's reaction
to recent events in the Middle East reflects his strange compulsion to express
all regional quarrels in the bellicose idiom of the East-West struggle. That
practice is anything but useful. Not only does it obstruct progress toward a
settlement of the Middle East's complex problems, but it denies us the
opportunity to explore some potentially productive approaches to the Soviet
Union that evolving realities now make possible.

The Administration's Middle East machinations have been not merely Byzantine but
inept. When, in spite of pious denials and evasions, the White House was caught
last November arming ''terrorist'' Iran, that disclosure provoked mistrust in
every Arab capital. Such mistrust was felt with particular intensity in tiny
Kuwait, which, caught in the middle of the Iran-Iraq ''tanker war,'' approached
the United States Coast Guard in January with a request to transfer its tankers
to American registry.

Then, a month later - after, and only after, our Coast Guard had ignored that
request with bureaucratic indifference - Kuwait asked Moscow to place the Soviet
flag on Kuwaiti tankers. Although the Soviet Union professed unfamiliarity with
the practice of reflagging, it did lease three tankers to Kuwait and agreed to
provide them with small armed escorts.

Oddly enough, the White House took little notice of these events until after an
Iraqi plane attacked the United States frigate Stark on May 17. Immediately the
President, without prior consultation with Congress or any adequate military
planning, abruptly announced that the United States would transfer its flag to
11 Kuwaiti tankers and provide them with armed escorts. Once more ideology had
prevailed over logic. Despite the fact that it was Iraq, not Iran, that attacked
the Stark and that Iraq had perpetrated two-thirds of all the harassment
incidents against Gulf shipping, the President dramatically proclaimed that he
was taking this step so that ''the use of the vital sea lanes of the Persian
Gulf will not be dictated by the Iranians.'' Then he added as an afterthought,
as though by conditioned reflex, that ''these lanes will not be permitted to
come under the control of the Soviet Union.''

In other words, while abruptly renouncing America's long held posture of
neutrality in the Iran-Iraq war and allying the United States with Iraq, the
President seemed compelled to sing his old familiar hymn of hate for the Soviet
Union. Yet, in his anxiety to ''stand tall'' and to bluster the Soviet Union
into keeping out of the Gulf, he utterly failed to explain how Moscow could
possibly contrive to ''control'' the Gulf sea lanes merely by escorting three
tankers.

His shrill warning sounded even more off key when the Soviet First Deputy
Foreign Minister stated reassuringly that, regardless of Washington's announced
plan to build up its fleet in the Gulf, the Kremlin had no intention of
augmenting its tiny three-ship flotilla. Nor, while continuing to utter his
provocative threat of confrontation and exclusionism, did the President even
acknowledge the Deputy Foreign Minister's additional statement that his country
was eager to consult with America on halting the Gulf war, as well as assuring
that the presence of the vessels of the superpowers would not provoke incidents.

Mr. Reagan's negativism seems particularly wrong-headed since Moscow and
Washington share a common objective in the Persian Gulf. They both wish to
promote tranquility in the area and both are antagonists of revolutionary Iran.
Each nation knows that the triumph of the Khomeini regime over Iraq would
present it with major policy problems. Iranian Shiite fundamentalism is already
creating unrest in the Moslem-inhabited Central Asian republics of the Soviet
Union, while Iran's assistance to the Afghan rebels is particularly galling to a
Kremlin that is seeking desperately to extricate itself from the Afghan
imbroglio.

For its part, the United States would suffer serious damage were an Iranian
victory to unleash fundamentalist forces that might overthrow friendly Arab
governments. Moreover, were the Iranians to gain control of practically all of
the Gulf's oil, the Khomeini regime could then exert leverage on Japan, Europe
and the United States. In view of Iran's hatred for Israel and its big brother,
America, it might even bring to the side of the rejectionist Arab states vast
numbers of veteran troops that could tip the balance and ultimately force the
United States to intervene with its own armed forces in what could become
another Vietnam.

Thus to forge a wise policy, the Administration must frankly answer at least two
questions. Does it make sense for our country to try to maintain an exclusive
sphere of influence in the Middle East - 7,000 miles away from our shores and
only 600 miles from the Soviet Union's? Should we risk American lives to pursue
that dubious objective, or would we not be better advised to seize the rare
chance presented by the current overlapping of interests to engage the Soviet
Union in a common effort to resolve some of the festering problems that make
sleepless nights for each superpower?

The potential benefits of a mutual approach could be significant, provided the
Administration revised its attitude and the rhetoric in which it is expressed.
Mr. Reagan is still concentrating on rendering nuclear weapons ''impotent and
obsolete'' and treating the Soviet Union as an ''evil empire,'' while doggedly
playing the 19th century ''great game'' of trying to bar the door of the Middle
East against Russia. In his preoccupation with outmoded diplomatic bromides, he
is ignoring the chance to exploit the nuclear balance of terror that has for 40
years deterred the superpowers from drifting into a new world conflict.

One may speculate that by breaking the war cycle that has for millennia cursed
humanity with two or three major wars a century the nuclear stalemate offers the
first and best chance for a cautious East-West collaboration in key areas where
the superpowers share objectives.

That proposition should, in any event, be tested, and the existence of common
interests in the Gulf offers a chance to test it with a minimum of risk. That is
not to imply that the Soviet Union will totally change its habits; no doubt,
whenever its financial resources and internal difficulties permit, it will still
seek targets of opportunity abroad.

But if the United States takes preventive measures to deal with the conditions
that provide those opportunities and create those targets, instead of relying
solely on force and military power to deal with them after the fact, the Soviet
Union might be denied significant gains.

Having combined our leverage to seek common immunity for our shipping and to
fashion a resolution of the Iran-Iraq war, we might then turn our attention both
to the Afghan war and the Arab-Israeli struggle.

The latter proposal requires us to recognize that, although the Soviet Union
lacks the ability to impose peace in the Middle East (certainly not in the face
of American opposition), it can torpedo any proposals that America might make.

Since there is growing danger that the rivalry of Syria and Israel could
ultimately lead to a confrontation between their superpower patrons, we might
well use the occasion of the projected Middle East peace conference to concert a
common policy with the Soviet Union and the Western European nations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              290 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
Heller Legacy: Clarity for All

BYLINE: By LEONARD SILK

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 884 words


WALTER W. HELLER, who died this week at the age of 71, raised the role of the
President's Council of Economic Advisers to the highest level it has attained
since that body was established by the Employment Act of 1946.

One reason for Mr. Heller's brilliant performance as chief economic adviser to
Presidents Kennedy and Johnson was his use of the English language. He could
make economic ideas not just intelligible but arresting and persuasive to
Presidents, Congressmen, business and labor leaders, journalists and everyone
else - and without debasing or distorting the ideas he was pushing.

He loved metaphor. ''The fine mist of incipient inflation may be turning into
light rain,'' he warned early in 1966, about a year after he left Washington to
return to teaching at the University of Minnesota. But President Johnson,
determined to pursue the war in Vietnam without going to Congress for a tax
increase, was slow to heed the warnings of Mr. Heller and his other economic
advisers, and the inflationary rain came down.

Whether in failure or success, however, Mr. Heller demonstrated that economic
rhetoric is the crucial link between economic analysis and policy making. As
Donald T. McCloskey has stressed in his book, ''The Rhetoric of Economics,'' the
mathematical formulations of economists are of little use unless they can be
translated into arguments that policy makers and the public can understand and
be willing to act upon.

The art of persuasion is a matter not of words alone but of heart and courage
and charm. Mr. Heller had these qualities in abundance and used them lavishly
inside the White House in dealing with the President and his political aides,
most of whom were trained as lawyers. He fired memos at them and followed up
with face-to-face lectures. He worked incredible hours and got his exercise in
Washington by ignoring the elevators and running up and down the stairs at the
old State Department building - the Executive Office of the President.

But Mr. Heller also carried his campaigns to the people. He was always ready to
spend time talking to reporters, being interviewed on television programs and
speaking at public meetings. President Kennedy encouraged him to do that - to
get out in front of the Administration to see whether a new and controversial
idea would fly or be shot down.

As good as Mr. Heller was in communicating economic ideas, his great distinction
was that he brought to policy making the best professional economic thinking he
could mobilize.

Although he enjoyed being chairman of the C.E.A. and was by no means without
vanity, he was secure and modest enough to bring to the council the stars of the
economics profession, such as James Tobin (later a Nobel laureate), Kermit
Gordon, Gardner Ackley, Robert Solow and Arthur M. Okun, and he continuously
consulted outsiders, such as Paul A. Samuelson, the first American Nobelist in
economics.

The economic policies of the Kennedy and Johnson years were essentially built on
the theory of John Maynard Keynes that total demand for goods and services could
be manipulated to prevent unemployment on one side and to stop inflation on the
other.

Did the outbreak of inflation in the latter half of the 1960's represent a
failure of those Keynesian policies - or was it due to the unwillingness of
President Johnson to heed his economists' advice? The answer is both. At first,
the economists of the Kennedy-Johnson era were inclined to blame the political
leadership for failing to take their advice in time to head off inflation by
reversing fiscal policy to restrain aggregate demand, with the economy
approaching full employment.

As time wore on, however, it became clearer that there had been an exaggerated
belief among the economists that they had solved the problem of maintaining
economic stability.

In his review article ''The Economics Profession and the Making of Public
Policy'' in the March 1987 issue of The Journal of Economic Literature, Robert
H. Nelson of the Interior Department reminds the profession that in 1966 Mr.
Solow of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology had stated that most
economists believed ''short-run macroeconomic theory is well in hand. The basic
outlines of the dominant theory have not changed in years.''

A decade later Joseph A. Pechman of the Brookings Institution, a colleague of
Mr. Heller's from graduate-school days at the University of Wisconsin, said,
''The high rate of price increases during the recent periods of sluggish demand
is a mystery that economists have not solved.'' And the late Mr. Okun, who
became chairman of the C.E.A. under President Johnson, urged greater humility
upon the economists with respect to their ability to analyze, forecast and
prescribe.

But saying one does not know it all is not to say one knows nothing. The high
self-confidence of economists, which Mr. Heller embodied, and their adroit
policy shifts, did help give the United States the longest, most vigorous and
most stable spell of economic growth in history. If it all came to a bad end,
whether because of the hubris of economists or the blunders of politicians, the
fruits of an intelligent relationship between the two - as it was during the
Kennedy-Heller years, professional and knowing on both sides - should not be
forgotten.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              291 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 20, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PINNAWELA JOURNAL;
Small Place Squeezes In for Elephant

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 906 words

DATELINE: PINNAWELA, Sri Lanka


The Asian elephant, hauler of teak and vehicle of monks and monarchs, is rapidly
being driven from the Asian landscape as the last of the wild savannas and
jungles feel the encroachment of people and progress.

In Sri Lanka, where elephants are important to the mythology and ritual of both
Buddhists and Hindus, the major religions, environmentalists say there may be
only 35,000 of the animals left in all of Asia.

Sri Lanka country had 12,000 elephants at the turn of the century; it now has
2,500 to 3,000 in the wild. And so the Asian elephant, an animal with smaller
ears than its African relative, is the subject of a Sri Lankan conservation
project that experts say gives the elephant more attention than it gets in most
other Asian countries.

In Indonesia, a program moving people from overcrowded Java to underpopulated
islands has pitted homesteaders in Sumatra against elephant herds confused by
new obstacles to their traditional foraging routes. Environmentalists there say
they have inadequate resources to protect or relocate the animals.

Some Trained for Lumbering

In northern Thailand's forests, elephants trained for lumbering are brutally
victimized by poachers collecting ivory, mahouts at the national forestry
training school say.

Elephants seem to have all but disappeared from large areas of Cambodia and
Vietnam. And Laos, once ''the Kingdom of a Million Elephants,'' is down to a few
thousand, conservationists report.

The African elephant is not doing well either. The population on that continent
is down drastically, to fewer than a million, and they are disappearing at the
rate of 10 percent a year, because of poaching for ivory and because their
migration paths are being cut off by the growing human population. As a result,
African elephants are increasingly isolated in national parks, and because of
that there is no good genetic mix. Scientists say they are concerned because
future generations will suffer from inbreeding and similar problems.

The African elephant is classified as vulnerable by the International Union for
the Conservation of Nature, a Swiss-based organization that determines whether
animals are extinct.

Until recently, Burma and parts of India seemed to be the last bright spots on
the elephant map. Many are still used there in heavy labor and as pack animals
and passenger transportation in roadless, hilly terrain.

But now Sri Lanka, a country preoccupied by an ethnic conflict that has made
danger zones of some game parks where guerrillas hide and the army conducts
maneuvers, is nevertheless going ahead with plans to turn 4 percent of its
national territory into six reserves for elephants, bears, leopards, deer and
other wildlife.

Advice From U.S. Experts

Sri Lankans are getting some help from experts in the United States National
Park Service, whose advice is provided as a form of American aid. One of the
Americans working here, John W. Bright, assistant manager of the park service's
Denver Service Center, said that the members of the American team might not know
much about elephants, but that they knew how to plan environments tailored to
animal behavior.

In Sri Lanka, that means using limited space - this country of nearly 16 million
people is only a fraction larger than West Virginia - to create self-sustaining
habitats for restless, voracious eaters.

''Sri Lanka is a little too small to have such large animals as elephants,''
said Malcolm A. B. Jansen, senior environmental officer of the Mahaweli Economic
Agency, part of a national development project built around the country's
largest river system, the Mahaweli Ganga.

''People are killing elephants that get into their farms,'' Mr. Jansen, a Sri
Lankan who was educated here and in East Germany, said in an interview. ''We
have to learn how to reduce conflicts between man and beast.''

''We are at a very crucial point,'' he said. ''In the Mahaweli land development
scheme we are in the process of eliminating the main natural elephant habitat in
this country.''

New ones have to be created away from dams and agricultural land, he said.

An Elephant Orphanage

A focal point of the battle to save the Asian elephants is here in Pinnawela,
about 50 miles northeast of Colombo, where in 1975 an ''elephant orphanage'' was
opened to rescue and rear baby animals who had lost their mothers to hunters or
accidents. The first orphan, the Sri Lanka Wildlife Service says, was a
''26-inch, furry 140-pounder.''

In 1982, the Pinnawela sanctuary, an extension of Colombo's National Zoological
Gardens, expanded its activities into animal breeding, with help from the
Smithsonian Institution and the World Wildlife Fund. In 1984, the first baby
elephant was born here in captivity. Two more elephants are now pregnant, zoo
officials say.

The mothers-to-be, part of a herd of 24 animals of various ages, were wallowing
happily in the Maha Oya River at the Pinnawela center one day not long ago.
Their sanctuary, a coconut grove set in scenic hills, gives the elephants more
than 20 acres to roam.

Sri Lankans, who assign elephants important roles in temple festivals, are proud
and fond of the orphanage. Visitors are invariably urged to visit this place
''to see that not everything in the country is bad news,'' a businesswoman said.

Mr. Jansen echoed the sentiment. ''In this project,'' he said, ''we in Sri Lanka
are being used all over the world as a model.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of elephants bathing in river at Pinnawela sanctuary (NYT/Barbara
Crossette); map of Sri Lanka showing location of Pinnawela

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              292 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 20, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

It Takes Luck to Collect Social Security Checks

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 225 words


To the Editor:

In his important letter on the subject of Social Security (''I Earned It!'',
June 3), Daniel Fischel failed to list a key factor in support of his position.

To underscore the fact that the elderly ''have worked a lifetime for the
pensions and benefits'' they receive, he said that in his case actual cash
contributions added up to $50,000, which at modest interest rates would have
grown to a fund of $80,000 by the time he took early retirement. This is true
enough, but stops short of the whole story.

Mr. Fischel did not take into account the enormous amounts of money that accrue
to the Social Security fund because many of the insured die before they ever
collect one cent. In addition to all the normal factors that contribute to
population control, since Social Security's inception there has been a huge
annual highway toll, and there have been the numerous casualties of World War
II, the Korean War and the Vietnam War.

The Social Security System, like most pension and insurance plans, benefits
appreciably from payments made by those who do not live long enough to collect.
As Darwin might have said, those who do survive to collect have proved they are
the fittest -and the luckiest. They deserve every penny they get. Mr. Fischel
did indeed earn it.

L. FLETCHER PROUTY
  Alexandria, Va., June 3, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              293 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 20, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ WARNS ASIA NATIONS ON TRADE

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 37, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 473 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, June 19


Secretary of State George P. Shultz warned six nations of Southeast Asia today
that even if the Reagan Administration thwarted protectionist trade legislation,
they should not expect to increase their markets in the United States.

Speaking to the foreign ministers of the members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, Mr. Shultz said that efforts to reduce the trade deficit would
mean that the United States would not be a growing market for Asian imports.

''Given the importance of exports, particularly exports in manufactures, to all
of your countries, you are going to have to work hard to diversify your
markets,'' Mr. Shultz said. ''While you may be able to maintain your current
market share in the United States, you clearly will not be able to look to the
U.S. to take major increases in your exports.''

Need for 'Adjustments' Stressed

The reason, he said, was ''not necessarily because of U.S. protectionism, but
simply because of the adjustments the U.S. economy will have made in order to
service our large growing external debt.''

The six nations of the association -Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines,
Thailand, Singapore and Brunei -are worried about growing protectionist
sentiment in Congress and, in particular, a bill to reduce textile imports.

''Although the measures are targeted at Japan, it is our economies which will be
hurt the most,'' a senior Southeast Asian diplomat said. ''If this situation
degenerates into one of mutual retaliation we will be the ones in the middle.''

Last year, Congress came close to overriding a Presidential veto of a measure
imposing restrictions on textile imports. This year's version of the bill
includes some changes to make a veto less likely, such as allowing a 1 percent
increase in imports over previous year's levels.

Although the principal topics at this year's meeting of the association have
been Vietnam and its occupation of Cambodia, Mr. Shultz seemed eager to warn the
Asian countries to be prepared for sudden shifts in the world economy.

''Your flexibility and pragmatism will be challenged perhaps as never before
over the next few years,'' Mr. Shultz said, ''as the world economic system
adjusts to the inevitable, and in my view, possibly rapid decline in the U.S.
trade deficit.''

A senior State Department official said it was the growing view of
Administration economists that the trade deficit will soon begin to shrink.
''The time is coming when the balance will reverse,'' the official said. ''Not
in five or ten years, but much, much sooner.''

The official said that Mr. Shultz was eager to impress the members of the
association that ''natural economic forces will curtail your access to our
markets.''

Mr. Shultz's main message to the association members, the official said, was
that ''they should seek other markets.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Secretary of State George p. Shultz (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              294 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Sherman Letters Show Civil War General Regarded Reporters as 'Spies'

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1115 words


In 1984, Joseph H. Ewing opened a folder of letters addressed to his
great-grandfather and grandfather in an almost illegible scrawl. The letters had
lain in a locked trunk for 40 years and in a bank safe-deposit box for 30 more,
and all Mr. Ewing knew was that they had been written by William Tecumseh
Sherman.

As he began reading, Mr. Ewing, a retired Army historian who lives in Wheaton,
Md., realized that the family archive was an unexpected source of new details
about a military leader whose friends thought he was irrational and whose
enemies thought he was insane.

The letters, often written late at night in his tent, followed Sherman through
some of the Civil War's bloodiest battles, including the devastating Union sweep
through Georgia in 1864 that he directed. Sherman had been reared by Mr. Ewing's
great-grandfather after his own father died, so the correspondence has the
emotion of a son's letters home.

Long Diatribe on Press

Sherman never had a kind word for war correspondents or newspaper editors, and
among the Ewing letters is an 11-page denunciation of the press. Mr. Ewing said
it was the longest and most revealing piece Sherman ever wrote on the subject,
and some historians who have seen the letters say Sherman's anger reminds them
of Gen. William C. Westmoreland, who complained about news coverage in Vietnam
and later unsuccessfully sued CBSfor libel.

To Sherman, journalists were ''spies'' whose dispatches were ''false, false as
hell.'' Still, Sherman was dismayed that they provided the enemy with detailed
information on his battle plans.

Sherman was not much kinder to newspaper readers. He called them ''the
non-thinking herd,'' adding, ''Vox populi, vox humbug.''

Mr. Ewing said many of Sherman's complaints stemmed from technology that was
just becoming widespread in the Civil War.

The newly invented telegraph made it possible for war correspondents' dispatches
about preparations for a battle to appear in Northern newspapers before the
fighting began. Sherman often complained that the papers were then sent to
Confederate operatives before he had a chance to attack.

To halt this flow of information, Sherman banned reporters from traveling with
his troops and had one correspondent court-martialed for disobeying.

In other letters in the Ewing collection, the Union general who marched through
Atlanta said ''it would be a good thing'' if the Confederate general Robert E.
Lee seized Philadelphia, Baltimore and Washington, just to teach the War
Department ''some sense.''

In another letter Sherman said his fellow Union general, Ulysses S. Grant,
''cannot make a speech of five sentences.''

Complained of Poor Discipline

In another, he suggested turning Arkansas into a colony for slaves. And he
complained that discipline was higher among Confederate troops than among his
own. On April 21, 1864, he wrote, ''So many men want a furlough, and it is like
drawing teeth to get them back.''

Mr. Ewing, who is 77 years old, said the letters provided little new information
about Sherman. But they round out the image of the irascible general, mounted on
his horse, puffing on a cigar, sloppily dressed, quite different from the
imposing figure in bronze mounted on a pedestal between the Plaza Hotel and
Central Park.

Mr. Ewing, who quoted some of the letters in an article published in the July
issue of American Heritage magazine, said he paid little attention to his
family's Sherman connection while he was growing up. ''My father would talk
about Sherman,'' Mr. Ewing recalled last week. ''We owned a Victrola and I
remember hearing 'Marching Through Georgia' when I was young and hearing him
talk about Sherman. I remember asking him if he ever talked to Sherman, and he
said no, but Sherman had patted his head once when he was a little boy.''

Father Withheld Letters

About 70 years ago, Mr. Ewing said, his father inventoried the 24 letters, but
he never published them and never shared them with biographers or scholars. Mr.
Ewing did not get around to reading them until after he retired.

In addition to the general's letters, the folder contained such miscellaneous
items as a letter from the 16-year-old Sherman acknowledging his appointment to
the United States Military Academy at West Point and a page from the academy's
conduct reports for February 1839 showing that the young cadet had earned four
determits that month.

Sherman wrote the earliest letter in the collection on March 4, 1832, when he
was a 12-year-old schoolboy in Lancaster, Ohio. He had yet to master the rules
of capitalization and punctuation in the 16-line note to his foster father,
Thomas Ewing, who was serving in Washington as a United States Senator.

That note mentioned Senator Ewing's daughter, whom Sherman married in 1850.

Once he became a soldier, the letters show that Sherman saw himself much as
historians see him: as a hard-charging, hard-talking character, a soldier who
sometimes says more than he means, and in the most direct way possible. ''Abrupt
I am, & all military men are,'' he told Mr. Ewing's grandfather.

The early battles of the Civil War, Mr. Ewing said, sharpened Sherman's enmity
toward the press.

''I will illustrate why I regard newspaper correspondents as spies,'' Sherman
wrote on Feb. 17, 1863. ''A spy is one who furnishes an enemy with knowledge
useful to him and dangerous to us. I say in giving intelligence to the enemy, in
sowing discord & discontent in an army, these men fulfill all the conditions of
spies. I am satisfied they have cost the country hundreds of millions of dollars
& brought our country to the brink of ruin & that unless the nuisance is abated
we are lost.''

''While they cry about blood & slaughter they are the direct cause of more
bloodshed than fifty times their number of armed Rebels,'' he wrote.

The correspondent who defied Sherman's ban on journalists traveling with him was
Thomas W. Knox of The New York Herald. At his court-martial, Mr. Knox was found
not guilty on a charge that he gave intelligence to the enemy. But he was found
guilty of disobeying Sherman's order by accompanying the army down the
Mississippi, although the court ''attaches no criminality thereto.'' The
tribunal ordered him not to return to the front.

Sherman had the last word. Mr. Knox appealed to President Lincoln, who
countermanded the sentence on the condition that Sherman's superior, Grant,
agree. Grant did not, turning the matter over to Sherman, ''Come with a sword or
musket in your hand, prepared to share with us our fate, and I will welcome you
as a brother and associate,'' Sherman wrote. But come as a reporter, he added,
''And my answer is Never!''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of ''Sherman's March Through Georgia,'' painting by A. B. Carlin

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              295 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Refugee Gains Weight to Get Flier's Wings

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 397 words

DATELINE: WHITING FIELD, Fla., June 20


A Vietnamese refugee who was originally rejected by the Navy as a security risk
and who later began a pasta-rich diet to measure up to the size requirements
earned his wings Friday as a naval aviator.

In ceremonies at this base on the Florida Panhandle, Ens. Hung Dinh Vu's mother
pinned the wings on his white uniform.

At the Pensacola Naval Air Station, Ensign Vu's thigh length, measured from
buttocks to knee, had been deemed three-tenths of an inch too short to qualify
for pilot training.

Reaching Rudder Pedals

Ensign Vu, who is 5 feet 5 inches tall, began the pasta-rich diet and a special
exercise program to build up his posterior to reach the minimum thigh
measurement, 21.9 inches, needed to assure that he could reach an aircraft's
rudder pedals and fit properly in an ejection seat.

''I was packing in the carbohydrates,'' the ensign said before the ceremony.

The regimen worked and Ensign Vu was transferred from aviation maintenance
officer school to basic flight training here, about 30 miles northeast of
Pensacola. But his leg length was neither the first nor the last of his
problems.

Family Escaped From Vietnam

Ensign Vu, 26 years old, is a naturalized citizen and the fifth of nine children
born to Minh Trang Do and her husband, Du Dinh Vu, of Glen Ellyn, Ill., a
Chicago suburb.

Four years ago the Navy rejected him as a security risk because two of his
brothers remained in Vietnam after the rest of the family escaped in 1975.

He continued his studies at Elmhurst College in Illinois, receiving a degree in
computer science. In the meantime, the two brothers managed to escape from
Vietnam, and Ensign Vu was accepted at the Aviation Officer Candidate School in
Pensacola.

Assigned to Helicopters

Although he took care of the size problem, his flying career again was put on
hold for three months when doctors found a weakness in one of his eyes. He
obtained a waiver and finally began primary flight training.

Ensign Vu had dreamed of becoming a jet fighter pilot, but he has been assigned
to helicopters. He is philosophical about the decision, pointing out that
helicopters have more controls and are more complicated to fly.

After a month of recruiting duty in Chicago, Ensign Vu will report to the
Mayport Naval Station at Jacksonville for training in the Navy's newest
antisubmarine helicopter, the SH-60 Seahawk.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              296 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ADMIRING THE UNPREDICTABLE MR. KUBRICK

BYLINE: By DAVID RABE; David Rabe's plays include ''Hurlyburly'' and a quartet
of Vietnam works - ''The Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel,'' ''Sticks and Bones,''
''The Orphan'' and ''Streamers.'' He has just completed a novel, ''The Recital
of the Dog.''

SECTION: Section 2; Page 34, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2093 words


IT WAS ABOUT EIGHT MONTHS ago when I first heard that Stanley Kubrick was making
a film dealing with Vietnam, called ''Full Metal Jacket.'' Holding Mr. Kubrick's
work in the high esteem that I do - and having attempted to write about the war
in a number of ways and from a number of angles - I was immediately intrigued.
The fact that Michael Herr, who had written ''Dispatches,'' an amazing book
about the war, was involved only increased my interest. The person to whom I was
speaking said the movie was based on a novel, ''The Short-Timers,'' by Gustav
Hasford, and that it contained one of the scariest scenes my friend had ever
read. It sounded like this material was right up Mr. Kubrick's alley. Certainly
he had shaken me up a number of times.

Though I cannot, without reference to a film almanac, recollect the date or
where I was living at the time, the experience of first seeing Mr. Kubrick's
''Dr. Strangelove'' rushing to its conclusion is fixed in my mind. It was in a
state of near hysteria that I watched the great white plumes of flowering
nuclear devastation erupting in gyres one upon the other and heard the eerie,
innocent music in the background, the tune being sung by innocuous voices in
their sweet but dopey harmony: ''We'll meet again, don't know where, don't know
when, but I know we'll meet again some sunny day.'' With the cataclysms depicted
in the rather abstract beauty of their fury, the image that we had emerged from
the 50's sharing as our communal nightmare totem, the mushroom cloud, appeared
again and again, a kind of exploding cross when you really looked at it, the
plume intersected by the light rushing out in either direction; and with the
sappy, nostalgic music beneath it, a kind of cozy and ostensibly sweet, yet
somehow lifeless, invitation to a universal and final rendezvous, it seemed to
me some dark yet cherished longing of our hearts had been unmistakably depicted.

It's from that moment that I date my awareness of Mr. Kubrick. There was a
spirit at work, as distinct as the most developed novelistic voice. He seemed a
man thinking rigorously and originally about the most crucial issues. What was
more, he had control of a film technique flexible enough to render this theme
with wit, intelligence and passion.

The year, according to the film almanac, was 1964. With the use of that date I
can establish my occupation and whereabouts. Having dropped out of school, I was
working either as a parking lot attendant at one Philadelphia hotel or a bellhop
at another. Prompted by these facts, the street onto which I strode in the
aftermath of that experience emerges. It was late afternoon, the theater was in
Bryn Mawr, Pa., and I could not shut up.

My shock was one of recognition, for nothing I had previously seen had ever
portrayed with such precision and accuracy the strange mix of inappropriate
emotion, tedium and elaborate rationality that are the ingredients repetitively
of our contemporary horrors.

In Sterling Hayden, as General Jack Ripper, reason and logic were at a premium
as he outlined the cause and effect basis upon which he had set out to start
World War III. Mad he might be, but logical he was. In the latter part of the
1950's, films had delivered us a steady parade of bug-eyed, frothing crazies.
But this lunatic was professorial and bureaucratic. Every word was measured, the
voice confident and calm, however undeterrable. While others might fret, he was
serene in the absolute plausibility of his knowledge. Only when he revealed his
deepest premises, some construct to do with fluoridation, Commies, precious
bodily fluids and sex, could his madness be glimpsed. But even these points he
explained patiently as, step by step, he laid out the entire scheme, expecting
to be understood, every thought precisely placed before he went into the
bathroom and shot himself.

In the B-52 headed with the bomb toward Russia, the crew knew nothing of their
commanding general's arcane and personal premises. They were lost in a system of
technological procedures, cut off from all access in a hermetic world of codes
and passwords, like numerological adepts adhering strictly to their doctrines.
Shot with a shaking hand-held camera, every angle awkward, the frame crowded,
the pans were rushed and sometimes indecisive. The faces of the men inside the
belly of this bomber were shot past shoulders, over knees, the angles always
clumsy so that the feel was that of a documentary. They spoke almost exclusively
in slogans or the jargon by which they fulfilled their functions, and every
button, light bulb and switch of their procedures was shown with a mounting
sense of onrushing, mechanized doom.

I began then to await Mr. Kubrick's movies, looking forward to them with a
special anticipation. Memory, operating out of its own prerogatives, suggests
that his next film was ''Lolita,'' followed by ''Paths of Glory,'' ''2001,'' ''A
Clockwork Orange,'' ''Barry Lyndon'' and ''The Shining.'' The film almanac,
however, quickly amends this list with ''Fear and Desire,'' ''Killer's Kiss,''
''The Killing'' and ''Spartacus.'' It also reorders some of my transposed
chronology, informing me that both ''Paths of Glory'' and ''Lolita'' preceded
''Dr. Strangelove.''

Jarred by this information, memory serves me with a pair of recollections, the
first being the dismay and resentment I felt when I saw ''Paths of Glory,'' with
its portrait of vanity and injustice in the military. Judging by the date, 1957,
I was still living in Dubuque, Iowa, a junior in high school. I had not then
begun to think of becoming a writer, but I remember the unaccustomed queasy
feeling the movie gave me when justice failed utterly to triumph. The second
recollection bears upon my developing awareness of Mr. Kubrick and consists of
the amazement I felt when I discovered, after seeing ''Dr. Strangelove,'' that
the same man had made both these films.

In their deepest themes, they might well have been found to share interests, but
in tone and technique they appeared drastically dissimilar to me. I more or less
determined at that point to approach his work with as open a mind as I could
manage, suspending judgment and expecting to find merit as one might approach a
classic in which worth had been clearly established. With a talent as original,
idiosyncratic and wide-ranging as his appeared to be capable of being, it seemed
a plausible strategy and, as a strategy, it has served me well, particularly
regarding his last two films, ''Barry Lyndon'' and ''The Shining.'' My own
appreciation of ''The Shining,'' a film that is problematical for many, is as a
metaphysical morality tale in which the issue at stake is the soul of the
father, Jack Torrance, played by Jack Nicholson. It was for me a story not
unlike that of Macbeth or Faust. I don't mean to argue that it matches these
dramas, but merely bring them up to indicate the terrain I think ''The Shining''
occupies.

If Torrance's main adversary is his son, then the man has little hope, for the
boy is telepathic, guided and protected. If one expects the conventional
horror-story monster, then Torrance is a disappointment. He is a pathetic,
blustering monster. Spurred on by demons and dark deals, he preens and struts,
threatening his wife only to have her hit him over the head with a baseball bat.
Hacking open the bathroom door behind which his wife is hiding, he once more
blusters, full of bombast, and in the process is stabbed by her in the hand. He
is a desperate buffoon of a monster, marching hopelessly into the maze of his
damnation, into which his son lures him at the end of the movie, leaving him
there to freeze in that arctic confusion like an icy ring of Dante's hell.

I was living in New Haven, working on the Long Wharf Theater production of my
play ''Streamers,'' when I saw ''Barry Lyndon'' in 1975. Perhaps because of the
focused nature of rehearsals, I was unaware of the manner in which the movie was
being perceived. I saw it uninfluenced and was strongly affected by it, though
it took some time for me to clarify the nature of what I felt and why I felt it.
I listened to the arguments that the lushly detailed photography was indulgent.
I remember hearing a successful Hollywood agent dismissing the film as
nondramatic; he characterized the voice-over as being like listening to a
history lesson. Mr. Kubrick was accused of being cold and unfeeling.

I listened, and as I sought to express what had moved me, I found myself
gradually realizing that what the movie was about for me was time, the passing
of time, and how that passing affects us. It was historical because it was about
the passage of time. Certainly an unsentimental experience; I had, nevertheless,
not found the movie cold. Overall, it had seemed to attend its subject from a
vantage almost Eastern or Oriental in the compassionate, but resigned, distance
of its view of human enterprises. The vendetta that developed between Lyndon and
his stepson, Lord Bullingdon, was frightening in its vicious and inescapable
enmity.

These were lives spent in struggle against each another while being swept
themselves into the past for all their finery, for all their shrewd devices. In
the execution of this fateful tone, the photography served an essential purpose,
as did the voice-over. The camera might unrelentingly seek to capture every
aspect of every field and face, every room and flower and candle flame in
exquisite detail, yet these were phenomena, people included, to be inevitably
and irretrievably lost. In all their astounding immediacy, they were
disappearing; they were past. In the voice-over, there was frequently
forecasting, as impending developments were foretold, sometimes in accordance to
a character's intentions and expectations and sometimes utterly opposed.

Most powerfully this technique was employed to show us Lyndon playing lovingly
with his son, Bryan, as we were gradually informed in the voice-over: ''But fate
had determined that he [Lyndon] should leave none of his race behind him and
that he should finish his life poor, lonely and childless.'' Then we watched as
Lyndon bought a horse for his son and the horse threw the boy to his death.
Conventional suspense had been supplanted by something larger. We had been
distanced, but only sufficiently, to enable us to watch, with unfamiliar pity
and terror, as commonplace decisions devised the child's doom.

It was about halfway through that Mr. Kubrick introduced a key thematic
ingredient - perhaps the key ingredient, if my notion is correct and it is a
film concerned with time - and that ingredient was the single successful
instrument man has invented in his effort to arrest time, and that instrument is
neurosis.

In the movie, Lyndon was married to a woman with a young son of 6 or 7 years of
age. The boy was robust and vital, full of a child's innocent courage, and when
he offended Lyndon, trying, in his dead father's place, to stand up against a
usurper in his house, he was taken by Lyndon into an adjoining room and beaten.
With the next cut of the film, we were met with the image of a foppish teen-age
boy, lounging in a strangely languid and serpentine pose, holding his mother's
hand, his flesh eerily bloated, his eyes flashily glittering with the poisonous
pleasure of unauthentic emotion. It was that robust little boy grown up crooked,
twisted, obsessed with getting his mother back. Upon this unrelenting enmity
between Lyndon and Lord Bullingdon the rest of the movie developed until they
were face to face in a duel with pistols in which time all but stopped, slowing
to a point where every gesture of the ritual was shown in its most minuscule
calibration and, like neurosis itself, the struggle appeared to reach its
conclusion only to be unsatisfied and begun again.

The outcome was a ball of lead shattering Lyndon's leg. Crippled, he was put in
his mother's care, one-legged and dependent. Lord Bullingdon also ended up with
his mother, his appearance more that of her sister or husband than that of her
son, as together they signed papers and checks, doling out money. Having
arrested time, they had ossified themselves.

With ''Barry Lyndon'' and ''The Shining,'' I have been brought then to the
present in Mr. Kubrick's world, and that present is ''Full Metal Jacket,'' which
I am still, at the deadline for this piece, waiting to see. In his admirably
obsessive fashion, he is reported to be still editing a couple of weeks before
the film is scheduled to open. Needless to say, I am willing to wait.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Stanley Kubrick on set of filming of ''Dr Strangelove''

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              297 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STANLEY KUBRICK'S VIETNAM

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2068 words

DATELINE: LONDON


THE REASSURING THING about Stanley Kubrick is that after being deep as Yahweh in
the creation of one movie for the last five years, he emerges gentle and curious
on the seventh day, asking about beer commercials and envying silent film makers
and recalling the pleasures of the Thalia.

''Have you seen those Michelob commercials?'' he asks as if they were samizdat,
speaking of the 30-second spots that came uninvited with the Giant football game
videos that his sister sent the eminent director all last winter from New
Jersey. Then, he had no time to spare for watching anything beyond his own work
in progress and a weekly fix of football. ''They're just boy-girl, night-fun,
leading up to pouring the beer, all in 30 seconds, beautifully edited and
photographed. Economy of statement is not something that films are noted for.''

Sunday morning at Pinewood Studios in the London suburbs seems sepulchral in the
empty executive offices, as quiet as Hal's deep-space murder scene in ''2001,''
an awful setting to encounter one of a kind. But Mr. Kubrick arrives rumpled and
lone as the night watchman, offers a simple hello, accepts the fact that he
cannot direct the phone to work properly, and settles down to discuss movies and
imagination and his own new work, much as a carpenter would feel the grain of a
cabinet. It is his newest making, perchance his best or at least another in his
line.

''It starts with being excited by a story and finally it's telling the story on
the screen,'' he says, speaking of the process of directing. ''It goes from the
most wonderful literary atmosphere to desperation. It can be as crude as
standing up and writing on the back of an envelope when someone's just said
something and it's 4 o'clock with the winter sun fading. You've got to shoot it
and you're trying to exploit something that's just come up. It's like a
quarterback calling an automatic play when he sees the defense he's up
against.''

His new movie, ''Full Metal Jacket,'' a story hinged on the trauma of the Tet
offensive in the Vietnam War, is completed and opens in New York on Friday at
neighborhood theaters. Beckton, an old 1930's-gasworks town abandoned on the
Thames, has been destroyed by Mr. Kubrick's technical artists, all fiery and
pocked as Hue, the Vietnamese city of the movie's climax. The 200 palm trees
flown in from Spain to make Vietnam of this sceptered isle have been returned to
peacetime. Out on the downs, the Parris Island cadence counting has ceased along
with all the lurid, ignoble, cynical and sadly mortal motion of characters
directed onto film from the mind of Stanley Kubrick.

The movie is literally only hours old in Mr. Kubrick's finished, perfectionist
version, and far from talking 1980's box office or 1960's jabberwocky about his
personal agony through the nation's Vietnam experience, Mr. Kubrick is
describing being true to the initial emotion that struck him when he first found
this story. That was five years ago amid what is the hardest part of directing,
he says, searching for a good tale that sustains the imagination.

''The sense of the story the first time you read it is the absolutely critical
yardstick. I remember what I felt about the book, I remember what I felt in
writing the script, and then I try to keep that alive in the very inappropriate
circumstances that exist on a film set where you've got a hundred people
standing around and nothing but particular problems, still trying to sustain a
subjective sense of what it is emotionally - as well as what it is that pleases
you.''

Bearded and staring carefully as a question is asked, Mr. Kubrick speaks with
his right hand rubbing his brow, often glancing down, like a man reciting the
confiteor or handicapping the next race.

''That first impression is the most precious thing you've got, you can never
have it again - the yardstick for any judgment that you have as you get deeper
and deeper into the work because making a movie is a process of going into
smaller and smaller detail and finally winding up in the minutiae of how does a
footstep sound on the sound track when you're remixing the film.''

No, he had no craving to make a signature movie about that war, he says. He was
reading the Virginia Kirkus Review, as he usually does, looking for stirring
fiction about something, anything that might promise a stunning translation to
film and he came upon a novel, ''The Short-Timers.'' He read a copy.

''I reread it almost immediately and I thought, 'This is very exciting, I better
think about it for a few days.' But it was immediately apparent that it was a
unique, absolutely wonderful book,'' he says about the novel, written by Gustav
Hasford, an ex-Marine combat correspondent whose offering resembles a memoir of
the pellucid and the ravaged as much as the naked and the dead. The screenplay
is by Mr. Kubrick, Mr. Hasford and Michael Herr, author of ''Dispatches,'' a
memoir of the Vietnam War.

''Full Metal Jacket'' is a reference in military bureaucratese to the rifle
cartridge that is the field ammunition of the basic Marine Corps fighter-killer.
The movie is blue with death and madness but also characteristically balletic at
times with Mr. Kubrick's forensic eye, particularly in the initial boot camp
scenes where men are shaved raw for war. The chorus-type character, Private
Joker, played by Matthew Modine, traverses the war diagonally, encompassing the
propaganda mill of the combat correspondents and the sudden, all-hands combat
duty of the Tet offensive by the North Vietnamese. This is an event that shreds
the jingoistic romance of the war and makes an unlikely killer of Joker.

Whether critics judge the film singularly good or bad - never an easy,
predictable task for them by the director's track record - at a minimum the
movie has been spare and ugly and beautiful by the time its dark sweep is
completed from the Marine Hymn to the singing of M-I-C-K-E-Y M-O-U-S-E as Mr.
Kubrick's Marines stagger beyond the Tet offensive into nowhere and houselights
up.

Mr. Kubrick is such a loner in the film business, not only following the beat of
a different drummer but more likely constructing his own drum, that it can only
be purest coincidence that his movie has emerged now in the industry's sudden
burst of special Vietnam films. It comes close after ''Platoon,'' the well
acclaimed standout that he recently saw and liked very much, he says plainly as
a fan who loved the Thalia's darkness, apparently devoid of professional envy.
Mr. Kubrick shies from talking of what he hopes his movie says; he judges he was
typically dubious and critical of the Vietnam War in its day, but he hardly
seems the zealot-esthete now having his say about it. His worry about war in
conversation is understandably technological from the man who made ''Dr.
Strangelove,'' a doubt that nuclear weapons can ever be eliminated and a concern
that there is too little negotiation to limit the chances of accidental missile
war.

Mr. Kubrick works hermitlike for years on a single picture, searching out a
story, writing a script, producing and directing all the way down to, lately,
the search for good foreign writers, actors and directors who might not spoil
the work for him in the four main movie dubbing markets. His choice of subject
matter for a new film is enough to fascinate buffs who have bounded with him
across 30 eclectic years from ''Paths of Glory'' to ''Spartacus,'' from
''Lolita'' to ''Dr. Strangelove,'' from ''2001: A Space Odyssey'' to ''A
Clockwork Orange,'' from ''Barry Lyndon'' to ''The Shining.''

''I'm happy with the picture,'' he says in this period of pause when he will
catch up on 18 months of missed movies, good and bad, and read as ever with the
hope of finding another story. ''My films have all had varying critical opinion
and it's always been subsequent critical reaction that settles the scores.''

He talks of that more in puzzlement than vindication. ''The only thing I can
think of is that everybody's always expecting the last movie again, and they're
sometimes angry - I mean some critics - often put off because they're expecting
something else.'' He talks of trusting the ''more democratric intelligence'' of
the public, a lesson he particularly learned after ''2001'': ''People who didn't
have the responsibility of having to explain it or formulate clear statements
about it two hours after they saw the film weren't troubled.''

At age 58, Mr. Kubrick has been involved in making movies for 35 years, a
physician's son who became a relative adventurer from the Bronx, dropping from
formal education to become a photographer for Look magazine, then moving to
motion pictures where he has mastered the basic phases from writing to financing
and reigns as a bookish autodidact of unpredictable curiosities. He dislikes Los
Angeles, feels New York is technically limited for film making and so finds
London the place to work and raise his family in satisfying privacy.

''Just keep at it,'' he says of his work habit of plunging into the making of
each film, analyzing each approaching day's move well into the night before,
much like the masters of Mr. Kubrick's beloved avocation, chess. ''Chess is an
analogy - it is a series of steps that you take one at a time and it's balancing
resources against the problem, which in chess is time and in movies is time and
money,'' he says.

Chess is less creative for him but teaches him not to get carried away with
impulsive first ideas. ''I've found over the long period of time which it takes
to make a movie that your own sense of whether you think it's good or bad or how
happy you are at a particular time is very unimportant, that the ideas just come
and sometimes they seem to come out of some place that's got nothing to do with
how you feel.''

Mr. Kubrick talks of movies not as Ahab stalks the whale but as a physicist
might toss and catch Newton's apple.

''I have a feeling that no one has yet really found the way to tell a story to
utilize the greatest potential that films have,'' he says. ''I think the silent
movies come closest to it because they weren't trapped in having to present a
scene which was essentially a stage type of scene; movies consist of little play
scenes.'' He sounds gentle toned, as if he were not discussing the heart of his
existence. ''There's a a gap between the guys who can actually write a story and
someone who can visualize it, and that's a big gap because even the directors
who write, like Woody Allen and Bergman, are very much bound up in the
conventions of the stage.''

As he talks, Mr. Kubrick suddenly puts his envy of the silents on a track
parallel with his curiosity about the 30-second Michelob spots. ''The best TV
commercials create a tremendously vivid sense of a mood, of a complex
presentation of something.''

''Some combination of the two might work,'' Mr. Kubrick says, braiding a fantasy
that seems to twirl somewhere within. ''I have a feeling that no one has begun
to do what a movie could really do.'' His voice has a casual, New York mood, but
his eyes reflect a terrible determination.

The director pictures a grainy old fade-in from the silents and he invents a
title card: ''Joe's cousin, Bill.'' ''And you just see a shot of Bill doing
something,'' he says as a listener lingers wishing that Stanley Kubrick would
flesh out Bill. But Bill ceases to exist, with no time for mourning in the run
of ideas, as Mr. Kubrick lovingly talks of ''economy of structural statement,
the nearest to silent film.'' This is a quality he savored in the Vietnam book
in his first reaction, he recalls, and one that in the film he has sought to
transfer ''quite literally because the dialogue is so almost poetic in its
carved-out, stark quality.''

But this movie is done, and Mr. Kubrick seems not so much depleted or doubting
as waiting for the process to turn in his mind all over again, waiting for a
story. ''It's the most difficult thing,'' he says, ''A good story is a
miraculous discovery.''

Even then he sounds more grateful than plaintive. ''The structure making a movie
imposes on your life when you're doing it again feels like it felt each time
before,'' Mr. Kubrick says, smiling. ''So there is a kind of wonderful
suggestive timelessness about the structure. I'm doing exactly the same as I was
doing when I was 18 and making my first movie. It frees you from any other sense
of time.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of scene from ''Full Metal Jacket'' with Dorian Harewood; photo
of director Stanley Kubrick; photo of Matthew Modine in ''Full Metal Jacket''
(page 34)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              298 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WALTER HELLER: PRESIDENTIAL PERSUADER

BYLINE: By KYLE CRICHTON

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2367 words


WALTER W. Heller, chief economic adviser to Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, came
of age in the postwar era when many of the most creative economic thinkers were
drawn to the theories of John Maynard Keynes. But Mr. Heller, who died last week
at the age of 71, was unusual in that he was in a position to apply those
precepts. Moreover, he was an enormously personable man with a soothing manner
that served him well in convincing Presidents to follow his prescriptions, even
when they clashed with political expediency.

On a visit to New York earlier this year from his native Minnesota, Mr. Heller
talked with Kyle Crichton, the Business Forum editor, about his career as a
Presidential counselor. His reminiscences provide a fascinating glimpse into the
inner circles of power and a reminder of how great policy decisions are often
made by people who may have had something more important on their minds that
day.

Q. You have called yourself an ''educator of Presidents.''

A. This is perhaps self-serving, but I was struck last spring when somebody
introduced me as the economist who advised more Presidents and Presidential
candidates than any other economist. I guess that's right. Going back to Adlai
Stevenson, I worked - well, he didn't think much of economics and working with
him as an economic adviser was not a terribly demanding thing - but I was one of
the inner coterie there, and worked with Humphrey, Mondale, Kennedy, Johnson and
Carter and so on.

Q. Of all the Presidents and Presidential aspirants you have known, who was the
smartest?

A. Mondale was, I would say, the brightest of the lot, the one who not only
understood something while you were explaining it to him but retained it. And if
you had a meeting with him three months later and went over the same ground, he
would say 'Yeah, I've got that, let's go on from there.'

Q. The Kennedy tax cut, which touched off an economic boom that lasted almost a
decade, is generally regarded as the seminal economic event of the 1960's,
perhaps of the postwar period. Do you regard it as such? Was it your idea, as
history seems ready to concede?

A. As far as our activities in the 60's, everything started with - it's immodest
to say so, but it was - my tax cut. It was born on my desk, and at the time not
with the cooperation of my two colleagues on the Council, Kermit Gordon and
James Tobin.

It was clear that we were not going to reach full employment under the burden of
that heavy income tax - which at the time ran to 91 percent marginal rates. It
was then, in March 1961, that I began pushing for a major tax cut, which
President Kennedy eventually proposed in 1963. That was the first time in
history that a President specifically endorsed and adopted the Keynesian
approach - the first President who was willing to say that a deficit could be a
good thing. I know, because I wrote the words for him. I had a fascinating
experience with him on it.

Q. What happened? Did you have a difficult time converting the President to
Keynesianism?

A. In a sense I felt that the milestone in the education of a President in
applied Keynesian economics occurred in January 1963.

At the last minute, four days before it had to be printed, I took 22
typewritten, double-spaced pages to the President. I thought I'd just give them
to him, tell him a little bit about it and then let him read it and tell me what
changes to make. But he was a speed reader, and by now he was pretty savvy on
the economic front. Of course, economic advisers always claim their President is
savvy, but Kennedy really was. Although, always within limitations.

But, instead of having a little conversation and dismissing me he said, 'No,
I'll go over it right now.'

Now you have to remember that the tax cut was a totally innovative thing,
because we had no recession. The economy was moving up. We had a substantial
deficit, and never before had any President had the wit or wisdom to put in a
tax cut in an expanding economy with a big budget deficit.

Anyway, we were standing there -he on one side of his desk and I on the other -
and he flipped through the speech in perhaps no more than 10 minutes, maybe
less, and then tossed it to me and said 'that's fine.' I said, laughing, 'My
God, Mr. President, you're sure showing a lot of confidence in me.'

He said 'Sure, why not?'

I said, 'Don't you know I have you saying something in there that no other
President has ever said - that a deficit under certain circumstances can be a
good thing; that there are constructive deficits and destructive deficits and it
depends on the circumstances?

He said 'Well, all right, let me take another look at that.' And so he went back
and he looked at that part, and he changed one sentence, just very moderately,
and then he tossed it back to me and said 'let's go.'

Q. You said that the best young minds were attracted to economics in the wake of
the Depression.

A. Yes, and then the best minds in the field were very literally attracted to
the Kennedy Administration. When Jim, Kermit and I were assembling the Council
of Economic Advisers we had almost no turndowns. Almost without exception,
whoever we asked was glad to serve with us. Imagine a council that had Jim and
Kermit and a staff with Ken Arrow and Bob Solow. I operated it as much as I
could as a coordinate council, quite contrary to the advice of one very towering
economist from Harvard.

Q. You are referring, of course, to John Kenneth Galbraith?

A. Good old Ken Galbraith, whom I'm very fond of - we're good friends - but he
is fundamentally patronizing in his way, and he came over and he said, 'Now
Walter, I know the Kennedys very well and I want to share some thoughts with
you, and one is that I don't think economists should advance on the President en
masse.' He urged me to keep that authority in my own hands, and so forth. I did
just the opposite.

Q. You said in a 1961 article that you were pushing for a tax revision that
would close the marginal rates from a range of 20 to 91 percent down to 14 to 61
percent, and eliminate virtually all loopholes and preferences.

A. Where does that come from?

Q. It was a cover story in Time magazine. ''Heller advocates a radical program
of tax reform, but conservatives could well support it unless. . .''

A. Isn't that interesting? I'd forgotten that. Well, go ahead, read it.

Q. ''Heller considers the present income tax structure not only inequitable, but
uneconomic too. It impedes economic efficiency by distorting economic decisions.
So a tax reform, he believes, would improve the economy's overall efficiency. .
.'' The discussion hasn't changed much through the years, has it?

A. I wrote the first article on tax reform in 1951. At that time we needed
additional revenue for fighting the war in Korea without inflation. So I
suggested eliminating all these different categories of tax preferences instead
of raising rates.

Within a year or two, Joe Pechman took that, converted it into a thoroughgoing
examination of where the base was being riddled with these special provisions
and calculated that you could reduce the rates by 40 percent if you closed all
the loopholes and preferences.

Q. One other part of this 1961 article has a familiar ring to it. It states that
''an exciting new concept in economics. . .''

A. Oh, yes.

Q. ''with vast implications for public policy. . .''

A. Of course.

Q. ''is the investment in human capital, knowledge, skills and invention, rather
than in tangible capital.'' Another great idea that we rediscover periodically?

A. Well, I had been working with the National Education Association. It was a
new concept to them, they just loved it - the idea that one could think of
education as an investment. But the investment in human capital was something
Kennedy endorsed and understood. It was extraordinarily difficult to devise good
programs in that field. We did our best, which wasn't terribly good.

Q. Back to Presidents. You said that Kennedy was a quick study.

What about President Johnson?

A. Well, Johnson was also extraordinary. I think he had a great I.Q., but he
didn't want to go into things in the same depth that Kennedy did. Bill Moyers
once said to me, 'One thing you ought to know is that you don't want to bring
your memos over here in a wheelbarrow.' So I developed this staccato style for
him, where the stuff was put in a highly digestible form.

And to my great embarrassment, President Johnson held up one of my memos at a
Cabinet meeting one time, and he said, 'Here's one of Walter Heller's memos. See
how it's set up? That's the way I want you all to write your memos.' God. How to
lose friends and alienate people - I could have sunk through the floor.

Q. By this time, you were beset with that gathering Vietnam War inflation. How
were you dealing with it? I suppose that, for political reasons, President
Johnson just didn't want to hear about tackling inflation?

A. That's true. He asked me to stay until after the election, which I did for a
year. But even after I went back to Minnesota, he would have me come down to the
ranch or the White House for a couple of days, so that I continued to work with
him.

We wanted to apply Keynesian economics in reverse - that is to cool off an
overheated economy with a tax increase rather than stimulate an underutilized
economy with a tax cut. We couldn't sell him. He called me down to the ranch in
December 1965 - the occasion was that he was sore as a boil at the Fed chairman,
William McChesney Martin, for raising the discount rate.

When I arrived he was just fulminating about the Martin double-cross - you know,
stabbed him in the back and so forth - and I was in a terrible quandary. Now,
how am I going to get across the idea that the reason Martin is doing this is
that aggregate demand is beginning to mount, and that his only mistake was not
first coming to the President and saying, 'Look, unless you put a tax increase
into your budget program for 1966, I'll have to increase the discount rate and
tighten money.'

In the middle of all this, I was trying to sell him a tax increase, a very
modest 5 percent surtax on the individual income tax. What gave me some help was
that we sat down after dinner and here was a wonderful cable saying that a
Commerce Department survey showed a 16 percent jump in real terms in plant and
equipment spending was coming up in 1966. I said, 'You know, Mr. President, this
spells trouble, because we're very close to full employment, and we need' - we
got interrupted - 'a tax increase' - and we got interrupted again. The subject
didn't come up again until the next morning while we're deer hunting in a white
Continental convertible.

And here's the President driving. We're on the back 2,000, which is about four
miles from the ranch house, and George Hamilton is sitting up there. Hamilton,
who had told me the night before that he hadn't had a gun in his hand for five
years, tapped me on the shoulder and asked me if I was nervous. I lied through
my teeth and said no. But I was the spotter -the President driving - the best
automobile driver I've ever seen. He gunned it over dirt roads, through water,
at 50, 60 miles an hour.

Q. In a white Lincoln?

A. A white Lincoln convertible. And he goes right on with our conversation of
the night before. No matter what he was doing, whether he was going to the
toilet or whatever, he'd continue the conversation. Out of the 22 hours that I
spent at the ranch, I spent 17 hours with him. And so he said, while barreling
along these dirt roads, I understand you want me to ask for a tax increase. What
do you want me to do, call Congress back into special session? This is December.
And rescind those excise tax repeals? He was very wily. Those were temporary
excise taxes dating from 1933, and we were so glad to get rid of them he knew
damn well I wouldn't advocate that.

And I said, no, no, not that Mr. President. Let's have a surtax on the income
tax. Well, he said, I can't get a handful of votes on either side of the aisle
of either House of the Congress on that. And so he didn't ask for it until
January of 1967, and because Congress feared a recession, it wasn't enacted
until 1968. By then, the inflation tiger was out of the cage.

Among the many tragedies of Vietnam, one of them was that it simply negated the
great Keynesian experiment in economics.

Q. Has Keynesianism survived the war, the 70's and Reaganomics? Is there any
chance the experiment will be resumed?

A. There's no question that it has survived, despite the claims of the
monetarists and in spite of the challenge from the super supply siders -punk
supply siders, as Herbert Stein so aptly calls them.

What we have today is a kind of modified Keynesianism that could be called the
mainstream in policy thinking these days. I call myself a chastened Keynesian,
after the beating we took in the 1970's, with simultaneous high unemployment and
high inflation, the stagflation bugaboo. We've built in Milton Friedman's
natural rate of unemployment. We've tried to deal with stickiness in wages and
prices. This modified Keynesianism still provides the most satisfactory guidance
for policy, and the most satisfactory explanation of the responses to policy.

WHO WAS WHO, CIRCA 1962

Kenneth J. Arrow:   Professor of economics at Stanford; won the 1972 Nobel
Memorial Prize in Economic Science; economist, Council of Economic Advisers,
1962; president, American Economics Association, 1973.

Kermit Gordon:   Member of C.E.A., 1961-62; directed the Bureau of the Budget,
1962-65; president of the Brookings Institution, 1967-76; died in 1976.

Joseph A. Pechman:   Senior fellow of the Brookings Institution; economist,
C.E.A., 1954-56; consultant to the C.E.A., 1961-69; leading analyst of the tax
system.

Robert M. Solow:   Professor of economics at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology; staff economist, C.E.A., 1961-62; president of the A.E.A., 1979.

James Tobin:   Professor of economics at Yale University; won the 1981 Nobel
Memorial Prize in Economic Science; member of C.E.A., 1961-62; president of the
A.E.A., 1971.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Pres. Kennedy naming Walter Heller chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers (UPI) (page 13)

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              299 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 72 words


A short article about Tom Hayden in The Week in Review on June 7 misstated the
circumstances surrounding the cancellation of a speech he was to have made at
the San Jose City College commencement on June 5. The appearance by Mr. Hayden,
a California Assemblyman who was an activist during the Vietnam War, was
canceled by the college, because of fears that the ceremony would be disrupted
by what it called ''outside groups.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: correction

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              300 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS OF THE TIMES;
More Than a Lawyer

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 154 words


Orville Schell Jr., who died last week at the age of 78, exemplified the kind of
New York lawyer whose public spirit, and career, transcended the practice of
law. His name and reputation rank with those of Whitney North Seymour Sr.,
Orison Marden, Francis Plimpton, Herbert Brownell and Cyrus Vance.

He led the Association of the Bar of the City of New York in the 1970's with a
sharp eye for civil rights at home and human rights abroad. When the American
Bar Association supported the Supreme Court nomination of G. Harrold Carswell,
he marshaled rank-and-file opposition to an unqualified candidate. He chided
Argentina's lawyers for timid reluctance to defend victims of repression. When
the organized bar went along with the Vietnam War, he led a lawyers' march on
Washington to protest the military campaign in Cambodia. He will be remembered,
and missed, for his vigor, cheer, professionalism - and conscience.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              301 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: JUNE 21, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1470 words





                                                      Weeks
This                               Last                  On
Week                               Week                List Fiction

 1                                    1          3           MISERY, by Stephen
                                                            King. (Viking,
                                                            $18.95.)
                                                             Injured and
                                                            drugged, an author
                                                            is held captive by
                                                            a
                                                             psychotic fan.

 2                                    2          6           THE HAUNTED MESA,
                                                            by Louis L'Amour.
                                                             (Bantam, $18.95.)
                                                            Unraveling the
                                                            mystery of
                                                             Indian cliff
                                                            dwellers who
                                                            vanished centuries
                                                            ago.

 3                                    6          2           PALE KINGS AND
                                                            PRINCES, by Robert
                                                            B.
                                                             Parker.
                                                            (Delacorte,
                                                            $15.95.) Spenser on
                                                            the trail of
                                                             a major
                                                            Northeastern
                                                            cocaine ring based
                                                            in a small
                                                             New England town.

 4                                    3          14          FINE THINGS, by
                                                            Danielle Steel.
                                                            (Delacorte,
                                                             $18.95.) The
                                                            vicissitudes of a
                                                            son of the 60's on
                                                            his
                                                             way to the 80's.

 5                                    5          6           HEIRESS, by Janet
                                                            Dailey. (Little,
                                                            Brown, $17.95.)
                                                             Sisters vie for
                                                            their father's
                                                            affection and
                                                            fortune.

 6                                    4          20          WINDMILLS OF THE
                                                            GODS, by Sidney
                                                            Sheldon.
                                                             (Morrow, $18.95.)
                                                            Nightmarish
                                                            experiences befall
                                                             a woman appointed
                                                            Ambassador to
                                                            Rumania.

 7                                    8          2           EMPIRE, by Gore
                                                            Vidal. (Random
                                                            House, $22.50.)

                                                            Turn-of-the-century
                                                            Washington, seen
                                                            from the
                                                             point of view of a
                                                            young woman
                                                            newspaper
                                                             publisher.

 8                                   12          2           THE TIMOTHY FILES,
                                                            by Lawrence
                                                            Sanders.
                                                             (Putnam, $18.95.)
                                                            A Vietnam vet
                                                            turned detective
                                                             checks out dubious
                                                            entrepreneurs for
                                                            Wall Street
                                                             firms.

 9                                   14          2           MORE DIE OF
                                                            HEARTBREAK, by Saul
                                                            Bellow.
                                                             (Morrow, $17.95.)
                                                            The many-faceted
                                                            relationship of
                                                             the 35-year-old
                                                            narrator and his
                                                            uncle, a famous
                                                             botanist.

10                                    7          11          THE LADIES OF
                                                            MISSALONGHI, by
                                                            Colleen
                                                             McCullough.
                                                            (Harper & Row,
                                                            $12.95.) An
                                                             Australian town at
                                                            the turn of the
                                                            century.

11                                    9          21          THE EYES OF THE
                                                            DRAGON, by Stephen
                                                            King.
                                                             (Viking, $18.95.)
                                                            A fairy tale,
                                                            complete with an
                                                            aged
                                                             king, two princes,
                                                            an evil wizard and
                                                            a mouse.

12 *                                 11          47          RED STORM RISING,
                                                            by Tom Clancy.
                                                            (Putnam,
                                                             $19.95.) The West
                                                            tries to stave off
                                                            the Russians.

13                                                        1  SPHERE, by Michael
                                                            Crichton. (Knopf,
                                                            $17.95.)
                                                             Four scientists
                                                            explore the
                                                            mysteries of an
                                                            alien
                                                             spaceship found on
                                                            the floor of the
                                                            South Pacific.

14                                   13          13          DESTINY, by Sally
                                                            Beauman. (Bantam,
                                                            $19.95.)
                                                             The 30-year
                                                            romance of a couple
                                                            with diverse
                                                             backgrounds and
                                                            ambitions.

15 *                                 10          11          TEXASVILLE, by
                                                            Larry McMurtry.
                                                            (Simon &
                                                             Schuster, $18.95.)
                                                            From the 50's to
                                                            the 80's in
                                                             Thalia, Tex. - a
                                                            sequel to ''The
                                                            Last Picture
                                                            Show.''

                                                      Weeks
This                               Last                  On
Week                               Week                List Nonfiction

 1                                    1          8           THE CLOSING OF THE
                                                            AMERICAN MIND, by
                                                             Allan Bloom.
                                                            (Simon & Schuster,
                                                            $18.95.) A critique
                                                             of liberal arts
                                                            education during
                                                            the past 25 years.

 2                                    3          6           HAMMER, by Armand
                                                            Hammer with Neil
                                                            Lyndon.
                                                             (Putnam, $22.95.)
                                                            The autobiography
                                                            of the
                                                             octogenarian
                                                            industrialist and
                                                            philanthropist.

 3                                    2          3           CULTURAL LITERACY,
                                                            by E. D. Hirsch Jr.
                                                             (Houghton Mifflin,
                                                            $16.95.) The
                                                            information -
                                                             geography,
                                                            history,
                                                            literature,
                                                            politics - that you
                                                             need to read with.

 4                                    4          17          COMMUNION, by
                                                            Whitley Strieber.
                                                            (Beech Tree/
                                                             Morrow, $17.95.) A
                                                            professional writer
                                                            tells of the
                                                             visits of
                                                            ''intelligent
                                                            nonhumans'' to his
                                                            home.

 5                                    6          29          A DAY IN THE LIFE
                                                            OF AMERICA.
                                                            (Collins
                                                             Publishers,
                                                            $39.95.) The nation
                                                            on May 2, 1986, as
                                                             recorded in
                                                            pictures by 200
                                                            photojournalists.

 6                                    7          3           THE DIFFERENT
                                                            DRUM, by M. Scott
                                                            Peck.
                                                             (Simon & Schuster,
                                                            $16.95.) A
                                                            psychiatrist's
                                                             prescription for
                                                            peace.

 7                                    5          11          LOVE, MEDICINE &
                                                            MIRACLES, by Bernie
                                                            S.
                                                             Siegel. (Harper &
                                                            Row, $17.95.) A
                                                            surgeon stresses
                                                             the importance of
                                                            the patient's mind
                                                            and emotions.

 8                                    8          7           GLORY DAYS, by
                                                            Dave Marsh.
                                                            (Pantheon,
                                                             $18.95.) Bruce
                                                            Springsteen in the
                                                            1980's; an account
                                                             written with the
                                                            rock star's
                                                            cooperation.

 9                                    9          11          HOLD ON, MR.
                                                            PRESIDENT! by Sam
                                                            Donaldson.
                                                             (Random House,
                                                            $17.95.) A White
                                                            House television
                                                             correspondent
                                                            comments on his
                                                            assignment and
                                                             the ways of the
                                                            news media.

10                                                        1  EVERYTHING TO
                                                            GAIN, by Jimmy and
                                                            Rosalynn
                                                             Carter. (Random
                                                            House, $16.95.) The
                                                            former first
                                                             couple tell what
                                                            they're doing to
                                                            make the most of
                                                             the rest of their
                                                            lives.

11                                   10          5           GRACE, by James
                                                            Spada.
                                                            (Dolphin/Doubleday,
                                                             $17.95.) The
                                                            private and public
                                                            lives of Princess
                                                             Grace of Monaco.

12                                                       24  A SEASON ON THE
                                                            BRINK, by John
                                                            Feinstein.
                                                             (Macmillan,
                                                            $16.95.) A
                                                            chronicle of one
                                                            season
                                                             spent with the
                                                            coach Bob Knight
                                                            and his Indiana
                                                             University
                                                            basketball team.

13                                   12          10          THIS 'N THAT, by
                                                            Bette Davis with
                                                            Michael
                                                             Herskowitz.
                                                            (Putnam, $17.95.)
                                                            The actress's
                                                             memories and
                                                            opinions.

14 *                                 15          19          THE FATAL SHORE,
                                                            by Robert Hughes.
                                                            (Knopf,
                                                             $24.95.)
                                                            Australia, from
                                                            penal colony to its
                                                            gradual
                                                             emergence as a
                                                            flourishing nation.

15                                   14          18          THE FITZGERALDS
                                                            AND THE KENNEDYS,
                                                            by
                                                             Doris Kearns
                                                            Goodwin. (Simon &
                                                            Schuster, $22.95.)
                                                             From the Boston
                                                            slums of Irish
                                                            immigrants to the
                                                             White House: three
                                                            generations of a
                                                            family.

                                                      Weeks
This                               Last                  On
Week                               Week                List Advice, How-to and
                                                            Miscellaneous

 1                                    1          93          WEBSTER'S NINTH
                                                            NEW COLLEGIATE
                                                             DICTIONARY.
                                                            (Merriam-Webster,
                                                            $14.95.) A
                                                             standard reference
                                                            work in a 1983
                                                            revision.

 2                                    2          3           WOMEN MEN LOVE,
                                                            WOMEN MEN LEAVE, by
                                                             Connell Cowan and
                                                            Melvyn Kinder.
                                                            (Clarkson N.
                                                             Potter/Crown,
                                                            $18.95.) Why men
                                                            are drawn to
                                                             some women and
                                                            desert others.

 3                                    3          3           THE DIET
                                                            PRINCIPAL, by
                                                            Victoria Principal.
                                                             (Simon & Schuster,
                                                            $17.95.) A
                                                            television star's
                                                             guide to
                                                            nutrition.

 4                                    4          34          THE FRUGAL GOURMET
                                                            COOKS WITH WINE,
                                                             by Jeff Smith.
                                                            (Morrow, $16.95.)
                                                            Recipes to be
                                                             prepared at
                                                            moderate cost.

 5                                                        1  SIBLINGS WITHOUT
                                                            RIVALRY, by Adele
                                                            Faber
                                                             and Elaine
                                                            Mazlish. (Norton,
                                                            $14.95.) Ways to
                                                            cope
                                                             with bickering
                                                            between one's
                                                            children.


 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

LANDSCAPES AFTER THE BATTLE, by Juan Goytisolo. (Seaver Books, $17.95.)
Deliberately short on plot but long on all kinds of disaster, this brilliantly
peculiar short novel by the Spanish master takes the postmodern world for its
subject and seems to ask what task is left in it for artists.

THE FOUR DAYS OF COURAGE: The Untold Story of the People Who Brought Marcos
Down, by Bryan Johnson. (Free Press, $19.95.) The author, Far Eastern
correspondent for The Toronto Globe and Mail, revises much accepted history,
notably the notion that high American officials encouraged and abetted Corazon
Aquino in her rebellion against the Marcos regime.

ROSA LUXEMBURG: A Life, by Elzbieta Ettinger. (Beacon, $24.95.) A sympathetic,
credible account of the Russian-Polish-German revolutionary, assassinated in
1919, who remains perhaps the most appealing figure in the annals of Communism.

LOVE UNKNOWN, by A. N. Wilson. (Viking, $16.95.) The latest precise, ironic
product of this industrious writer - nine novels and three biographies since
1977 - turns the traditional English comic novel into a vivisection of romantic
love.

THE FORGING OF THE UNION 1781-1789, by Richard B. Morris. (Harper & Row,
$22.95.) Everything was new to our inexperienced republic in the eight intense
years of this engaging history, which illuminates the problems the Constitution
was meant to solve.

IDEOLOGY AND U.S. FOREIGN POLICY, by Michael H. Hunt. (Yale University, $22.50.)
The deepest American values, according to Mr. Hunt's sober argument, have often
inspired aggressive American foreign policies, designed to impose ''liberty'' on
people who didn't necessarily want it.

TIME'S ARROW, TIME'S CYCLE: Myth and Metaphor in the Discovery of Geological
Time, by Stephen Jay Gould. (Harvard University, $17.50.) Does geological
history repeat itself? Mr. Gould elucidates the position of this question at the
heart of the development of the scientific outlook in the 19th century.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              302 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PART OF THE SOLUTION, PART OF THE PROBLEM

BYLINE: By HENDRIK HERTZBERG; Hendrik Hertzberg is a senior associate at the
Press-Politics Center at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of
Government.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2782 words



''DEMOCRACY IS IN THE STREETS''
From Port Huron to the Siege of Chicago. By James Miller. Illustrated. 431 pp.
New York: Simon & Schuster. $19.95.

ACCORDING to a highly informal survey I have been taking lately, the average
bright, well-informed, socially conscious college student of 1987 has never
heard of the Port Huron Statement. Tom Hayden, yes. They all know about him,
Jane Fonda's husband and political partner. Many also know that the initials
S.D.S. stand for, or stood for, Students for a Democratic Society, and that all
of it had something to do with protest in the 1960's. But the Port Huron
Statement draws a blank - even though it arguably was, as James Miller says in
'' 'Democracy Is in the Streets,' '' his excellent account of the early student
New Left, ''one of the pivotal documents in post-war American history.''

It is now exactly a quarter of a century since, under the auspices of an obscure
liberal-to-radical student group that had lately changed its name from the
Student League for Industrial Democracy, some five dozen people gathered at a
United Auto Workers lakeside camp near Port Huron, Mich., to talk about a
political text. In those pre-Beatles, pre-acid days, they could have passed for
the executive board of the Young Republicans or the Young Democrats. But theirs
was not a politics of parties, nor of candidates, nor even of issues. It was a
politics of vision and values. They talked about civil rights and foreign policy
and welfare and education, but the questions that underlay their discussion were
bigger ones: What makes for a meaningful life? What is a good society? How can
the world be remade? At 5 o'clock on the morning of June 16, 1962, after four
days of intense talk, of cutting and pasting and very little sleep, they
ratified their text and walked wearily out into the damp, rosy dawn, knowing
they had done something important. Some of them held hands silently on the shore
of the lake, and felt exalted.

The new student left of the 60's had been in gestation for some time, but the
publication of the Port Huron Statement of Students for a Democratic Society may
be considered the moment of its birth. In the student left's decade or so of
life it left its mark on an entire generation, the generation that is now moving
into positions of power in politics, education, the media and business. Its
death followed a shuddering descent into nihilistic rage, mindless
anti-intellectualism and grotesque pseudo-Marxist cultism. What was born at Port
Huron in 1962 began to die on the streets of Chicago in 1968, and was buried in
the rubble of a Greenwich Village brownstone on March 6, 1970, when three
members Continued on page 31 of the Weathermen, the last mad remnant of S.D.S.,
blew themselves to pieces trying to make a bomb out of a stick of dynamite and a
cheap alarm clock.

At the end, the early history of S.D.S. repeated itself as grim farce. In place
of the open-ended, open-minded spirit of the Port Huron Statement there was the
clotted dogmatism of the Weatherman manifesto. In place of the S.D.S. Economic
Research and Action Project, through which hundreds of idealistic students tried
to organize a radically democratic ''interracial movement of the poor'' in
Northern city neighborhoods, there were club-wielding ''affinity groups'' living
an airless life of revolutionary fantasy in grungy apartments under the slogan
Smash Monogamy. In place of Port Huron's search for a radicalism with
authentically American roots, there was the spectacle, at S.D.S.'s final
convention in 1969, of two factions shouting each other down with chants of
''Ho, Ho, Ho Chi Minh!'' and ''Mao, Mao, Mao Tse-tung!'' WITH such a gaudy end,
no wonder the beginning has been overshadowed, the intellectual foundations of
the New Left, in Mr. Miller's words, ''ignored, repudiated, forgotten.'' Mr.
Miller was present at the destruction: as a college student he demonstrated in
the Chicago streets during the 1968 Democratic Convention and attended that last
S.D.S. convention there the following year. Though Mr. Miller was not among the
chanters, the experience left him, as it left many others, shaken and not a
little disillusioned. ''The New Left was obviously in some respects a dead end -
indeed, for many years I did not want to think about the Sixties at all, since I
had grown ashamed of my youthful naivete,'' he writes. ''At the same time, as a
mood of smug tranquillity began to settle over the political culture of the
United States in the early Eighties, I found myself increasingly uncomfortable
with both the neoconservative scorn and the facile nostalgia that have typified
popular attitudes about the Sixties.''

Mr. Miller falls into neither of these traps. He is an accomplished writer in
both academic and popular forms, having written both a widely praised scholarly
book about Jean Jacques Rousseau (''Rousseau: Dreamer of Democracy'') and many
articles on rock-and-roll for Newsweek. He has delved deeply in primary and
secondary sources; he has interviewed the participants at length. He even took
the extraordinary step of sending a draft of his manuscript to everyone he
interviewed and incorporating their corrections and comments where relevant. As
Mr. Miller acknowledges, his book owes a debt to Kirkpatrick Sale's ''SDS''
(1973), a similarly well-researched volume written in the heat of events and
marred by a now anachronistic loathing of reformism and infatuation with
revolutionary rhetoric. But Mr. Miller has broken much new ground, and his
judgments are sounder. He makes a fine guide - accurate, sympathetic, critical,
learned.

Mr. Miller tells his story largely through the lives of a dozen or so young men
and women who came together at Port Huron and who then spent the next several
years living out, modifying and, in some cases, abandoning the ideas that were
affirmed there. The inner circle - the core of the core - was a group of four
friends who discovered one another at the University of Michigan at the end of
the 1950's: Al Haber, bearded and balding, a little older than the others, a
''reticent visionary'' who argued that students could be a key to radical social
change and who became the first president of S.D.S.; Sharon Jeffrey, a blond
Midwesterner who became a stalwart of S.D.S.'s ghetto organizing; Bob Ross, a
Jewish New Yorker who was the host of a jazz program on the campus radio station
and who came to S.D.S. via the avant-garde scene and the civil rights sit-ins;
and their prize recruit, Tom Hayden.

Mr. Haber, Ms. Jeffrey and Mr. Ross were all children of parents active in
liberal or socialist politics; for them rebellion was almost an act of filial
piety. Not so for Thomas Emmett Hayden. Born on Dec. 11, 1939, and named for St.
Thomas Aquinas, Mr. Hayden went to Roman Catholic schools in the Royal Oak,
Mich., parish of Father Coughlin, the anti-Semitic radio priest of the 1930's
and early 40's. Mr. Hayden's parents were divorced. His mother, who brought him
up, was liberal and tolerant, his father stern and reactionary. In high school
Mr. Hayden's idols were J. D. Salinger's Holden Caulfield and Mad magazine's
Alfred E. Neuman; he started his own underground paper, The Daily Smirker.

At the University of Michigan Mr. Hayden became the editor of The Michigan
Daily, then the best college newspaper in the country. Reading Jack Kerouac's
''On the Road'' sent him hitchhiking across the country. He witnessed student
protests at Berkeley against the House Un-American Activities Committee. In Los
Angeles to cover the 1960 Democratic Convention, Mr. Hayden filed stories about
John F. Kennedy - ''a politician dedicated to public greatness but at the same
time calculating and opportunistic'' - and had an interview with the Rev. Martin
Luther King Jr. ''Meeting King transformed me,'' he told Mr. Miller 24 years
later. ''There I was, with pencil in hand, trying to conduct an objective
interview with Martin Luther King, whose whole implicit message was: 'Stop
writing, start acting.' That was a compelling moment.'' Back in Ann Arbor, Mr.
Hayden organized a left-liberal campus political party, wrote several articles a
week for The Michigan Daily and traveled south to write about the plight of
black sharecroppers evicted from the land after trying to register to vote.
Meanwhile he was reading - Camus, Orwell, John Dewey and, above all, the
sociologist C. Wright Mills, about whom he wrote a thesis. Mr. Hayden had
resisted joining S.D.S. - he distrusted ''the morbid traditions of the left
centered in New York City'' - but ended up, after graduation, signing on as
S.D.S.'s field secretary, with special responsibility for liaison with the
burgeoning civil rights movement in the Deep South. By the end of 1961, when Mr.
Hayden began work on the Port Huron Statement, he had been beaten and jailed in
Mississippi and was already nationally famous, at least in the world of student
and left-liberal activism.

Despite the inspiration Mr. Hayden and the others drew from the black struggle,
the Port Huron Statement, as Mr. Miller shows, owes more to the civic
republicanism of thinkers like Dewey and Mills than to the Christian pacifism of
the civil rights movement. And Mr. Miller offers many fascinating glimpses into
the process by which Mr. Hayden's draft was hammered into final shape. For
example, Mr. Hayden wrote the document's famous beginning (''We are people of
this generation, bred in at least modest comfort, housed now in universities,
looking uncomfortably to the world we inherit'') on the spot, after his original
opening (''Every generation inherits from the past a set of problems - and a
dominant set of insights and perspectives by which the problems are to be
understood and, hopefully, managed'') was rejected. And the first draft
contained the daring thought that ''private enterprise is not inherently immoral
or undemocratic - indeed it may at times contribute to offset elitist
tendencies.'' That was too much for some of the socialists in the group and out
it went.

The Port Huron Statement's great contribution to political language was
''participatory democracy'' -the notion, in essence, that people should take
part in the decisions that affect their lives. Vague though the idea was,
participatory democracy seemed to offer young radicals both a goal and a means
of getting there. And it was American: ''By taking such patriotic rhetoric and
treating it as a transcendent political vision,'' Mr. Miller writes, ''Hayden
presented the extension of democracy to new areas of social life as a matter of
both homespun common sense and political romance.''

The Port Huron Statement, distributed in a variety of forms by S.D.S and
reprinted in anthologies of New Left writings, catapulted S.D.S. to the fore of
the nascent student movement. But the statement's critique of anti-Communism
touched off a bitter fight between S.D.S. and the adult organization it was then
affiliated with, the League for Industrial Democracy (L.I.D.). As Mr. Miller
sensitively shows, both sides wore blinders in that fight. The L.I.D.'ers, led
by Michael Harrington, saw an exaggerated threat of Communist popular frontism
in the activities of S.D.S.; the S.D.S.'ers refused to learn from their elders'
experience with Stalinism. Mr. Harrington has since written feelingly of his
regrets about the role he played in the S.D.S.-L.I.D. split; in interviews with
Mr. Miller, some of the S.D.S.'ers express similar regrets. As the older and
presumably wiser parties to the dispute, the L.I.D.'ers must take most of the
blame.

The bitterness lingered, and S.D.S. lost a tie to a democratic left tradition
that might have helped it keep its bearings later. Instead, when the war in
Vietnam came along, S.D.S. was primed for rapid radicalization. In 1962
S.D.S.'ers saw participatory democracy as a supplement to the parliamentary
kind; three years later they saw it as a replacement. And three years after that
they saw it - and themselves - as the enemy of ''Amerikan'' institutions.

S.D.S.'s antileader, antielitist ideology deprived it not only of an
institutional memory but also of an effective national structure. It grew
spectacularly - from fewer than a thousand members in 1962 to at least 50 times
that many in 1968 - as the war energized student protest. But in the absence of
mechanisms of accountability, the national office lost touch both with the
concerns of the student members and with political reality, and S.D.S. ended up
consumed by a loonier incarnation of the same sectarian marginality it had set
out, at Port Huron, to transcend.

Mr. Miller tells this story in fascinating detail, much of it new to me. He is
especially illuminating on Mr. Hayden, the most elusive and interesting of his
subjects. Torn between the democratic ideology he had outlined at Port Huron and
the embittered revolutionism he increasingly embraced, Mr. Hayden by 1968 was
leading a double life - flying to Hanoi or urging violent resistance to what he
considered the illegitimate United States Government one day, meeting secretly
with Averell Harriman or Robert Kennedy the next. The 1969 Chicago Seven trial
made Mr. Hayden a pop celebrity but increased his isolation as much as his fame.
By 1971 he was living in Venice, Calif., under the name Emmett Garity, trying to
piece his life back together. MR. MILLER'S final chapter has the fascination of
a 25th annual report. Most of his characters remain actively involved in
movements of social and political change. Mr. Hayden, now 47, sits in the
California Legislature as a Democrat from Santa Monica. He chairs the Higher
Education Committee and is a grudgingly respected and increasingly respectable
figure, though distrusted by many of his old radical comrades for the tenacious
strength of his political ambition. Mr. Miller leaves us with the sense that Mr.
Hayden's extraordinary story is far from over.

The Port Huron Statement, which Mr. Miller reprints in full as an appendix (it
covers 46 densely printed pages), retains much of its original energy. It seems
less dated now than it did a decade ago, perhaps because the late 80's, like the
late 50's, are a time in which superficial prosperity masks a profound crisis of
values. If the cycles of history mean anything at all, we can expect the 90's to
be a decade of youthful political awakening and perhaps upheaval. The leaders of
the next revolt will do well to read Mr. Miller's fine book - for inspiration,
and for admonition, too.

POP AND POLITICS

James Miller wrote '' 'Democracy Is in the Streets' '' because he could not bear
seeing the history of the New Left, a movement he knew well, mired in myth and
misunderstanding. ''I can remember seeing 'The Big Chill' and being very
angry,'' he said in a telephone interview from his home in Boston. ''I was angry
not because of political content, but because these people were so glib, and the
one thing my friends and I had going through the 60's was an extraordinary
intensity and seriousness which has remained with us to this day. I was unhappy
with the neoconservative tenor of the times and the facile stereotypes that were
circulating about the 60's. At the same time, I felt as if the part of that
decade I had actually lived through as a radical activist had fallen victim to a
kind of social amnesia.''

Still, writing about Students for a Democratic Society was not easy. ''I felt
very complex emotions about it,'' he said. ''In part, I was unrepentant and, in
part, I was ashamed about how foolish I had been.''

Mr. Miller focuses on the New Left in the early 60's, when the Port Huron
Statement, the one clear New Left manifesto, sought to build the foundations of
a radically democratic movement that rejected bureaucracy, Leninist discipline
and Marxist theory. Later, the movement fell victim to the very sectarianism it
began its life by condemning; some of its members veered into the politics of
random, mindless violence. But that is not how it started. ''It was so
relentlessly self-analytic and self-critical,'' Mr. Miller said. ''I don't think
this sort of book could have been written about the Communist Party in the
1930's. People were enormously candid.''

Besides writing about political philosophy, Mr. Miller also writes about
rock-and-roll. ''Pop music and politics all seemed to be about the same
movement,'' he said.

Mr. Miller hopes his book will move the debate on the left beyond the arguments
of the 60's, not back to them. The New Left's purpose was, he said, ''to move
the political debate away from the terms of the 30's.'' For him, back to the
future is not the way forward.

E. J. DIONNE JR.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of S.D.S. group in 1963, including Tom Hayden and Rennee Davis
(George Abbott White); photo of James Miller (page 31)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              303 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAEL WAS EVERTHING

BYLINE: By MARTIN GILBERT; Martin Gilbert's most recent books are ''Winston S.
Churchill: Road to Victory 1941-1945,'' ''Shcharansky: Hero of our Time'' and
''The Holocaust: A History of the Jews of Europe During the Second World War.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2147 words



BEN-GURION
The Burning Ground 1886-1948. By Shabtai Teveth. Illustrated. 967 pp. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company. $35.

NEARLY four decades have passed since David Ben-Gurion decided to seize history
by the horns and declare the independence of a new state, Israel. It was a bold
initiative that went against the advice of many of his colleagues in the Jewish
Agency for Palestine. The decision to declare independence was typical of the
man: sudden, forceful, decisive.

This book, which takes Ben-Gurion's life up to the years immediately after World
War II, has been 13 years in the making. The Israeli statesman, who became the
first Prime Minister of Israel and did not finally retire from public life until
he was in his 80's, in 1970, is lucky to have as a biographer the Israeli
political writer and journalist Shabtai Teveth - a person willing to embark upon
pioneering research and historical detective work of the highest order. Even
someone familiar with the general outline of Ben-Gurion's career will find many
previously unknown facts and remarkable insights, illustrating his utter
single-mindedness in pursuing the goal of statehood, even when that goal seemed
most hopeless and was indeed remote.

Ben-Gurion was a child of the Polish provinces of czarist Russia: the heartland
of the overcrowded, poverty-stricken, seething Pale of Settlement from which
emerged every variety of Jewish endeavor, including the revolutionary Socialist,
the assimilationist and the Zionist. Born in 1886, he was one of 11 children, of
whom only five survived into adulthood. His mother died before he was 12 years
old. He never knew her maiden name, and in later life was tormented by the fact
that he could never conjure up the image of her face.

His father, who had helped to found a local ''Lovers of Zion'' society in 1890,
taught Ben-Gurion that the Jews would only be redeemed when they lived in Zion.
In 1901, only four years after Theodor Herzl had opened the first Zionist
Congress, Ben-Gurion's father wrote to Herzl for financial help to enable his
son to study. Herzl made no reply. Ben-Gurion educated himself, learning Hebrew
at a local Zionist youth society. Moving to Warsaw in 1904, he paid for his
further education by giving private Hebrew lessons. In the days of revolutionary
ferment in 1905 he joined the Jewish Social-Democratic Party, Poale Zion,
becoming a Marxist. In 1906 he left Russia for Palestine - ''the land of our
rebirth,'' as he called it in a letter to his father just before he set sail.
FROM that first journey until the declaration of statehood 42 years later,
Ben-Gurion's career was to undergo an extraordinary blend of setbacks and
rebounds, through all of which he made his determined way to the one goal. In
1909 he was one of the organizers of a Jewish defense group in Galilee. ''We buy
as many weapons as we can afford,'' he wrote to his father, and he added, ''They
are as important to a man here as the clothes on his back and the food in his
mouth.''

From these beginnings, Mr. Teveth traces in meticulous and absorbing detail the
emergence of Ben-Gurion the political leader. The 700 pages that take the reader
from 1909 to 1939 are so rich in facts as to leave no space for padding or
invention. There is many a detailed page, but never a dull one. Politics are
interwoven with innumerable personal vignettes to portray a man of nimble mind,
increasingly conscious that he has been marked by destiny. Before World War I he
had acquired a working knowledge of Turkish, French and Arabic to go with his
earlier fluency in Hebrew, Polish and Yiddish. Reaching New York in 1915, he had
startled the immigration officer by answering his questions in English - a
language, he explained, that he had taught himself during the voyage across the
Atlantic. (Later he was to learn Greek well enough that he was able to translate
New Testament biblical passages from Greek to Hebrew during the London blitz of
1940.) Ben-Gurion's aim on reaching the United States in 1915 was ''to establish
an army of American pioneers'' to till the soil of Palestine ''and defend it.''
World War I would provide a unique historical chance, he argued, for Jews to
show their willingness to go to Eretz Israel, the Jewish homeland. Tours and
exhortations followed. But more than 30 cities offered up no more than a hundred
pioneers in all, a pitiful response. It was to be in Europe, and above all in
Poland, that the pioneers were to be found, following the Balfour Declaration of
1917, pledging British support for a Jewish national home in Palestine.
Churchill's further declaration of 1922, that the Jews were in Palestine ''of
right, and not on sufferance,'' was the turning point that Ben-Gurion
brilliantly exploited, helping to build up in Palestine, throughout the interwar
years, Jewish representative institutions, and above all a Jewish trade union
movement with substantial responsibilities for health, welfare andconstruction.

By 1933 the achievements of Ben-Gurion did not seem to call for further
extraordinary exertions. In 1933, however, Adolf Hitler's rise to power shook
the slow evolutionary pattern out of its then somewhat languishing mold (there
was one 12-month period shortly before 1933 when more Jews decided to leave
Palestine than decided to immigrate there).

Six years after Hitler came to power in Germany, there was a further stimulus to
the demand for statehood when the British Government closed the gates of
Palestine to all but a fragment of those who were then trying to reach its
shores in rapidly growing numbers. At a conference in London in January 1939,
Ben-Gurion pleaded in vain for the British to allow the Jews to become a
majority in Palestine (as Churchill had envisaged in 1922 and reiterated in
1937).

Ben-Gurion returned to Palestine on the eve of World War II convinced that
Britain would now never agree to a Jewish majority in Palestine. Immediately
after his return he told a secret meeting of his party: ''If I knew that it was
possible to save all the children of Germany by transporting them to England,
and only half by transferring them to the Land of Israel, I would choose the
latter, for before us lies not only the numbers of these children but the
historical reckoning of the people of Israel.''

Was this statement - which, surprisingly, Teveth does not publish - that of a
cynic writing off the future of half of Germany's Jewish children for the sake
of a political aim, Jewish statehood? Or was it a desperate attempt to explain
to his closest colleagues that without Jewish statehood in Palestine (itself
impossible without massive and immediate immigration) no Jews anywhere in the
world would be safe from a threat to their survival? One would very much like to
believe the latter, though it would have been particularly helpful had Mr.
Teveth been able to give us guidance on this point.

Mr. Teveth is in no doubt that in regard to rescue, Ben-Gurion adhered to a
''philosophy of what might be called the beneficial disaster.'' This is almost
exactly what the British playwright Jim Allen accused Ben-Gurion of in his play
''Perdition,'' which recently aroused such indignation among British Jews,
myself included. Yet Mr. Teveth is emphatic that before the summer of 1944, when
Ben-Gurion and his colleagues first appreciated the true scale of the Holocaust,
he regarded it as ''a relatively modest catastrophe that his Zionist concept
defined as suitable for exploitation.''

It was only in the early summer of 1944 that the Jewish Agency leaders in
Jerusalem realized the full extent of the disaster. Ben-Gurion at once
intervened directly with the British authorities in Palestine to try to save the
Jews of Hungary, then being deported to Auschwitz, by urging the British to
follow up the Gestapo offer of ''blood for goods.'' Here again, surprisingly,
Mr. Teveth does not refer to Ben-Gurion's personal appeal to the British High
Commissioner in Palestine for acceptance of the Nazi offer (on May 26, 1944).
Instead, in a sentence dark with the potential for misuse, Mr. Teveth writes:
''Two facts can be definitively stated: Ben-Gurion did not put the rescue effort
above Zionist politics, and he did not regard it as a principal task demanding
his personal leadership; he never saw fit to explain why, then or later.'' It
was not rescue, says Teveth, but the rallying of world Jewry and especially
Palestinian Jewry to the creation of a Jewish state, to which Ben-Gurion
''devoted his efforts.'' Here we have an oversimplification of motive that may
not be sustained by the evidence, for Mr. Teveth abandons at this point in his
narrative the rigorous scrutiny of Ben-Gurion's day-to-day thoughts and
activities that is so impressive a feature of this book in the period up to
1940.

With Britain in control of Palestine since 1918, how was that statehood to be
obtained? In 1945, a few weeks after the end of World War II, Winston Churchill
advised his own closest Zionist friend, Chaim Weizmann, that as both the
Conservative and Labor parties in Britain were hostile to Jewish statehood, the
Zionists should enlist United States political support as well as international
support for their goal. Ben-Gurion had reached this conclusion a decade earlier,
and never deviated from it, or from his faith that statehood would come. When,
in 1946, he met Ho Chi Minh in Paris, the Vietnamese leader offered him a Jewish
home-in-exile in Vietnam. Ben-Gurion turned this offer down, telling Ho Chi Minh
(as he related in a letter to this reviewer on July 27, 1967): ''I am certain we
shall be able to establish a Jewish Government in Palestine.'' IT is clear from
Shabtai Teveth's book that Ben-Gurion's confidence, far from being misplaced or
starry-eyed, was the result of an incredible personal belief in the possibility
of men to obtain by their own physical and mental exertions the justice that
natural law and divine prophecy jointly promise. The author does not neglect or
minimize the role of others in this struggle, but the one clear message that
emerges through the intricate historical narrative is the supreme political
leadership, and inspiration, of Ben-Gurion, who never allowed the goal of a
Jewish state, or the primacy of immigration, to slip from his central focus.
''The Jews will not be intimidated into surrender,'' he told a senior British
general in 1939, ''even if their blood will be shed.'' These words were not mere
bravado, but the frankly spoken conviction of a remarkable man, whose talents
and political genius, as well as his human faults and failings, are amply and
ably portrayed in this absorbing book.

SOMEONE FOR B.G. TO TALK TO

If David Ben-Gurion had not got bored, Shabtai Teveth never would have got to do
his biography. Mr. Teveth, a noted Israeli journalist, scholar and biographer,
first approached Ben-Gurion in the late 1960's with the idea of doing his life.
''At the time the people around him did not think I was important enough,''
recalled Mr. Teveth, ''and they handed over the project to the great historian
Jacob Talmon.'' But he dropped the biography after a short while.

''Years later, in 1971, Ben-Gurion was really forsaken by many of his close
friends and people in the party,'' said Mr. Teveth. ''He had a lot of time on
his hands. It was the worst of old age. His personal secretary called me up one
day and said, 'You remember you wanted to do a biography? Well, now's the time.'
Actually, all he was interested in was that B.G. have someone to talk to from
time to time to ease his loneliness. We met for two years very regularly. He had
his cloudy days and his sunny days. Then his cloudy hours and sunny hours. At
the end, he could not always remember who I was and would ask me, 'How come you
know so many things about me?' ''

It would take Mr. Teveth, now 61, 13 years to sort out all of Ben-Gurion's
remarkable life and to write it up. ''Ben-Gurion's hallmarks were two,'' said
Mr. Teveth. ''The first was endurance. He lived to be 87, and for at least 57 of
those years he was a central, if not the central, figure in Jewish political
life. Second, he was a collector. He saved every letter he wrote. There were
750,000 items in his posthumous papers. What is more, all of his personal
diaries from 1919 until his last day exist - 50 thick volumes. This must be a
record.''

The rewards of the book were as much in the research as in the publication.
''Israel has been going through a difficult period during these last 13 years,''
said Mr. Teveth. ''But all this time I feel as though I have been working in a
bunker full of light and hope. In my bunker the Jewish state is yet to be born.
The Jewish people have a strong leader and the world is huge. The world of
Ben-Gurion was not a small world, but the whole Jewish world - a big,
multifaceted world.''
  THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing of David Ben-Gurion; photo of Shabtai Teveth (Teora) (page 24)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              304 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FORSAKING THE ODDBALL LIFE

BYLINE: By MARY-ANN TIRONE SMITH; Mary-Ann Tirone Smith is the author of ''The
Book of Phoebe.'' Her second novel, ''Lament for a Silver-Eyed Woman,'' will be
published next month.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 976 words



SOMEWHERE OFF THE COAST OF MAINE
By Ann Hood. 225 pp. New York: Bantam Books. Paper, $6.95.

THE tenaciously successful television sitcom ''Family Ties,'' with Michael J.
Fox, was originally intended to entertain viewers with the hilarious
interactions between ex-hippie parents and their conservative 1980's teen-agers.
After a few episodes, the focus of the show shifted to the more orthodox kinds
of problems that exist within typical families. Why? Because ex-hippies aren't
funny and neither are conservative kids. Hippies were dead serious about
''dropping out'' and were only amusing to outsiders who saw their beads, shawls
and communes as a freak show. Ann Hood's first novel, about three former flower
children and their present-day family life, rings true.

Suzanne, Elizabeth and Claudia come of age in the late 60's and early 70's, when
the death threat of Vietnam hangs heavily over the heads of unprepared college
students, threatening their plans, eliminating joy. The three women spend their
days making protest posters and their evenings escaping the unescapable by
smoking pot and making love. Claudia is the free spirit from Haight-Ashbury,
sent by her parents to a ''safe'' college in Maine. There she makes a friend of
the serious war protester Elizabeth, and together they take the conservative,
lost Suzanne under their wing.

''Somewhere Off the Coast of Maine'' opens with Suzanne's 14-year-old daughter,
Sparrow, and the heading ''Sparrow, 1984.'' Sparrow finds a picture of her
father, who impregnated Suzanne and refused to marry her. Sparrow's story is her
search for her father, with her mother acting as a roadblock. ''Why won't you
tell me about him?'' Sparrow pleads. But for Suzanne, that part of her life is
over, including her intensely close friendship with Elizabeth and Claudia. It is
so over that Suzanne has even begun calling Sparrow Susan and plans to marry a
corporate executive whom Sparrow detests.

On to ''Rebekah, 1985.'' She is the 15-year-old daughter of Elizabeth and
Howard. They have remained hippies, making and selling pottery and giving
Rebekah dried fruit and nuts for lunch. Consequently, Rebekah is an outcast
amongst her peers, but arrives at the typically adolescent conclusion that her
looks are to blame. So she steals money from the till and has a nose job. When
her circumstances remain unchanged, Rebekah continues her search to find
herself. But there is a roadblock in front of Rebekah, too. Her mother has
cancer.

Henry, the 17-year-old son of Claudia, is in love with Rebekah. Henry has
managed to get around the roadblock presented by his mother: her madness,
brought about by the tragic drowning of Henry's older brother during the halcyon
days when his and Rebekah's family lived together on a farm. Here, the author is
brilliant in demonstrating Claudia's inability to cope with such a grievous
loss: ''Later, people told Claudia that she, too, had run down to the pond,
right behind Elizabeth. They said that she had stood screaming at the edge of
the water as Elizabeth pulled Simon out and tried to breathe life into him. But
she was sure that they were wrong. She had stayed in the garden and picked the
lettuce and then the summer squash. An ambulance came and still she kept
picking. But don't you remember running up the hill, holding Simon's hand on the
stretcher and Elizabeth yelling for the children to go inside the house? they
asked her later.'' Claudia remembers staying in the garden until Elizabeth came
for her. '' 'No,' they told her later. 'You ran down to the pond and rode in the
ambulance all the way to the hospital.' But she shook her head.''

And so we suffer with these women as they plod through the years, wincing at
their impulsive behavior wrought by the Vietnam era, an era vividly captured by
Ann Hood in this accomplished novel.

COFFEE, TEA OR SUBPLOT?

Growing up in the small town of West Warwick, R.I., Ann Hood became fascinated
by books and by faraway places. ''In the fifth grade, I wrote a novel and sent
it to Bennett Cerf, whom I'd seen on TV,'' she said, talking on the phone from
her apartment in Manhattan. (He sent back a ''very gentle'' rejection.) As she
scribbled more stories and devoured books like ''Jane Eyre'' and ''Little
Women,'' she came across ''How to Be a Flight Stewardess,'' by Johni Smith. That
marked the beginning of her two careers.

Ms. Hood became a flight attendant in 1979, a year after her graduation from the
University of Rhode Island. She worked for Trans World Airlines for three years
- traveling the world ''as a closet writer'' - until a layoff in 1982. That
year, her brother died in an accident. As she grappled with his death, she said,
she also realized that ''if you want to do something, life is too short not to
try.'' The result: she enrolled in graduate school at New York University and
began writing the stories that evolved into ''Somewhere Off the Coast of
Maine.''

Ms. Hood was only 9 years old in 1966, the year her novel's three main
characters meet at college. But like her characters, she has powerful memories
of the era. Her earliest impressions came through her brother, who was five
years her senior. ''He and his friends had American flags sewn on their jackets,
and there were always Volkswagen vans in our yard,'' she said. ''The culture
took on a fascination for me as I grew up.''

Still, she said, ''I didn't set out to write about the 60's. I wanted to write
about relationships - about kids and their parents and women's friendships. The
60's versus the 80's seemed a good way to capture that.''

Ms. Hood is now at work on a second novel. ''It's about a death in the family
and how it splinters that family,'' she said. Once again her childhood
impressions will come into play. ''The adults in the book were children in the
60's.''
  DEBORAH STEAD

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              305 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By JONATHAN SPALTER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 23, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 267 words



INSIDE THE PRIVATE OFFICE: Memoirs of the Secretary to British Foreign
Ministers. By Nicholas Henderson. (Academy Chicago, $15.95.) In his brief and
unrestrained memoir, Sir Nicholas Henderson commits that most unusual sin - he
reveals the hidden world of Britain's Foreign Office, and brings to life several
of the colorful men who served as its master. The author, Britain's ambassador
to Washington from 1979 to 1982, spent his earlier career nursing a passion for
anonymity as private secretary to five foreign ministers. In this high but
shadowy post, he gained unrivaled access to both the intrigues of power and the
quirks of the powerful. ''Private Secretaries [are] the keepers of private
secrets,'' he writes, ''just as . . . the Secretaries of State . . . are the
keepers of state secrets.'' He describes fondly his years in the entourage of
Anthony Eden, the suave political insider whose gilded public career was
eclipsed by an emotional breakdown suffered during the Suez crisis; Ernest
Bevin, the folksy west country trade unionist whose taste for sherry was
surpassed only by his success at statecraft; Richard Austen (Rab) Butler, whose
short tenure at Whitehall was clouded by a reputation for indecision and a
talent for avoiding political confrontation; and Michael Stewart, the most
''unsung'' of modern Foreign Ministers, loved for his bookish and quiet bearing
and hated for his vocal support of United States policy in Vietnam. If Sir
Nicholas's memoir is sentimental, he is to be forgiven: his was the last
generation to serve the empire before it sank into obscurity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              306 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
Tough Korean Dilemma

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 741 words

DATELINE: SALZBURG, Austria


The violent crisis in South Korea goes on. It will leave more bitter scars in a
country that has many resentments to cherish, and whatever the U.S. does now,
anti-American feelings are stoked.

There is little prospect of any early euphoric ending of an era, as the election
stolen from Corozon Aquino and reclaimed by the will of the people caused in the
Philippines. The problem isn't just President Chun. It is the perpetuation of a
tough, military-run regime in a country that has made extraordinary economic and
social progress in a generation. Politics lags behind.

And it is a reflection of the strains added when a country undergoing the
difficulties of rapid change is also a key piece in the East-West ideological
conflict.

Like leftist youths in West Germany, the Korean demonstrators have their own
ideas for the country they live in and don't see why they should think instead
about the Communist regime next door.

Unlike the Germans, they have not had democratic experience. The country was
ravaged by a half-century of Japanese occupation. When North Korea invaded in
1950, it had scarcely begun to revive. Since then, protected by 41,500 American
troops, it has flourished and made an enormous mark on the world of commerce.

But it is still partitioned, still smarting at a sense of less than complete
independence. President Jimmy Carter planned to withdraw the U.S. troops, which
probably would have been a good idea in terms of the development of internal
South Korean politics as well as in terms of cost to the U.S.

It was a bad idea strategically, so demonstrably bad as Soviet-American detente
broke down and Moscow pushed at soft spots around the globe that he canceled it.
The troops remain and do their job of guarding the front effectively.

North Korea is still a taut, opaque, heavily armed state with undisguised
ambitions. Kim Il Sung is aging, but he hasn't begun to bend in the direction of
reforms that even Vietnam, well behind China and the Soviet Union, has come to
admit are necessary.

From time to time, there have been gestures toward minimum accommodation between
the two halves of Korea. But they never got far. There is nothing like the human
contacts between the two Germanys, actively and expensively encouraged by Bonn
to ease the pain of national partition.

It is a shame that Seoul was not willing to accede to Pyongyang's demand for a
larger share as host to Olympic events. That would at least have forced some
opening of North Korea and provided some test of what lies beneath the surface.
Nobody knows. Kim Il Sung is trying to assure that the regime will go on
unchanged by preparing the succession of his son, which may or may not work. It
would be imprudent for South Korea to let down its guard.

But this is not a good enough argument for keeping what is essentially a
military regime, which doffed its uniforms, muzzling the democratic aspirations
of the South. On the contrary, the refusal to consider constitutional reform
before next year's Olympics and the failure to convince the opposition that
elections will be fair are causing the trouble now.

Even the Olympics are threatened. They should be moved unless there are clear
signs fairly soon that the Government is prepared to calm the atmosphere by
seeking reconciliation with its people, and it is to be hoped it has now reached
the point of decision. The demands are not new. Twenty years ago students were
rioting in Seoul, calling for democracy. Now their children are saying the same,
and they won't be denied indefinitely.

The dilemma for American policy has no easy answer. Urging the Government to
talk to the opposition and to show restraint hasn't had much effect. Inevitably,
many Koreans hold the U.S. responsible for the survival of repression. In the
eyes of the demonstrators, doing nothing to oppose it is a proof of support.

But this is not a case for sanctions, certainly not trade sanctions, which would
immediately be seen as an American trick to limit Korean competition with a thin
excuse. Some stern talk is needed, preferably in private so as not to stiffen
the confrontation.

Americans made a huge sacrifice to safeguard Korea's chance for its present
prosperity and its hopes for democracy. The U.S. has a right to press the
Government to fulfill those hopes. But it is also paying the price of focusing
too much on global rivalry when the people directly involved have their own
priority.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              307 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 23, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MARINES WILL DISCHARGE DESERTER WHO FLED VIETNAM 17 YEARS AGO

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 384 words

DATELINE: QUANTICO, Va., June 22


A Vietnam War deserter who surrendered after being at large for 17 years is
being discharged from the Marine Corps ''for the good of the service'' instead
of being court-martialed, the service said today.

Douglas G. Beane, who has been held at the Quantico Marine Base since June 9,
admitted to being guilty of charges of desertion, dealing in the black market
and threatening to kill another marine, said Gunnery Sgt. Dean Chamberlain, a
base spokesman. Confined to Base Mr. Beane, 39 years old, had faced trial on
those charges in Vietnam when he deserted.

He will be restricted to the base until his separation from the Marines is
complete, which should be in several days, Sergeant Chamberlain said.

The decision to give Mr. Beane a discharge on other than honorable conditions
was made by Lieut. Gen. Frank E. Petersen, commander of the Marine Corps
Development and Education Command at Quantico, based on Mr. Beane's request for
separation.

The decision was made on the recommendation of the command staff judge advocate
and Mr. Beane's commanding officer, Col. J. P. McHenry, Sergeant Chamberlain
said.

Mr. Beane was arrested in December in Australia, where he had lived the past 17
years, after applying at the United States Consulate for a passport so he could
visit his sick father in Vermont. Australia's highest court blocked his
extradition, but Mr. Beane surrendered to the United States authorities and was
returned to the United States on June 8.

Vietnam Tour Nearly Over

Mr. Beane, who was 17 years old when he joined the Marines, deserted in 1970,
two weeks before his tour in Vietnam was to end.

The charges against Mr. Beane when he deserted included currency manipulation,
solicitation of another Marine to assist in blackmarketing American and foreign
currency, communication of a threat to kill that Marine and a previous
desertion, Sergeant Chamberlain said.

''My hopes are that they will take into consideration the time,'' he said in an
interview with a Vermont television station after his return to the United
States. ''I want to see my family. I want to see my parents at least.''

He has been unavailable for comment since being brought to Quantico.

His father, Donald, lives in Rutland, Vt., and suffers from circulatory ailments
and other problems.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              308 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 23, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
'The Least Tolerable'

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Three hundred years ago John Milton thundered against the English censorship of
the time: laws requiring official approval before any manuscript was published.
His view was embraced in our First Amendment. American law, as former Chief
Justice Warren Burger put it, regards prior restraints on publication as ''the
least tolerable infringement'' on freedom of expression.

It is often said that the Supreme Court has never approved a prior restraint on
pure expression, but that is not so. In 1980 the Court upheld an injunction
requiring Frank Snepp, a former C.I.A. officer, to get the C.I.A.'s approval
before speaking or writing on any broad subject that had come before him in the
agency.

The injunction binds Mr. Snepp for the rest of his life. And it has now produced
a graphic example of why prior restraints are so arbitrary, so damaging to
freedom.

In 1985 CBS commissioned a television mini-series on Mr. Snepp's saga, his
Supreme Court case and the issue of censorship. To be sure the agency's position
was fairly represented, Mr. Snepp asked William Colby, the former Director of
Central Intelligence, to act as a consultant. He agreed.

''It will probably begin with my departure from the embassy roof in Saigon,''
Mr. Snepp wrote to a friend when he started working on the script.

At the end in Vietnam Mr. Snepp felt strongly that the United States had treated
its Vietnamese intelligence aides and sources badly, even leaving their names
behind in files. He tried to get the agency to investigate its own performance
but was turned down. He then published a book on what had happened, ''Decent
Interval.'' The Government said he had violated a secrecy agreement by
publishing the book without first clearing the manuscript, though it did not
claim he had disclosed any classified information. The Supreme Court agreed. It
made Mr. Snepp turn over his gross receipts from the book -about $180,000 so far
- to the Government. And it put him under that lifetime injunction.

In November 1985, in compliance with the injunction, Mr. Snepp gave the C.I.A. a
draft treatment of the story before showing it to CBS. Agency censors first told
him that he had to take out all names except his own - including, for example,
the well-known last U.S. Ambassador to South Vietnam, Graham Martin.

The C.I.A. censors thought again when he protested. They then demanded 11
specific deletions from the brief manuscript. He appealed. Finally, 16 months
after he turned the manuscript in, the C.I.A. relented on 10 of its demanded
deletions.

Looking at those 10 items, now set free, we can get an idea of the censor's
mind. Here, for example, is one passage, with a word the C.I.A. wanted to delete
in italics:

''In the customs area, Frank Snepp hands over his diplomatic passport . . .''

Other deletions demanded were in a scene at the U.S. Embassy in Bangkok. The
censors insisted on removing the fact that the building shown was the embassy.
The treatment had Mr. Snepp driving up to the gates and being stopped by Marine
guards. The censors deleted the word ''Marine.''

Milton would surely have recognized the mind of the censor at work in those
deletions. It is hard even to imagine any interest of national security in them.
They could kindly be called pettifoggery. Or might there be a continuing
animosity at Frank Snepp because of his book?

The irony is that Mr. Snepp has never been a general antagonist of the agency.
He saw his story, he once said, as one of a man who, ''though not at all a
turncoat or C.I.A. hater-and-baiter, found himself facing the full force of the
law for what began as an act of conscience.''

This latest go-round with the agency has cost him dearly again. CBS decided last
year that it could not wait while Mr. Snepp tried to clear his manuscript. It
canceled the mini-series.

The Supreme Court, when it decided his case in 1980, acted summarily, without
hearing argument or getting briefs from the lawyers. It imposed on Mr. Snepp a
process that it said would be simple and fair - but that in fact has been
burdensome and unfair. The decision shows what may happen when the Court forgoes
its duty of reflection.

But there is some joy for Frank Snepp. He has lately worked on a script for
Marlon Brando, about drug trafficking and a former C.I.A. agent who avenges his
daughter's death. It is all made up, but Mr. Snepp still had to submit the film
treatment. The agency cleared it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              309 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 23, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam's Newest Bank

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 10, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 108 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, June 22


Vietnam's first commercial bank under Communist rule is scheduled to open next
month, and one of its goals will be to help check inflation, Japan's Kyodo News
Service reported today. It quoted Nguyen Xuan Oanh, an economic adviser to the
new premier, Pham Hung, as saying the bank would open in early July in Ho Chi
Minh City, formerly Saigon. Mr. Oanh said that Vietnam now has only state-run
and foreign trade banks and that the state-run banks have not succeeded in
adjusting the volume of currency issued. By coordinating credit extension, the
new bank will seek to check inflation and will make loans and handle personal
savings accounts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              310 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 24, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Be Firm in the Gulf

BYLINE: By Michael Sterner; Michael Sterner, former Ambassador to the United
Arab Emirates and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, is a consultant on
international affairs.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 707 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


There is confusion and even hysteria surrounding Washington's decision to allow
Kuwait to place part of its tanker fleet under United States protection. Let us
try to sort out some of the key issues.

Our interests. The debate has focused on one interest - maintenance of the oil
shipping lanes in the Persian Gulf - but has neglected a second that is equally
important.

This is to insure the territorial integrity and political independence of the
Gulf's Arab states, which produce 80 percent of the oil that leaves the Gulf and
whose oil reserves are even more important for the future. We cannot afford to
have these countries quarrel under the influence of a power whose purposes are
hostile to the United States, whether that power is the Soviet Union or Iran.

At present, the greatest danger to Western interests is the possibility of an
Iranian victory over Iraq, which would extend Iran's influence throughout the
Gulf and encourage Islamic extremist movements elsewhere in the Middle East.

Vietnam, Lebanon, etc. We need to go easy with historical analogies. The
situation in the Persian Gulf has about as much resemblance to Vietnam as it
does to the 30 Years War.

We are not fighting an army of national liberation nor is anyone proposing to
engage American land forces. Our deterrent consists of naval and air assets - an
area where we have the clearest comparative advantage, especially against Iran.
The risk of an all-out confrontation is low for that reason and the stakes
important enough to accept that risk.

Reflagging. Since September 1986, when Iran started targeting Kuwaiti cargoes,
27 of the 32 ships Iran has attacked in the Gulf have been ships proceeding to
or from Kuwait. This has been a clear attempt to intimidate Kuwait and pressure
it into dropping its support for Iraq. Our decision to allow Kuwait to place 11
of its tankers under our flag is a reasonable response to the Iranian campaign.
It is defensive and is neither escalatory or provocative.

Collective action. Some critics, pointing out correctly that Gulf oil is at
least as important to our allies as it is to us, have called for creation of a
United Nations peacekeeping naval force to protect freedom of navigation in the
Gulf.

The presence of allied warships is a valuable symbol of Western political
solidarity, but we must also be realistic.

Ultimately, only America has the naval and air power to provide an effective
military deterrent, and we cannot allow the credibility of that deterrent to be
enfeebled by the constraints of collective action. We have seen the difficulty
even our own naval command had in devising rules of engagement for its ships.
Can anyone believe that it would be feasible to arrive at a consensus among half
a dozen naval powers about rules of engagement in the Gulf's complex
environment?

United States credibility. Two successive Presidents have declared that the Gulf
is vital to our interests and that we are prepared to use military force if
necessary to protect those interests.

A superpower cannot keep saying these things and then not do anything when put
to the test. Either the statements should not have been made or we must now be
willing to back them up. I am not aware that any of the Congressional critics of
our Gulf policy expressed reservations when Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan made
these policy statements.

Selling our policy. The Administration has not been very adroit about this. It
is hung up between public professions of ''neutrality'' and the obvious fact
that our actions have ''tilted'' toward Iraq. Its proclivity toward anti-Soviet
rhetoric makes it describe the threat in the Gulf as Soviet expansionism, even
though this does not explain why we should be favoring one side in the Iran-Iraq
conflict.

This public-relations dilemma is unfortunate (and ironic, given the reputation
this Administration has for effective communication), but it should not obscure
what needs to be done in the Gulf. The thrust of our policy is to maintain
pressure on Iran in order to dissuade it from continuing to pursue the war. The
task now is to carry out that policy in a way that demonstrates firmness while
keeping diplomatic doors open for any sign of change in Iran's policy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              311 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 24, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 431 words

DATELINE: BURLINGTON, Vt., June 23


A Vietnam War deserter returned home to Vermont today to see his ailing father
hours after the Marine Corps discharged him.

The deserter, Douglas G. Beane, drove to his family's home in West Rutland where
his parents waited on the lawn to greet their son. Dozens of reporters,
photographers and neighbors watched the reunion.

The crowd parted, and Mr. Beane walked up the lawn and hugged his mother. His
father, walking stiffly because of circulatory problems, embraced his son.

Standing in front of his family's home, Mr. Beane said, ''It looks all the same,
the same as my dreams, except it's real now.''

He was discharged earlier today at the Quantico Marine Base outside Washington,
two weeks after flying from Australia and turning himself in.

He was asked if he had advice for other deserters facing charges. ''Come back
and face them,'' he said. ''It is not worth it.''

Mr. Beane, who deserted in 1970, was escorted off the Quantico base at midday.

He was discharged under other-than-honorable conditions after the Marines
decided Monday against a court-martial. He could have faced charges with a total
maximum sentence of 18 years at hard labor, his military lawyer, Maj. David H.
Henderson, said.

Mr. Beane admitted desertion, dealing in the black market and threatening to
kill another marine, said a spokesman at Quantico, where Mr. Beane had been
since returning to this country June 9.

He said his life in Australia, working at various jobs that included forestry
and railroading, was one of constant fear of getting caught. He said his wife
helped him make the decision to return ''and face the music.''

Threatened Marine Angry

The man whose life was threatened by Mr. Beane in Vietnam 18 years ago said he
was angry that the Marine Corps had discharged Mr. Beane instead of
court-martialing him.

''How can he just get a slap on the hand and be told bye-bye?'' the man, Kenneth
Buker, said.

Mr. Buker, who did not want to say where he lives, said he was in a Vietnamese
village in July 1969 when he caught Mr. Beane ''swapping American greenbacks for
military police currency,'' the scrip by which American servicemen were paid in
Vietnam.

Mr. Buker said Mr. Beane threatened his life and he reported the incident to his
commanding officer.

''I thought about him for the last 18 years,'' Mr. Buker said. ''I'm not going
to say I lingered around every day with it. But I want to know how he can be a
citizen, how he can desert in time of war two times? Is there still a threat
against my life with him allowed to walk free in the United States?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Douglas C. Beane (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              312 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 24, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'Go Tell Spartans,' On Vietnam War, To Be Re-released

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 822 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, June 23


''Go Tell the Spartans,'' a 1978 movie about the Vietnam War that was praised by
critics but ignored by audiences, is going to get a second chance.

After a decade of refusing to acknowledge that lost war, America now seems
almost obsessed by it, and Vietnam war movies are big at the box office.
''Rambo'' sold more than $150 million worth of tickets at American theaters in
1985. ''Platoon'' was a commercial blockbuster and the Academy Award-winning
best movie of 1986. Stanley Kubrick's ''Full Metal Jacket,'' which follows a
platoon of Marines from their first day of boot camp to their fate in Vietnam,
will open on Friday. It is to be followed later in the summer by ''Hamburger
Hill,'' the true story of a battle in which a hill was won at a huge price in
lives - and then abandoned.

Film Stars Burt Lancaster

Even so, re-releasing ''Go Tell the Spartans'' is the longest of long shots.
''It would be almost the first time a reissue was successful in the history of
the business,'' said Wendell Mayes, who wrote the screenplay for ''Spartans,''
which stars Burt Lancaster. Set in 1964, when American soldiers were still
advisers and there were 11 years to go before the war ended, ''Spartans'' is as
much about issues and moral ambiguities as it is about battles. Based on
''Incident at Muc Wa,'' a novel by Daniel Ford, the film's title is an ironic
reminder of the 300 Spartan warriors who died at the hands of the Persians at
Thermopylae in 480 B.C.

Except for ''Billy Jack,'' a 1971 film directed by and starring Tom Laughlin, no
one can remember a movie that failed and was later successfully resuscitated.
And there is another complication: 'Go Tell the Spartans'' has been released on
videocassette.

''It's almost impossible to reissue after a picture hits videocassettes,'' said
the president of distribution at Warner Brothers, Barry Reardon. ''I tried it on
'Woodstock' for the 25th anniversary last year with no success at all.'' Warner
Brothers also had no luck when it tried to re-release ''Jeremiah Johnson,''
starring Robert Redford.

'It's Such a Good Picture'

''There won't be a wide audience for the film, but I think we can fill one
theater and keep the film there for several months,'' said Martin B. Cohen. A
producer for 30 years, Mr. Cohen saw a 16-millimeter version of ''Spartans'' at
the house of his friend Ted Post, the director of the movie.

''It's such a good picture it seemed a crying shame that nobody saw it,'' said
Mr. Cohen, who recently purchased the theatrical rights from Dino De Laurentiis.
The rights to the movie had bounced from Joseph Levine to Norman Lear to the
Coca-Cola Company to Mr. De Laurentiis as Avco Embassy Pictures, which released
''Spartans,'' changed ownership again and again.

Mr. Cohen said ''Spartans'' is to open at one theater in Los Angeles around
Labor Day with a benefit for two Vietnam veterans groups. Advertising and
publicity will cost about $100,000. If things go well, a second city will be
added, and then a third. Eventually, Mr. Cohen hopes to take the much more
expensive gamble of opening the film in New York. The movie had the bad luck to
play New York during the city's 1978 newspaper strike, and to be released by
Avco Embassy when the company was being sold.

Mr. Mayes was working at 20th Century-Fox in 1966 when ''Incident at Muc Wa''
was published. He tried to interest Fox but ''they were frightened,'' he said.
For years, Mr. Mayes would get the same response: too dangerous a subject.

Unable to get the book out of his head, he optioned it himself in 1970 and wrote
a screenplay. ''I had absolute faith that the movie would somehow be made,'' he
said, ''because everybody liked the script. Ten or 12 people tried to raise the
money over the years and failed. When it was finally made, not a word was
changed from what I wrote in 1971 except a little additional dialogue to build
up Burt Lancaster's role. He played a professional soldier doing the best he
could in a situation he really did not understand.''

Mr. Mayes has suggested an advertising campaign based on a line that he
suggested to Avco a decade ago: ''You know how it ended. This is how it began.''
Avco chose to sell ''Spartans'' as a B war movie.

The original budget for ''Spartans'' was $1.5 million, although the money ran
out before the film was completed. Mr. Lancaster agreed to take much less than
his usual salary and then turned around and put up $150,000 to help finance the
movie.

''I thought it was a marvelous movie,'' the actor said. ''You hope it makes some
money, but that's always a mysterious thing. It was not the greatest film ever
made. A good little movie, but with an extra value because of what it told you
in a microcosmic nutshell about Vietnam. Will people accept that as being the
truth today? Are they really interested? Do people really care? Life goes on.
You die and you're forgotten. For me it's gone and over.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo from scene in ''Go Tell the Spartans''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              313 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 25, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: MARINE CORPS;
General Kelley's Farewell

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1204 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 24


When the senior commander of one of the military services steps aside, the usual
questions are: What mark did he leave? How will the historians recall his
tenure?

In the case of Gen. P. X. Kelley, who retires next week after four years as
Commandant of the Marine Corps, the questions must be inverted. For here is a
case in which history and the Corps have left a deep mark on the man.

According to some of his peers, General Kelley does not so much personify the
Marine Corps as he personalizes it, taking to heart what happens in the Corps
and making himself the incarnation of the organization he leads.

For such a leader, the past four years have been trying, for the Corps has been
shaken by events for which neither the organization nor the general was fully
prepared: the terrorist truck bombing of a barracks in Beirut that killed 241
military personnel, mostly marines; the conduct of a Marine lieutenant colonel,
Oliver North, at the White House, and the espionage scandal involving Marine
guards at diplomatic posts in the Soviet Union.

An 'Identity Crisis'

Those events have left the Corps suffering from an ''identity crisis,'' said
James F. Webb Jr., the new Navy Secretary. The paradox is that it comes at the
end of a period in which the Marine Corps was actually recovering from its worst
identity crisis, that which followed the Vietnam War. General Kelly, who would
help solve some of the worst problems, including second-rate fighting men and a
lack of modern equipment, came to lead the Corps at an ideal moment for a
renaissance. The renaissance occurred, but it was obscured by the shadow of
misfortune.

General Kelley objects to the implication that the elite Marine battalion that
guards embassy gates around the world, and with it the Corps as a whole, has
been impugned by the scandal surrounding guards in the Soviet Union.

One guard, Sgt. Clayton J. Lonetree, is charged with espionage. Another, Cpl.
Arnold Bracey, was charged as an accomplice, but those charges were dropped for
lack of evidence. A third has been charged with lying to investigators in the
case, a fourth with unauthorized social contacts with Soviet women. A fifth
marine, suspected of espionage years earlier in Leningrad, was never charged
because the military code's statute of limitations had run out.

But General Kelley sees no pattern here to indicate a general failing of the
Corps.

He frequently remarks that of 56 cases of espionage documented in the past 10
years or so - cases involving people who worked for the Central Intelligence
Agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Navy, the National Security
Agency - the individual's misdeeds were never extended to incriminate the
organization.

Now, though, General Kelley is annoyed that the Marine guard scandal has been
used by some to lampoon the Corps spit-and-polish image, especially when
editorial cartoonists parodied the Iwo Jima statue or the Marine hymn as images
to assault the Corps' integrity.

''It is part of the uniqueness of this office,'' the General mused in an
interview, ''because we are what we are, a small organization, that I sense
almost every incident like this and take it personally.''

He views the Corps as ''a small family'' and feels its wounds personally. ''It
is no different,'' he said, ''when I come into the office on a Monday morning
and find that a couple of marines have been killed on a motorcycle.''

If the spy scandal or Colonel North's involvement in the Iran-contra affair
touched him in this manner, they pale in comparison to the 1983 bombing of the
barracks at the Beirut airport, where a battalion of marines was installed as
part of a multinational force trying to keep the peace there. General Kelley
remembers the episode as ''the worst emotional trauma of my life.''

In the aftermath of the bombing, General Kelley was the symbol of the Corps. He
hastened to the scene, comforted the wounded, mourned the dead, all in the style
that has closely identified him with the marine in the trench, an emotional link
to the fighting man.

''When you see 144 caskets on an airplane,'' he said, remembering his grief at
the time, ''it will have an impact on you for the rest of your life.''

But as blame for the errors that led to the disaster was assessed, some critics
said he had ducked responsibility. He might have defused that accusation by
accepting blame on principle. But he did not.

Under questioning before Congress, General Kelley pointed out that, as far as
military operations were concerned, the chain of command bypassed him, flowing
from the local commanders to the European commander in chief, Gen. Bernard
Rogers, who took responsibility at the hearing for what happened.

General Kelley was not mentioned by a Pentagon commission that investigated the
bombings. It found that the failures occurred in the operational chain of
command, from which he was excluded.

But General Kelley, as Commandant, was responsible for the training of the
marines and, as a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, for advising the
President on their assignment to Beirut.

'Not Smart Enough'

The general looks back on the episode as one in which the Marine Corps and the
military at large were ''not smart enough'' to recognize the deterioration of
the political environment in Lebanon and the extent to which terrorist actions
directly threatened a military force.

But he does not accept that the marines were the wrong force to be sent into
Lebanon, nor that it is unwise to contemplate military actions for political
ends.

In the interview last week, however, he seemed unenthusiastic about the American
military presence in the Persian Gulf, where naval vessels are about to begin
escorting Kuwaiti oil tankers flying the American flag. ''I don't think the U.S.
should assume those kinds of responsibilities in a unilateral sense,'' he said.
''The Middle East is a dangerous area. It would serve everybody's best interest
if you could get a multinational force.''

General Kelley remembers a time when American forces were barely welcomed in the
region, although Navy warships have been visiting the Gulf for 40 years. He
played a central role in developing what came to be called, in the Carter
Administration, the Rapid Deployment Force: an assembly of military units based
outside the region but ready to intervene there in an emergency.

''We started out with a legal pad, a pencil and a Navy chief petty officer,'' he
said.The force, now called the Central Command, is based in Florida but takes
responsibility for the Gulf region.

''The Navy chief petty officer was the most helpful of the three,'' General
Kelley remembered. ''He got me a desk and a telephone.''

General Kelley became the first commander of the Rapid Deployment Force. It was
an ideal role for a marine; the current commander in chief of the Central
Command is also a Marine general. The reason is that the Marines, more than any
other military service, are meant to operate on short notice, under fire, in
places devoid of support facilities. To make, in military terms, the best out of
a bad situation.

And, in some sense, that is what General Kelley faced as Commandant: a trial
befitting a marine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of General Kelly and Beruit bombings (UPI; NYT/Ken Heinen)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              314 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

COMEDY, TRAGEDY AND NOODLES: A GUIDE TO SUMMER MOVIES

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1405 words


THE moviegoer becomes more suggestible when the weather gets warm. The defenses
crumble. The same individual who might deliberate long and hard about venturing
out into a blizzard for a blockbuster becomes willing to sit through Something,
Anything, even Anything III on a hot summer night. Something in the air makes
the theatrical film experience just that much more lulling. So it would be
fitting - only fair, really - if the film industry took special care not to
bruise the audience's tender feelings at this time of year.

Needless to say, that is never the case. New films arrive in droves each June,
and no strictures regarding taste, talent or truth in advertising exist to
protect the viewer from disaster. And disaster it may be - who can say for sure
that stumbling accidentally upon ''Ernest Goes to Camp'' will not cause
permanent damage? With that in mind, here is at least one person's attempt to
differentiate what's worthwhile from what's not.

Top Priority ''The Untouchables.'' Hands-down the most entertaining film of the
summer, and if you're not a longtime Brian De Palma fan, all the better. Mr. De
Palma's first attempt at four-square, deliberately conventional film making may
have reined in his more flamboyant side, but it has also produced his best work.
Gloriously stylish, ''The Untouchables'' has the satisfying moral dynamics of a
vintage western. And David Mamet's screenplay creates heroes an audience can
care about, even as it violates the contemporary rule that good guys always
escape unscathed. Great looking, beautifully acted, and a true crowd-pleaser in
the grand tradition.

''Full Metal Jacket.'' If ''Platoon'' conveyed the Vietnam experience in terms
that were utterly immediate, Stanley Kubrick's is a more abstract and no less
fearsome vision. Darkly funny and then brutalizing, frighteningly beautiful and
at times startlingly obscene, it divides into separate sections as sharply as
Mr. Kubrick's ''2001'' did, and culminates in an image of war's dehumanizing
effects that is as haunting as anything he has created. The title refers to the
casing of a bullet; this deeply disturbing film describes the process by which a
fighting man can himself be shaped into a hard, hollow shell. (Review on page
C3.)

Highly Recommended

''Roxanne.'' This big-hearted, picturesque romantic comedy, with its charming
small-town setting in the Pacific Northwest, is the light version of ''Cyrano de
Bergerac,'' the version in which little is at stake, no one is hurt and Cyrano
gets the girl. But it does have a heavyweight presence in the form of Steve
Martin, who wrote the screenplay and gives a sweetly disarming performance in
the leading role. As ''All of Me'' showed and this film seconds, Mr. Martin has
evolved into an extraordinarily nimble and graceful comic actor. Daryl Hannah
makes a glamorous heroine, and seems much more animated than she has before. But
in the role of a brilliant astronomer, she will be credible chiefly to those who
believe in the tooth fairy.

''River's Edge.'' This look at numb, jaded, drug-taking adolescents, involved in
a murder they can barely comprehend, has a brilliant and troubling premise. But
its potential is only partially realized in a film that is conspicuously uneven
much of the time. Some of the performances are simple and believable
(particularly those of Daniel Roebuck as the killer and Keanu Reeves as the
story's closest thing to a hero); others, especially the wildly histrionic one
from Crispin Glover, as the foremost accessory to the crime, take place on an
entirely different plane. Worth seeing for its tough, provocative stance and its
rich possibilities, however flawed it is in execution.

''Tampopo.'' This wonderfully offbeat Japanese comedy presents food preparation
as an exalted art, a sensual pleasure and a philosophical exercise. A central
plot about the niceties of noodle-making produces a great many surprising and
uproarious offshoots, including blackout skits about restaurant manners and
other related issues. Luckily, there are at least three Japanese restaurants
within a two-block radius of the Cinema Studio 2, where this is playing.

''My Life as a Dog.'' A young Swedish boy is the focus of this gentle comedy,
reminiscent of Francois Truffaut's films about children but shaped along
distinctly Scandinavian lines. Sex and death are the film's principal
preoccupations, but it manages an improbably buoyant, lighthearted comic style.

Maybe

''Spaceballs.'' Mel Brooks's ''Star Wars'' takeoff is a skit masquerading as a
feature; it has funny moments but long dry spells as well. Still, it's
consistently good-natured, and the humor is less sophomoric and strained than
some of Mr. Brooks's most recent efforts have been.

''Rosa Luxemburg.'' Barbara Sukowa's fine performance in the title role makes
this well worth seeing. But Margarethe von Trotta's film presents a narrow and
at times sentimental view of its heroine.

''Personal Services.'' A very attention-getting performance from Julie Walters
is the main attraction, but this British comedy about a famous madam has an
attitude toward sex that is distractingly coy. The film, which finds a lot of
humor in elderly gentlemen who enjoy spankings, never quite comes to terms with
its heroine's line of work.

''Gardens of Stone.'' Solemn and unfocused, Francis Coppola's military drama has
the feeling of a minuscule mini-series; a number of characters are gathered in
an important setting (as part of the honor guard at Arlington National
Cemetery), and lead separate lives that never really intertwine. But James Caan,
Anjelica Huston and James Earl Jones are well worth watching.

''The Secret of My Success.'' A mindless but well-crafted hit, with a thoroughly
likable performance from Michael J. Fox and a high gloss that befits its yuppie
hero.

Comedy Sleepers

''Ishtar.'' Beneath that mountain of bad publicity and squandered funds rests a
sly and amusing summer comedy with some moments of real inspiration. Really. And
a musical score this awful deserves to be heard.

''Hollywood Shuffle.'' Robert Townsend's film has been around long enough and
done enough business to qualify as a bona fide hit. But its sleeper quality has
more to do with style than success. Raffish, irreverent, intentionally cheap,
this look at black actors in white Hollywood has a rude, high-spirited humor
that's irresistible.

Conversation Piece

''The Witches of Eastwick.'' Why, you may ask, did they need John Updike's book
if they weren't going to use it? Hasn't Jack Nicholson done most of this before,
in ''The Shining''? Is there really a crying need for so many special effects
involving vomiting? The best to be said is that there's never a dull moment; the
worst is that there's rarely a logical one.

''Prick Up Your Ears.'' Stephen Frears's film about Joe Orton is an occasion to
discuss Mr. Orton's playwriting career, and to wonder why it figures so
peripherally in this biography. But Gary Oldman's cool, impenetrable performance
as Orton is striking, and Vanessa Redgrave, sublimely bitchy as his theatrical
agent, steals the show.

For Children

''Benji the Hunted.'' The screen's reigning animal act this time has a
supporting cast sizable enough to fill a small zoo. And what a cast: a timber
wolf, a Kodiak bear, an eagle, the cuddliest of mountain lion cubs and the gutsy
frog who serves as the mountain lions' plaything. Children will marvel; parents
will keep busy wondering how Benji was persuaded to do even half of the things
he manages here.

Pre-Fab

''Beverly Hills Cop II.'' A completely cynical, though not unfunny, carbon copy
of the earlier film, with Eddie Murphy treading water. The additional flourish
of rock video-style direction in several scenes, by Tony (''Top Gun'') Scott, is
not an improvement.

''Predator.'' Arnold Schwarzenegger can fight mysterious high-tech lizard men in
his sleep by now. You could probably watch him that way.

Beware

''Harry and the Hendersons,'' with its big-eyed Bigfoot who can hardly wait to
follow an all-American family home, nestle in their Barcalounger and watch game
shows on television.

''Million Dollar Mystery,'' the lottery film that attempts to capitalize on pure
greed.

''The Believers,'' with its plot about the voodoo sacrifices of small boys.

''Ernest Goes to Camp.'' If only Ernest would just go somewhere.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of scenes from different movies

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              315 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Film: Kubrick's 'Full Metal Jacket,' on Vietnam

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1287 words


MORE than any other major American film maker, Stanley Kubrick keeps to his own
ways, paying little attention to the fashions of the moment, creating fantastic
visions that, in one way and another, are dislocated extensions of the world we
know but would prefer not to recognize.

The best Kubrick films - ''Lolita,'' ''Dr. Strangelove,'' ''2001,'' ''A
Clockwork Orange'' and ''Barry Lyndon'' - are always somewhat off-putting when
first seen. They're never what one has expected. No Kubrick film ever
immediately evokes the one that preceded it. Yet it's so distinctive that it
can't be confused with the work of any other director.

Though the general public couldn't care less, this can be infuriating to anyone
who wants to be able to read a film maker's accumulated body of work as if it
were a road map leading to some predetermined destination. As movie follows
movie, the Kubrick terrain never becomes familiar. You drive at your own risk,
confident only that the director has been there before you.

''Full Metal Jacket,'' Mr. Kubrick's harrowing, beautiful and characteristically
eccentric new film about Vietnam, is going to puzzle, anger and (I hope)
fascinate audiences as much as any film he has made to date. The movie, opening
today at the National and other theaters, will inevitably be compared with
Oliver Stone's ''Platoon,'' but its narrative is far less neat and cohesive -
and far more antagonistic - than Mr. Stone's film.

Like ''The Short Timers,'' Gustav Hasford's spare, manic novel on which it is
based, the Kubrick film seems so utterly reasonable that one doesn't initially
recognize the lunacies recorded so matter-of-factly. The film is a series of
exploding boomerangs. Just when you think you can relax in safety, some crazed
image or line or event will swing around to lodge in the brain and scramble the
emotions.

''Full Metal Jacket'' is closer in spirit to Francis Coppola's ''Apocalypse
Now,'' even if it has none of the mystical romanticism of the Coppola film in
either its text or physical production. However, lurking just offscreen, there's
always the presence of Mr. Kubrick, a benign, ever mysterious Kurtz, who has
come to know that the only thing worse than disorder in the universe is not to
recognize it - which is, after all, the first step toward understanding and,
possibly, accommodation.

Disorder is virtually the order of ''Full Metal Jacket,'' whose pivotal
character, Private Joker (Matthew Modine), the narrator of the novel, wears a
peace symbol on his battle fatigues and, on his helmet, the slogan ''Born to
Kill.'' Disorder is also there in the structure of the film itself.

''Full Metal Jacket'' is divided into two parts, which at first seem so
different in tone, look and method that they could have been made by two
different directors working with two different cameramen from two different
screenplays. Only the actors are the same. Part of the way in which the movie
works, and involves the audience, is in its demand that the audience make the
sudden leap to the seemingly (but far from) conventional battle scenes in
Vietnam, which conclude the film, from its flashily brilliant first half, set in
the Marine Corps boot camp at Parris Island, S.C.

Though Mr. Modine's Private Joker, a humanist in the process of being
permanently bent by the war, provides the film with its center, the poetically
foul-mouthed Gunnery Sergeant Hartman (Lee Ermey) is the film's effective heart,
giving terrifying life to ''Full Metal Jacket'' long after he has left the scene
and the film has moved on to Vietnam.

Sergeant Hartman is a Marine ''lifer,'' a machine whose only purpose is to turn
the soft, half-formed young men who arrive at Parris Island into killers without
conscience. There's no nonsense that he's doing it for the men's own good.
Everything is made subordinate to ''the corps,'' to which end the recruits are
humiliated, beaten, exhausted, tricked, lied to, subjected to racial slurs and
drilled, constantly drilled, physically and psychologically.

They recite by rote creeds, prayers and obscene couplets intended to detach them
from all values from the past. On Christmas they sing ''Happy birthday, dear
Jesus,'' and laugh at their own impertinence. They sleep with their rifles, to
which they've been ordered to give girls' names. The training is a kind of
ecstatic, longed-for washing of brain and body, defined by Mr. Kubrick in a
succession of vignettes so vulgar and so outrageous that one watches in hilarity
that, boomerang-like, suddenly returns as shock and sorrow.

The effect of this part of the film, photographed and played with an unnatural
cleanliness that reflects the nature of the training iself, is so devastating
that one tends to resist the abrupt cut to Vietnam, where order is disorder and
truth is simply a matter of language. At one point Private Joker, who has become
a Marine combat correspondent, respectfully notes that henceforth ''search and
destroy'' missions are to be described as ''sweep and clear.'' The landscape is
lunar. Even the sky is a different color.

Though the first half seems complete in itself, the point of ''Full Metal
Jacket'' is made only through the combat mission that ends the film in the ruins
of the city of Hue, which, as seen by Mr. Kubrick, is both a specific place and
the seat of judgment for all that's gone before. Sergeant Hartman's ghost looks
on.

The performances are splendid. Mr. Modine (''Birdy,'' ''Mrs. Soffel,''
''Streamers'') must now be one of the best, most adaptable young film actors of
his generation. The film's stunning surprise is Mr. Ermey, a leathery, ageless,
former Marine sergeant in real life. He's so good - so obsessed - that you might
think he wrote his own lines, except that much of his dialogue comes directly
from Mr. Hasford's book, adapted by the novelist with Mr. Kubrick and Michael
Herr (''Dispatches''). Note with admiration Vincent D'Onofrio, who plays a
hopelessly overweight Parris Island recruit who turns himself into Sergeant
Hartman's most dedicated student.

''Full Metal Jacket'' is not without its failed inspirations. A series of
television ''interviews'' with battle-worn marines suggests a different,
simpler, more obvious kind of movie. Some jokes intended to appall are just
jokes: ''How do you manage to shoot women and children?'' ''Easy. You don't lead
them so far.'' It sounds as if it's been said many times before, but that could
also be the point.

Not for Mr. Kubrick is location shooting in the Philippines or Thailand. Since
the early 1960's, he has lived and worked in England, where he created his own,
very particular Vietnam locations for ''Full Metal Jacket.'' They're
otherworldly. They don't match expectations, any more than the narrative does.
They are, however, utterly true to a film of immense and very rare imagination.

WAR IS HELL

FULL METAL JACKET, produced and directed by Stanley Kubrick; screenplay by Mr.
Kubrick, Michael Herr and Gustav Hasford, based on the novel ''The Short
Timers,'' by Mr. Hasford; edited by Martin Hunter; director of photography,
Douglas Milsome; music by Abigail Mead; production designer, Anton Furst;
released by Warner Bros. At National, Broadway and 44th Street; Manhattan Twin,
59th Street east of Third Avenue; Eighth Street Playhouse, west of Eighth
Street; Cinema Studio, Broadway at 66th Street; 86th Street East, between Second
and Third Avenues. Running time: 118 minutes. This film is rated R.
Private Joker/Matthew Modine
Animal Mother/Adam Baldwin
Private Pyle/Vincent D'Onofrio
Gunnery Sergeant Hartman/Lee Ermey
Eightball/Dorian Harewood
Cowboy/Arliss Howard
Rafterman/Kevyn Major Howard
Lieutenant Touchdown/Ed O'Ross

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Matthew Modine

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              316 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 26, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At the Movies;
Putting on Weight

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1183 words


For a film executive like Paul Heller, the proper word seems to be eclectic.
After all, his first venture as a producer was ''David and Lisa'' (1963), a
sensitive tale about two emotionally disturbed teen-agers. But he has also been
involved with the kung fu epic ''Enter the Dragon'' (1973), starring the
immortal Bruce Lee, and with such tourist attractions as ''The New York
Experience'' and ''South Street Venture.''

So it really should not come as too much of a surprise that even while he is
currently represented in theaters by the quirky and well-received British comedy
''Withnail and I,'' the independent producer's next two projects will be based
on the works of Herman Melville and George Orwell.

Right after the new year, Mr. Heller expects the cameras to be turning - under
John Huston's direction - on Melville's story ''Benito Cereno,'' about an
encounter in the early 1800's in a deserted island cove between an American
merchant vessel and a Spanish slaver that has, in fact, been seized by the
slaves. Mr. Heller said he had ''moral commitments'' from Robert Duvall and Raul
Julia to come aboard as the captains.

And when spring rolls around, he hopes that filming, under the direction of Mike
Newell (''Dance With a Stranger''), will be in progress - perhaps in Thailand -
on Orwell's novel ''Burmese Days,'' a tragic love story set among the British
residents of a hill station in Burma, where elaborate intrigues are seething
within the native population.

''With any sort of colonial mentality, the people out in the field have no
concept of what's really happening in the country,'' Mr. Heller said. ''For me,
at least, the parallels are with us and Vietnam and with us and Central
America.''

As for ''Withnail and I,'' Mr. Heller said, his involvement represents an act of
friendship toward its writer-director, Bruce Robinson, whom he has known for a
dozen years. Mr. Heller said that after the release of ''The Killing Fields,''
Mr. Robinson was voicing some mild criticisms from his vantage point as its
writer. Mr. Heller recalled: ''I said, 'Well, the only way you're going to solve
that is to direct yourself.' And he said, 'Who'd give me a job as a director?' I
said, 'If you want to do it, I will work on it.' He said, 'The thing I really
want to do is ''Withnail.'' ' And I said, 'Let's give it a shot.' ''

Mr. Heller proceeded to go out and put together the $2.4 million financing of
what has turned out to be a success. ''I'm just thrilled,'' Mr. Heller said.
''It's one of these sorts of acts of faith. I guess I knew Bruce so well that I
knew he could do it.''

Mission: Nonfiction

''The Killing Fields'' - a story of war, genocide and abiding friendship rooted
in an account of upheaval in Cambodia by the Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist
Sydney Schanberg -has also had its impact on the life of Catherine Wyler.

And its background helps explain why Ms. Wyler is now a senior vice president of
production at Columbia Pictures with a clearly defined mission - ''to do this
very specific job of developing feature films based on nonfiction,'' she said.

The net result of all this is that plans are afoot for such movies as a United
States-Soviet co-production about the Chernobyl nuclear disaster; for a story
about a Vietnam veteran trying to reintegrate himself into society after living
for years in the American woods, and for films about a circus aerialist of the
1920's, and a World War II bomber crew setting out on its final mission.

These days, Columbia Pictures is headed by David Puttnam, who produced not only
''The Killing Fields,'' but also ''Chariots of Fire,'' the 1981 film that won an
Academy Award for best picture and was based on a true story of athletic rivalry
in the 1920's.

''I think it's something he's particularly interested in,'' Ms. Wyler said of
Mr. Puttnam. ''I think he believes nonfiction is a very strong source of movie
materials.''

Ms. Wyler is the daughter of the eminent director William Wyler, whose
documentary ''Memphis Belle'' will be the inspiration for the film about the
bomber crew. She and Mr. Puttnam met three years ago when she was visiting the
Sundance Institute in Utah in her capacity as director of cultural and
children's programming for the Public Broadcasting Service (''everything from
'American Playhouse' to 'Sesame Street,' '' she said). Two years later, after he
took over at Columbia Pictures, he invited her to join him to take on what Ms.
Wyler says is a unique job in Hollywood.

And so Ms. Wyler, who has been living for the last decade in Washington, where
she had also worked for the National Endowment for the Arts, found herself
coming back to the community - and the home (though not the room, she said) -
where she grew up as the daughter of the director of such memorable films as
''Dodsworth,'' ''Jezebel,'' ''Wuthering Heights,'' ''The Little Foxes,'' ''Mrs.
Miniver'' and ''The Best Years of Our Lives.''

''It's much more crowded,'' was Ms. Wyler's reaction to the new Hollywood. She
has memorialized her father with her sole venture into film making - as
executive producer of ''Directed by William Wyler,'' an acclaimed documentary
shown last year at the New York Film Festival and scheduled for its television
premiere at 9 P.M. July 13 as part of the ''American Masters'' series on Channel
13.

As for the Chernobyl project, Ms. Wyler said, its genesis was eased because Mr.
Puttnam and Elem Klimov, the head of the Soviet film makers' union, are old
friends. The story treatment, she said, is now being written by a Russian
writer, and Stanley Kramer is to be the producer.

So far, Ms. Wyler said, ideas for films based on nonfiction have originated both
inside the studio and out. But as she seeks more projects in her unusual post,
she said, ''I also hope that the fact that this job description is so unique it
will be a beacon for people.''

Glory of the Stars

From the seas to the heavens. That's the route traversed by Daryl Hannah between
''Splash,'' her first big hit, and ''Roxanne,'' her current vehicle.

In the former, the athletic Ms. Hannah portrayed a mermaid. In the latter, an
updated ''Cyrano de Bergerac,'' Ms. Hannah portrays an astronomer whose vision
encompasses not only the glory of new comets, but also the inner beauty of the
nosey hero played by Steve Martin.

''She was an intelligent woman,'' Ms. Hannah said as she assessed the allure of
portraying Roxanne. ''I really liked the story. And I liked the idea of working
with Steve. Those three things combined made me want to do it.''

As for the connection between life and art, Ms. Hannah said: ''I'm definitely
interested in astronomy. I'm not a scientist by any term. But I do like to go to
the planetarium a lot.''

Since ''Roxanne,'' Ms. Hannah has gone on to play the role of an interior
decorator in Oliver (''Platoon'') Stone's ''Wall Street.''

And later this summer, by appearing as a tragicomic Midwestern hairstylist in a
play somewhere in New England, she hopes to address a very down-to-earth
problem. ''I have terrible stage fright,'' Ms. Hannah said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Catherine Wyler

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              317 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 27, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

The 'Toughness' Candidate in 1988

BYLINE: By GEORGE MCGOVERN; George McGovern, was the Democratic Party's
Presidential candidate in 1972.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 855 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


As we approach another Presidential election, the political commentators are
again telling us what qualities the people are looking for in a candidate. High
on the list is ''toughness.'' Recently I heard a guest commentator on the Voice
of America explaining that if the Democrats are to recover the White House they
must select a ''tough'' candidate like Harry S. Truman, John F Kennedy or Lyndon
B. Johnson - all winners - and not a ''preacher'' like Adlai E. Stevenson,
Hubert H. Humphrey, George McGovern or Walter F. Mondale - all losers. He said
Jimmy Carter was a special case - a ''preacher'' who won, but only because the
country wanted an antidote to Watergate.

When I hear such certain analyses about American politics, I recall H. L.
Mencken's response to a similar observation, ''There is something in what you
have to say, but not much.'' ''Toughness'' is obviously a desirable quality in a
contender, but that depends on how you define it. ''Toughness'' is one of those
all-encompassing words like ''realistic'' that depends on the eye of the
beholder.

I will always be a realist if you let me define ''reality,'' just as I will
always be an idealist of you let me define what's ''ideal.'' And so it goes with
''toughness'' or ''preacher.'' I'll accept either if I'm allowed to define them.

By my lights, our half-dozen greatest Presidents were Washington, Jefferson,
Jackson, Lincoln, Wilson and Franklin D. Roosevelt. And by my definitions they
were all ''tough'' and all great ''preachers.'' But can ''toughness'' and
''preacher'' be lodged in one man? Certainly.

The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was fond of the biblical text ''Be ye
therefore wise as serpents and harmless as doves,'' which to him was an
injunction to be ''tough-minded and tender-hearted.'' That is my perspective on
Presidential toughness - the capacity to make judgments with a ''tough'' mind
and a compassionate heart guided by a sense of moral purpose.

Toughness is often equated with the hawk side of the doves vs. hawks debate. But
it has generally seemed to me that the so-called hawks were the more soft-minded
people while the doves were generally of the more tough-minded, realistic breed.

I think the people who led us into Vietnam, where this hawks vs. doves business
all begin, did not make tough-minded judgments about the realities and
historical circumstances that confronted us in Southeast Asia. They gave us more
preachments than hard-headed analysis.

To be more current, I think the nation has been led for the past six and a half
years by an amiable man whose judgments are frequently soft-minded. Sometimes,
he seems to have reversed the biblical admonition as interpreted by Dr. King so
that it becomes ''Be ye therefore soft-minded and tough-hearted.'' I prefer the
King formula. I don't know why Adlai Stevenson lost twice to Dwight D.
Eisenhower or why Hubert Humphrey and I each lost to Richard M. Nixon and Walter
Mondale to Ronald Reagan. Nor can I recall any of the other contenders for the
nomination in those elections who would have done much better.

The late Senator Henry M. Jackson, who generously came to South Dakota to
campaign for me in my last Senate race shortly before he died, is frequently
cited as the kind of ''tough'' Presidential candidate the Democrats need to win.
But my guess is that he would have fared no better in a national race than the
rest of us did.

The toughness candidate for my party in 1988 will be the one who most clearly
understands that we are on a dangerously soft-minded course with our present
national policies and priorities. There is little toughness in a leader who
looks at the nuclear arms race in the 1980's and concludes that what America
needs is a major buildup of nuclear weapons and the expenditure of $1.5 trillion
for ''defense.''

There is no mental toughness in a leadership that permits America to double its
national debt and move from the world's leading creditor to its leading debtor
in six years. There is no toughness worthy of the name in a leader who looks at
Central America's desperate need for doctors, teachers and agricultural experts
and instead sends arms to discredited mercenaries.

There is no toughness in a leader who claims to be the enemy of terrorism and
then secretly sells arms to Iran.

There is neither tough-mindedness nor tender heartedness in a President who
calls for cuts in the school lunch program while pressing for the ''Star Wars''
system.

A Presidential contender with a tough mind and a tender heart will be committed
to a reversal of the arms race, an improvement in our relations with the other
superpower, a termination of military operations in Central America and a much
greater effort to reduce the Federal deficit and improve the quality of life in
our society.

To be tough today is to recognize that while America will always need an
adequate military defense, most of the dangers and opportunities that confront
us are economic, political, diplomatic and moral. A larger arms race with a
larger Federal deficit will further weaken our capacity to meet the central
challenges of our time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              318 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NORTHEAST JOURNAL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 34, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 909 words



Fooling Falcons On Boston Ledge

THIS WEEK a team of ornithologists climbed out on a 19th-floor ledge of the
Federal Courthouse in downtown Boston, scooped up the prairie falcon chick
placed there a week earlier and delicately replaced it with two peregrine falcon
chicks that had been rushed in from Idaho by plane.

This completed an elaborate ruse that the ornithologists have been playing on
the two peregrines that had made a nest in an eave of the McCormack Courthouse
in March. No peregrine falcons had lived in Boston since 1955, when pesticides
drove them away.

After the falcons on the courthouse accidentally knocked their first clutch of
eggs off the side of the building, ornithologists decided to intervene. The
birds laid four more eggs in May. The ornithologists exchanged them for chicken
eggs and incubated the falcon eggs at a hatchery in Idaho.

A week later they substituted a prairie falcon chick for the chicken eggs.
Prairie falcons are far more plentiful than peregrines, said Bradford G.
Blodget, the Massachusetts state ornithologist. He said that the nesting couple
had been given the prairie chick as an experiment to make sure that the falcons
would not kill offspring. The birds' nesting site was also moved from a
17th-floor ledge to the less precarious rooftop, two floors up.

On Wednesday the birds were reunited with their own kind. The changeling falcons
are not the birds' biological offspring, but the adults have accepted the chicks
as their own, according to Dwight Galler, a spokesman for the State Fish and
Wildlife Department. Their own chicks, still too young to live on an unprotected
rooftop, will be raised in Idaho, Mr. Galler said. ''The birds don't know the
difference between chicken eggs and falcon eggs or cliffs and buildings,'' said
Mr. Blodget.

He said cities could offer good homes for peregrine falcons because cities do
not have falcons' natural predators but do abound with small prey. He added
that, of the 50 pairs of peregrine falcons nesting in eastern North America, one
pair makes its home on the Verrazano Bridge in New York City.

Lone Star Flies In Southampton

''IT'S a victory for the American people, it's a victory for freedom of speech,
and yes, it's a victory for Texas,'' said Ronald Campsey, owner of the New Moon
Cafe in East Quogue, L.I., where the Town of Southampton has dropped its
objection to the cafe's display of a Texas flag.

The town had charged that the 5 by 8-foot flag was a form of advertising, and
therefore an illegal second sign on the property.

''If the flag had said, ''Food,'' or ''Open'' on it, or even if it was a flag
from another country, I could understand,'' said Mr. Campsey, a native of
Devine, Tex. ''But it wasn't a sign -it was the flag of my state.''

Harriet Tuthill, Southampton's sign inspector, had warned Mr. Campsey about the
flag when he put it up in 1985. But Mr. Campsey, a Vietnam veteran, said the
flag was ''in honor of some of my buddies who died in Vietnam.''

A solution appeared to be within reach when the town decided that it would
permit the Texas flag to be flown if Mr. Campsey flew the American flag
alongside. He complied, he said, ''and I didn't hear anymore about it.''

But the American flag was stolen, and when a replacement was also stolen, Mr.
Campsey decided he wasn't going to pay $65 for another American flag.

''We Texans are pretty proud people, and we're part of this republic too,'' Mr.
Campsey said. When the town issued a criminal summons for continuing to fly the
Texas flag, he decided to resist.

On June 19, however, Fred Thiele, the Southampton Town Attorney, dropped the
case. ''I didn't feel it rose to the level that would be an offense,'' he said.

Ms. Tuthill, the sign inspector, was not necessarily wrong in pursuing the case,
Mr. Thiele added. ''She made a judgment call. She looked at the flag as a sign
inspector. I looked at as an attorney.''

Island Home Found for Deer

THE deer that was too fond of human beings for its own good has been resettled
on an island in Lake Champlain. ''We've moved the deer,'' said Stephen Wright,
the state's fish and wildlife commissioner. ''She's in her new home.''

This spring, a jogger complained to Vermont wildlife officials that the deer ran
at her on the back roads of Shoreham, Vt. The deer, Bonkers, had been reared in
illegal captivity and was not afraid of humans.

But residents of Shoreham and Cornwall demanded that Bonkers be left alone,
arguing that they and their children enjoyed her visits and she was harmless.

After first promising that the deer would not be relocated last month, Mr.
Wright reversed his decision and ordered Bonkers taken to Santa's Land, a zoo in
Putney where children could pet her and she would share a 5,000-square-foot
enclosure with another deer. The relocation, early on Memorial Day, infuriated
the community, resulting in a public hearing June 1 at which Mr. Wright was
severely criticized.

Mr. Wright then examined Savage Island, a 200-acre private tract near
Burlington, and decided there was enough food and winter cover for Bonkers.

''There's some red pine cover on the north end of the island and adequate
food,'' he said. Friends of Bonkers, which had petitioned to have her released
from the zoo, praised the commissioner.

''We are definitely satisfied with the choice of the island,'' said Rose Gale, a
spokesman for the group. ''This is the best possible alternative.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of two peregrine falcon chicks (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              319 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OFFICERS SHAPED BY VIETMAN TAKING CONTROL OF THE ARMY

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 860 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WHAT the United States Army is going through is not just a change of command: It
is a changing of the entire guard.

In the most sweeping reshuffling of four-star generals since World War II,
officers who were tempered in the fires of Vietnam are taking control of the
Army. The legacy of that war, for most officers throughout the service, was a
profound distrust of the durability of the support they would get from
politicians, the press and the public in the event of another war.

''You have to understand the thinking of those of us who were in Vietnam,'' said
one Army colonel. Speaking as if he were at a briefing in the White House, he
said: ''Mr. President, don't send us to war again unless you have clear-cut
political goals and attainable military objectives. Sir, don't send us unless
you give us sufficient forces and the freedom of action to use them according to
the principles of war. And, Mr. President, you'd better have a hell of a lot of
public support.''

General Carl E. Vuono, sworn in Tuesday as the Army's 31st Chief of Staff, is
its youngest four-star general at 52 years of age. He commanded an artillery
battalion in Vietnam; among his assignments since have been leadership of the
Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth and, most recently, of the
Army Training and Doctrine Command.

Among the Army's 12 top generals, all in their 50's, five are brand new to the
four-star rank, where policy is made and civilian leaders dealt with. Three
more, including General Vuono, have had less than a year's service at that
level; two seasoned generals have new duties. Only two generals are staying
where they are.

Middle-grade officers are wondering anxiously whether the new leaders will be
able to hold their own when contending with other services over money and
missions and when seeking funds from Congress. Younger officers also are
watching for signs of General Vuono's agenda for the Army, especially whether he
will favor armored divisions or the much-debated light divisions, intended for
swift intervention in a crisis.

A leadership transition began two years ago, when General John W. Vessey Jr. of
the Army retired as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the World War II
generation of American officers passed from the scene. With the present changes,
most of the Korean War generation is retiring. Now, all the top generals served
in Vietnam as lieutenant colonels commanding battalions of 600 soldiers, the key
tactical unit of ground forces, and as staff officers or advisers to the South
Vietnamese army.

In Vietnam, Army officers believe, they fought a war under many handicaps:
ill-defined political objectives, negative press and television coverage and
waning public support. Today, the military leadership is wary of using armed
might as an instrument of national policy, fearing they may again be abandoned
to fight alone. For instance, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have cautioned the
Administration against becoming militarily involved in the Persian Gulf, opposed
the dispatch of marines to Lebanon in 1983, and are counseling against sending
combat forces into hostilities in Central America. If the President overrules
them and orders forces into battle, they salute, of course, and move out.

General P. X. Kelley, who is stepping down as Commandant of the Marine Corps and
who commanded a regiment in Vietnam, voiced the pervasive distrust of
politicians and press earlier this month. He lambasted Congress for ignoring
military leaders' advice and for seeking defense ''on the cheap.'' He criticized
journalists for a ''lynch mob mentality'' toward the armed forces.

An Army on the Upswing

Because they have come up through the system, General Vuono and his colleagues
are by no means seen within the Army as revolutionaries. ''These are not young
Turks from the outside,'' said one officer. But middle-ranking officers have
little inkling of General Vuono's agenda. The general did not tip his hand in
his confirmation hearing before the Senate Armed Services Committee, nor has he
granted press interviews.

In any case, General Vuono inherits an improving Army. After Vietnam, the Army
was demoralized not only by the political defeat but also by the corruption of
military ethics in an unfair draft, falsified body counts, unearned decorations
and ticket-punching for promotion. After the draft ended, the slump was evident
in racial tensions, lax discipline and poor recruiting.

Shortly after General Edward C. Meyer became Chief of Staff in 1979, he said he
led a ''hollow army.'' But he pulled the Army out of that shadowed valley as the
military buildup of the early Reagan years brought pay raises and new equipment.
His successor, General John A. Wickham Jr., while not enjoying such big budget
increases, concentrated on better training of soldiers, better education of
officers and a better quality of life in the Army.

Although General Vuono's strategic agenda is unknown, it seems likely that a
general whose assignments in recent years have centered on training, and who is
known in the service for being ''people oriented,'' will continue along that
line.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gen. Carl E. Vuono, Army's new Chief of Staff; photo of U.S.
troops (Woodfin Camp/Leif Skoogfors)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              320 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Headliners;
Behind Bars

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 128 words


All was not forgiven last week when Terrence Peter Jackson showed up for
sentencing after spending 17 years on the run. Mr. Jackson, who changed his name
from Silas Trim Bissell, had been a fugitive since 1970, when he and his wife
were charged with attempting to a bomb a campus R.O.T.C. building in Seattle to
protest the Vietnam War. The former professor of literature, who was working as
a physical therapist when he was arrested earlier this year in Oregon, asked for
leniency. He said he had acted ''out of love for country and for my fellow human
beings.'' Judge Walter T. McGovern was not persuaded. ''Just as you felt morally
compelled to act, I am morally compelled to have you incarcerated,'' Judge
McGovern said. Mr. Jackson got two years in prison.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Terrence Peter Jackson

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              321 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON LANGUAGE;
Effective Immediately

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 6, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1239 words


THE LEADERS OF the free world huddled in Venice and came up with a statement
about freedom of navigation in the Persian Gulf that urged ''the adoption of
just and effective measures by the U.N. Security Council.''

But some persnickety reporters wondered why the statement sounded so
wishy-washy. Why hadn't a more specific word like enforceable been used?

''A discussion came up,'' President Reagan responded when asked about this,
''between a choice of the words enforceable and effective . And it was decided -
a case in semantics here - it was decided that effective meant the other, and we
didn't need the other word, so it was agreed that we would use effective
measures.''

One meaning of effective is ''capable of producing the desired effect'' - hence,
one use of the adjective is to describe something that works. But can the word
be used to mean what Mr. Reagan called ''the other'' - enforceable - so much so
that the use of the two would be redundant, a case for the Squad Squad?

No. Effective is a broad, stretchable word that can be applied as a modifier to
people as well as things and events. Enforceable, however, cannot be applied to
people; you may think Mr. Reagan is an effective President, but nobody can call
him an enforceable one. The latter word, eschewed by the summiteers, applies to
agreements and has a legal use: an enforceable claim offers a cause of action,
and the essence of legality is that a contract is ''enforceable in a court of
law.'' At the center of the word is force, compulsion rooted in the Latin
fortis, ''strong.'' Mr. Reagan is familiar with the more powerful word; in his
address to the nation on his return from the summit, he used it in the context
of ''America's commitment to a consistent, enforceable plan to reduce our
deficits.''

Effective - ''having effect'' - just does not have the strength of enforceable.
Its width of meanings has led to a variety of offshoots: efficacious (applied to
treatments), efficient (applied to the competency or ability of an agent to have
an effect) and effectual (applied to the action and not the agent). An effective
hair-splitter would say, ''For an effectual result, get an efficient doctor who
prescribes efficacious medicines.''

Thus, an effective measure - one that will have some beneficial effect, perhaps
even do the job - is a far cry from an enforceable measure, which would require
whatever action is necessary to carry out the agreement. The first is fuzzily
rhetorical; the latter involves a legal commitment. For the President and his
fellow-summiteers to suggest that enforceable was cut out because effective
means the same is disingenuous. (In degree of puissance, effective is to
enforceable as disingenuous is to lying.) In the same press conference that
featured this obfuscation through doubtful synonymy, however, Mr. Reagan gave to
the English-speaking world the imprimatur that legitimized a previously taboo
phrase.

''I told you all the truth that first day,'' he insisted, referring to the
revelations of the diversion of arms profits to the contras, ''after the
-everything hit the fan.''

This is one of the great examples of ''punchline English,'' along with ''So
who's counting?'' ''Ready when you are, C.B.!'' ''Who's minding the store?'' and
''Don't make waves.'' (Some will insist ''It's your turn in the barrel'' fits
this category, but that line, of naval origin, is not widely enough understood.)
Until now, the presence of a scatological noun just before the familiar hit the
fan has restricted its written use; the President's skillful substitution of the
simple ''everything'' for the offensive word changes its approval rating from R
to PG.

Lexicographers have been filing citations on this phrase for years. When I
gingerly touched this subject three years ago, I did not have the courage to
report that lexicographer E.W. Gilman of Merriam-Webster explained the origin in
a story that ''dealt with a man who mistakenly took an exhaust fan above a
barroom as a suitable receptacle for defecation,'' following which the bartender
asked the man returning downstairs the question referred to by President Reagan
in connection with the furor caused by the diversion of arms profits to the
contras in Nicaragua.

Mr. Gilman reported, ''Even though the story was . . . based on highly
improbable assumptions (for one, that the fan was working in reverse), the image
evoked was vivid enough to have won itself a small place in the language.''

As the text of the press conference released by the White House indicates, the
President did some efficacious euphemizing in mid-sentence and thereby
effectuated a change in the acceptance level of the phrase, making previous
taboos unenforceable.

GONDOLIERS OF METAPHOR

WHENEVER A NEWSWORTHY event is held in a colorful place, the hounds of metaphor
begin baying in the minds of headline writers.

When Venice became the focal point of color stories by a press corps drawn up in
what Winston Churchill called ''vast cumbrous array,'' we braced ourselves for
quotations from Shakespeare's ''The Merchant of Venice'' and were not
disappointed by this obvious stuff. Literary allusion watchers, however, waited
for resuscitation of the phrase ''Death in Venice,'' which was the English
translation of the title of a 1912 novella by Thomas Mann.

However, with the omnipresent threat of terrorists, the word death was too
strong for feature use in a light vein. ''Dearth in Venice'' was, I thought,
labored. The problem was solved by Joseph Laitin, ombudsman of The Washington
Post, in a piece about the need to assign so many reporters to the economic
confabulation. His title, which wins this year's ''O Sole Mio'' award for zippy
headline writing: ''Debt in Venice.''

Laitin, an old-time press agent best known for his Bible-thumping instructions
to astronauts, undoubtedly took this construction from the borrowed headline for
a 1936 critical review by Frank S. Nugent of The New York Times. Directed at the
fiery playwright Clifford Odets, the headline criticized his film ''The General
Died at Dawn'' for lacking the familiar spark: ''Odets, Where Is Thy Sting?''

THE DOUGH ALSO RISES

IN DESCRIBING A WORLD War II cartoon by Bill Mauldin, I referred to one of the
G.I.'s as a doughface.

''You seem to have mixed both your metaphors and your wars,'' writes Brig. Gen.
Richard J. Toner, Commandant of the Air Force Institute of Technology in Ohio.
''The grunt of Vietnam was the dogface of Korea and World War II, whose father
was, in turn, the doughboy of World War I.''

Where did I get doughface from? ''A doughface,'' writes Charles S. Treat of
Chicago, ''was a Northern politician who sympathized with Southern views on
slavery. Many doughfaces no doubt became known as copperheads during the Civil
War.''

Doughface was defined in 1860 by John Russell Bartlett in his Dictionary of
Americanisms as ''a contemptuous nickname, applied to the Northern favorers and
abettors of Negro slavery.'' However, the coinage, perhaps derived from the
English derogation of a pliant politician with a ''nose of wax,'' was credited
to John Randolph of Roanoke, Va., in a speech in 1820 castigating abolitionists.

The old word for a pliant politician with an easily changeable image might be
useful today, stripped of its racial connotations; under no circumstances should
it be confused with the proud moniker of enlisted men, dogfaces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              322 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: JUNE 28, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1462 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   4    MISERY, by Stephen King. (Viking, $18.95.)
                 Injured and drugged, an author is held captive by a
                 psychotic fan.

 2      2   7    THE HAUNTED MESA, by Louis L'Amour.
                 (Bantam, $18.95.) Unraveling the mystery of
                 Indian cliff dwellers who vanished centuries ago.

 3      4   15   FINE THINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
                 $18.95.) The vicissitudes of a son of the 60's on his
                 way to the 80's.

 4      7   3    EMPIRE, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $22.50.)
                 Turn-of-the-century Washington, from the point of
                 view of a young woman newspaper publisher.

 5      8   3    THE TIMOTHY FILES, by Lawrence Sanders.
                 (Putnam, $18.95.) A Vietnam veteran turned
                 detective checks out dubious entrepreneurs.

 6      3   3    PALE KINGS AND PRINCES, by Robert B.
                 Parker. (Delacorte, $15.95.) Spenser on the trail of
                 a major Northeastern cocaine ring.

 7      6   21   WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
                 (Morrow, $18.95.) Nightmarish experiences befall
                 a woman appointed Ambassador to Rumania.

 8      5   7    HEIRESS, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown, $17.95.)
                 Sisters vie for their father's affection and fortune.

 9      9   3    MORE DIE OF HEARTBREAK, by Saul Bellow.
                 (Morrow, $17.95.) The many-faceted relationship of
                 the 35-year-old narrator and his uncle, a famous
                 botanist.

10            1  PRESUMED INNOCENT, by Scott Turow.
                 (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) A brutal murder
                 creates a crisis among a big city's politicians and
                 lawyers.

11     12   48   RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam,
                 $19.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians.

12     11   22   THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
                 (Viking, $18.95.) A fairy tale, complete with an aged
                 king, two princes, an evil wizard and a mouse.

13            1  DIRK GENTLY'S HOLISTIC DETECTIVE
                 AGENCY, by Douglas Adams. (Simon & Schuster,
                 $14.95.) A private eye's search for a missing cat
                 takes him on a trip through space and time.

14     13   2    SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $17.95.)
                 Four scientists explore the mysteries of an alien
                 spaceship found on the floor of the South Pacific.

15     10   12   THE LADIES OF MISSALONGHI, by Colleen
                 McCullough. (Harper & Row, $12.95.) An
                 Australian town at the turn of the century.

16 *   14   14   DESTINY, by Sally Beauman. (Bantam, $19.95.)
                 The 30-year romance of a couple with diverse
                 backgrounds and ambitions.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   9    THE CLOSING OF THE AMERICAN MIND, by
                 Allan Bloom. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) A critique
                 of liberal arts education during the past 25 years.

 2      2   7    HAMMER, by Armand Hammer with Neil Lyndon.
                 (Putnam, $22.95.) The industrialist's memoirs.

 3      3   4    CULTURAL LITERACY, by E. D. Hirsch Jr.
                 (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) Information - history,
                 literature, politics - that you need to read with.

 4     10   2    EVERYTHING TO GAIN, by Jimmy and Rosalynn
                 Carter. (Random House, $16.95.) How the Carters
                 are making the most of the rest of their lives.

 5      5   30   A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                 Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                 recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.

 6      4   18   COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber. (Beech Tree/
                 Morrow, $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the
                 visits of ''intelligent nonhumans'' to his home.

 7 *    6   4    THE DIFFERENT DRUM, by M. Scott Peck.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A psychiatrist's
                 prescription for peace.

 8      7   12   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S.
                 Siegel. (Harper & Row, $17.95.) A surgeon stresses
                 the importance of the patient's mind and emotions.

 9      8   8    GLORY DAYS, by Dave Marsh. (Pantheon,
                 $18.95.) Bruce Springsteen in the 1980's.

10 *   11   6    GRACE, by James Spada. (Dolphin/Doubleday,
                 $17.95.) The life of Princess Grace of Monaco.

11      9   12   HOLD ON, MR. PRESIDENT! by Sam Donaldson.
                 (Random House, $17.95.) A White House television
                 correspondent comments on his assignment.

12           53  FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/
                 Doubleday, $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations.

13     14   20   THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf,
                 $24.95.) Australia as a penal colony.

14            1  LIFE AND DEATH IN SHANGHAI, by Nien
                 Cheng. (Grove, $19.95.) China's Cultural Revolution
                 as experienced by a wealthy woman accused of
                 spying for the West.

15 *   13   11   THIS 'N THAT, by Bette Davis with Michael
                 Herskowitz. (Putnam, $17.95.) The actress's
                 memories and opinions.

15 *          1  ARE YOU LONESOME TONIGHT? by Lucy de
                 Barbin and Dary Matera. (Villard, $15.95.) The
                 alleged secret romance of Elvis Presley that
                 resulted in a daughter he never knew.

17 *          1  BERLIN DIARIES, 1940-1945, by Marie
                 Vassiltchikov. (Knopf, $19.95.) The records of an
                 exiled White Russian princess who worked for the
                 German Foreign Ministry during World War II.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   94   WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                 DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
                 standard reference work in a 1983 revision.

 2      2   4    WOMEN MEN LOVE, WOMEN MEN LEAVE, by
                 Connell Cowan and Melvyn Kinder. (Clarkson N.
                 Potter/Crown, $18.95.) Why men are drawn to
                 some women and desert others.

 3      3   4    THE DIET PRINCIPAL, by Victoria Principal.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) A television star's
                 guide to nutrition.

 4      4   35   THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE,
                 by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be
                 prepared at moderate cost.

 5      5   2    SIBLINGS WITHOUT RIVALRY, by Adele Faber
                 and Elaine Mazlish. (Norton, $14.95.) Ways to cope
                 with bickering between one's children.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

''DEMOCRACY IS IN THE STREETS'': From Port Huron to the Siege of Chicago, by
James Miller. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) Deprived of an institutional memory,
S.D.S. lives again in this account, which emphasizes the intellectual
foundations of the Port Huron Statement, the charter document of S.D.S.

THE LIFE AND TIMES OF MENACHEM BEGIN, by Amos Perlmutter. (Doubleday, $21.95.) A
critical biography of the Polish-born politician and ex-terrorist who became
Israel's most hawkish leader yet gave up territory for peace with Egypt.

BEN-GURION: The Burning Ground 1886-1948, by Shabtai Teveth. (Houghton Mifflin,
$35.) Mr. Teveth, an Israeli journalist and scholar, emphasizes Ben-Gurion's
astonishing energy and single-mindedness in the cause of creating the Jewish
state.

ALNILAM, by James Dickey. (Doubleday, $19.95.) Mr. Dickey's second novel - it
has been 17 years since ''Deliverance'' - is an extended hymn to air, light,
wind and aviation, distinguished by its bravura passages and symbolic
suggestiveness.

THE COMPLETE YES MINISTER: The Diaries of a Cabinet Minister, by the Right Hon.
James Hacker MP, edited by Jonathan Lynn and Antony Jay. (Salem House, $19.95.)
The diaries of their hero, ''edited'' by the writers of the uproarious British
TV series.

OIL & HONOR: The Texaco-Pennzoil Wars, by Thomas Petzinger Jr. (Putnam, $19.95.)
Mr. Petzinger, a Wall Street Journal reporter, delivers a personality-filled
account of the struggle that won Pennzoil a $10.53 billion court action against
Texaco.

AND A VOICE TO SING WITH: A Memoir, by Joan Baez. (Summit, $19.95.) At 44, an
artist who captured the temper of the 1960's examines her career from the
perspective of what seems our present age of celebrity worship and instant
gratification.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              323 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

QUEEN VICTORIA'S QUAGMIRE

BYLINE: By ROBERT BLAKE; Robert Blake is the author of, among other works, ''The
Decline of Power, 1915-1964'' and ''Disraeli.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 33, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1069 words



THE BANNER OF BATTLE
The Story of the Crimean War. By Alan Palmer. Illustrated. 289 pp. New York: St.
Martin's Press. $24.95.

THE Crimean War is too often seen in Britain through British eyes alone: the
sleeping cabinet that reputedly took the decision to go to war against Russia in
1854 to check Russian ambitions in the Near East (in fact it had been taken
earlier and they were merely bored with interminable dispatches read by the Duke
of Newcastle, who liked the sound of his own voice); ''the Lady with the Lamp''
(Florence Nightingale thought that appellation was nonsense); the heroic Charge
of the Light Brigade (the result of muddle, arrogance and folly). The historian
Alan Palmer reminds us in his excellent and very readable book, ''The Banner of
Battle,'' that Britain was not the major participant or the major sufferer.
Before the end French forces outnumbered the British by three to one. British
deaths amounted to nearly 20,000; fewer than 2,000 men died in action, the rest
partly from wounds but principally from cholera. The French lost 10,000 in
action and another 70,000 from other causes. No one knows the extent of Turkish
casualties, though they must have been very heavy. The Russian death toll from
all causes has been recently estimated at the huge figure of 450,000. It was a
grim enough war for Britain, but the other combatants fared even worse.

Mr. Palmer also points out that the Anglo-French strategy comprised a double
thrust - the battle in the Crimea to deprive Russia of her Black Sea naval base,
and the forgotten unsuccessful expedition to the Gulf of Finland to capture
Kronstadt and threaten the capital itself. The Baltic command was under the
eccentric Sir Charles Napier -''Mad Charlie.'' He was not in the prime of life.
He was 67 and had fought his way up Chesapeake Bay 40 years earlier to attack
Baltimore. But the commanders in the war both on sea and on land tended to be
elderly. Reproached for not choosing a younger man, the First Lord of the
Admiralty pointed out his difficulty in passing over the ''adventurous'' but
''uncontrollable'' Lord Dundonald, aged 79. Lord Raglan, who commanded the
troops in the Crimea, was 75, and his second in command, Sir George Brown, was a
youngster of 66. Many of the senior British officers had last seen action in the
Napoleonic wars. This was not in itself quite as much of a drawback as one might
suppose. Military technology had scarcely changed since 1815. Tolstoy, who
fought at Sebastopol as a young officer, was able to write his marvelous
descriptions in ''War and Peace'' based on experiences very similar to those of
Prince Andrew in the novel.

There had been one major change since 1815: for the first time, war
correspondents left their desks in London and actually saw what was happening.
In theory they could have done so with earlier campaigns no less disastrous.
Communications by sea were only marginally easier in 1854, but the press, headed
by William Howard Russell, a journalist of genius, was far more enterprising and
organized itself far more efficiently. There is no reason to think that the
horrors and sufferings of the Crimea were worse than those of the Peninsular War
during Napoleonic times, but they received unparalleled publicity. One might
compare the similar impact of the reporting of the campaign in Vietnam.

There was another contrast with the fighting in the Iberian Peninsula. Lord
Raglan remembered a war in which the Duke of Wellington's troops could ''live
off the land'' because the local population welcomed them as liberators. The
Crimea offered ''only fired villages, scorched earth, and despite amiable
gestures from surviving Tartar settlements, the implacable hostility of a
colonizing master race.'' Finally - and the biggest contrast of all - there was
no one of the caliber of the great Duke himself. Had he been alive, the campaign
would probably never have been attempted. It certainly would have been far more
efficiently conducted.

Although much of the war looked backward to the days before 1815, some aspects
were prophetic of the future. Battle orders were flashed by electric telegraph
to places thousands of miles away. Floating mines were used against naval
vessels. There were proposals for a primitive submarine and for a ''locomotive
land battery'' - a sort of proto-tank. Aerial reconnaissance by balloon was
another idea seriously considered, though not actually put into effect. That
''adventurous'' octogenarian, Lord Dundonald, put forward a scheme for chemical
warfare, first in the Gulf of Finland to overcome the defenders of Kronstadt
with sulfurous fumes and create panic in St. Petersburg, later to smoke the
enemy out of Sebastopol. The authorities declined, partly on humanitarian
grounds, partly for fear that the wind might suddenly change - a contingency the
German High Command would have been well advised to consider before launching
their chlorine gas attack on the Western Front in 1915.

Appalling though the story of the Crimean War is, there were some silver
linings. The efforts of the Nightingale ladies greatly reduced the mortality
rates at the military hospitals at Scutari, though Florence Nightingale could do
little in the Crimea itself since her writ did not run there. Another notable
improvement was caused by the arrival of the chef of the Reform Club, Alexis
Soyer. He was a brilliant cook who invented the stove named after him and taught
the Army how to make palatable and wholesome dishes, thus greatly raising morale
and lowering disease.

The last chapter of ''Banner of Battle'' is interesting. The main effect of the
war was to enhance the power of neutral Prussia. Napoleon III, who really
started it, received his retribution in the Franco-Prussian War. The author is
also fascinating on the subject of ''survivors.'' The Crimean troopship
Himalaya, once the largest vessel in the world, was sunk by German bombers in
Portland Harbor in 1940. In that same year Colonel Rookes Crompton, who had been
a midshipman in the Crimean fleet, died. He remembered visiting his soldier
brother in the trenches. He recalled the Carcasses - flare shells used to light
up the battlefield at night - and how ''what appeared to be 'a bluish sort of
gravel' in front of the trenches was 'the remains of countless lead bullets.' ''
This is a fascinating book, by far the best so far written on the subject.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo from Crimean War taken by Roger Fenton

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              324 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS;
A DIFFERENT WAVELENGTH

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 28, Column 3; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 471 words


WELL, I finally went out and bought a microwave. That may not seem earthshaking,
but for me it's taken on a symbolic meaning that transcends the mere purchase of
a kitchen appliance.

It's been sneaking up on me gradually, this transformation from 60's political
radical, sneering at the values of middle-class America in favor of more
idealistic, less money-grubbing goals, to a clone of Jane from ''Father Knows
Best.''

Well do I remember my days in peasant dresses, marching against the war, having
loud, emotional arguments with my father on all the hot topics of the day -
Johnson, the carnage in Vietnam, students' rights. I'm sure my father envisioned
me as part of Jane Fonda's entourage in Hanoi; his alternative nightmare was
bailing me out of jail after some demonstration. That my radicalism was more
verbal than active made no difference; I'm sure he, like many others, felt a
very real threat to social stability in what was going on.

When my husband and I bought our first car, it was a VW beetle, so stripped down
it didn't have a radio - we were too broke for that. We lived - where else? - in
the Village, in a studio apartment that looked out on a stone wall, the exterior
of a small factory that attracted every pigeon within a thousand miles.

Somewhere along the line, we ditched the VW for a Chevy, blew a kiss to Dinah
Shore and set out to join the mainstream of America.

By the time we moved to Merrick (after several intervening moves had distanced
us more and more from our radical political speechifying), we had become
relentlessly ordinary. Maybe it happened the day we bought a condominium in Rye
and joined the commuters. All I know is that, despite his transition from jeans
to suits for work in a publishing conglomerate, my husband's hair was still down
to his shoulders. Within a couple of weeks of our move, he was neatly trimmed
and fit in perfectly with the other gray suits on the 7:36.

Anyway, resisting a microwave oven became about the only political statement
left for us to make without looking like absolute fools. The environment, we
reasoned, affects everybody, so it was not as laughably hypocritical to talk
about the dangers of radiation as it would have been to rail about materialism.

And now I've caved in on that one, too. As in everything else, expediency won
out and took with it the last link to my college self - that self who lived
through the '68 riots at Columbia, yelled at the police, boycotted graduation
''to make a statement,'' seriously considered joining Vista (but didn't - I
chickened out), dutifully read Germaine Greer, Herbert Marcuse, Camus, Kate
Millett - the whole bag (and used expressions like ''bag'').

None of that competes for sheer fun with reheating left-over baked ziti in three
minutes flat, does it?

JERILYN FAMIGHETTI, Merrick

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              325 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE CANDIDATE WHO ISN'T THERE: NONRUNNERS CAST SHADOW ON '88

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1863 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 28


Twice last week, important Democrats gathered to discuss politics and listen to
Senators who most of those present thought would make an excellent President.

There was only one problem: In each case, the man in question - Senator Sam Nunn
of Georgia, the center of attention at a meeting of the Democratic Leadership
Council in Atlanta, and Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, who was roasted at a
fund-raising dinner in Washington - was not running for President. And Mr.
Bradley, at least, says he is absolutely, positively certain he will not run in
1988.

Among the unusual aspects of the 1988 Presidential contest, already off to an
early rocky start, is longing for the candidate who isn't there.

Some Longing for Baker

On the Democratic side, although seven candidates are in the race and three more
are thinking of running, many in the party say they want someone else. Among the
most talked-about nonrunners are Mr. Bradley, Mr. Nunn and Governor Cuomo of New
York.

Even among Republicans, who seem for the moment to have the more orderly battle,
there is some longing for Howard H. Baker Jr., who chose to be President
Reagan's chief of staff rather than be a candidate.

On both sides, moreover, partisans of those who are not candidates can concoct
ingenious scenarios under which their favorite would be nominated if he entered
the race late, or even if he did not announce at all. They back their claims
with polls that show that their prefered noncandidate, especially in the cases
of Mr. Cuomo, Mr. Bradley and Mr. Baker, is more popular than most of the
willing entrants.

Aware and Annoyed

The actual candidates, especially on the Democratic side, are well aware of (and
somewhat annoyed at) the interest being generated by those on the sidelines.

At the roast of Mr. Bradley, a fund-raising event for Independent Action, a
group that helps liberal Congressional candidates, each of the seven candidates
present - Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, former Gov. Bruce Babbitt of
Arizona, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, Senator Albert Gore Jr.
of Tennessee, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, Senator Paul Simon of Illinois and Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts - expressed gratitude that Mr. Bradley has
decided not to run.

Bradley's 'Internal Clock'

Mr. Biden, referring to Mr. Bradley's repeated statements that he does not
regard himself as ready to run, praised the New Jersey Senator's ''internal
clock'' and said he hoped it would keep him on schedule for a Presidential
candidacy - in 1996.

In Atlanta, at the meeting of the Democratic Leadership Council, Mr. Nunn was
besieged by questions about his intentions. Friends say the Georgian is moving
toward running. He coyly said that, while he had once been ''70 to 30'' against
running, the latest odds were a more favorable ''60.5 to 39.5,'' although still
against.

The continuing speculation that Mr. Nunn may run has been especially harmful to
Mr. Gore, who is trying to build a base as the South's only candidate. ''The
prospect of Sam Nunn running freezes a lot of people,'' said Dick Lodge, the
chairman of the Tennessee Democratic Party.

Other Democrats who are known to be considering candidacies are Representative
Patricia Schroeder of Colorado and Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas.

The election of 1988 is plainly not the first in which voters and party leaders
have looked outside the roster of volunteers for a nominee.

Memories of Willkie

Wendell Willkie was nominated by the Republicans in 1940 as the result of a
brilliantly orchestrated boomlet just before the convention. Adlai Stevenson's
nomination by the Democrats in 1952 was the product of a late draft.

In 1964, many Republican primary voters wrote in the name of Henry Cabot Lodge,
then the Ambassador to Vietnam, in preference to Nelson A. Rockefeller and Barry
M. Goldwater, the ultimate nominee. And in 1976, many important Democratic
leaders hoped that Hubert H. Humphrey would enter the Democratic race late to
stop Jimmy Carter. Although he did not enter the contest, Mr. Humphrey usually
ran ahead of the candidates on the ballot in polls taken in the key primary
states.

Many politicians see substantial differences from these earlier cases. For one
thing, the way candidates are selected now, through a grueling series of
primaries, is very different from what it was in 1940, 1952 or even 1964,
although Mr. Carter's strength through this system in 1976 may have helped keep
Mr. Humphrey out.

In the old days, convention delegates or the party leaders who controlled them
were largely free agents who could shift their support before and at the
national convention. Now, most delegates are bound by the decisions of primary
voters, at least for the first convention ballot, and most are directly selected
by candidates who count on their loyalty.

Memories of Humphrey

And those who are not running today, unlike Mr. Humphrey, were never before
nominated by their party for national office. By 1976, Mr. Humphrey had been
thought of as a potential President for close to two decades. Not so for Mr.
Bradley, Mr. Cuomo or Mr. Nunn, or the even for the more nationally experienced
Mr. Baker.

For supporters of the current candidates, the most annoying aspect of the
interest in the noncandidates is the implicit subtext: That those in the race
are somehow inadequate to the job.

Many political professionals dismiss this view and say that the remaining
Democrats are suffering from the pall thrown over the contest by Gary Hart's
abrupt withdrawal amid scandal over his relationship with a Miami woman, Donna
Rice. ''The whole episode of Gary Hart has put people on hold,'' said Harrison
Hickman, a Democratic polltaker.

Elaine Kamarck, deputy campaign manager for Mr. Babbitt, said that talk of new
candidacies made it easier for voters and professionals to avoid taking a
serious look at the current field. ''It lets people wait until the fall,'' she
said.

New Rules a Factor

One influential Midwestern Democratic Congressman said that his party now had
''a bunch of very good candidates for Vice President.'' But the Congressman, who
recently attended a convention where many of the candidates spoke, said that
many Democrats tended to be more enthusiastic about the existing candidates than
observers in Washington are.

Mr. Hickman said that another difference from the past is that the new rules of
Presidential politics had the effect of encouraging little-known candidates.
''One of the requirements to be a player in the game used to be that you had to
well known,'' he said.

But with all the publicity that accrues to the Iowa caucuses and the New
Hampshire primary, unknowns can count on being instant celebrities if they win
in either state. Such recognition propelled Mr. Carter to the nomination in 1976
and Mr. Hart to national prominence in 1984.

Mr. Gore captures a popular perception that the process has become a trifle
absurd with a joke that always draws laughter. This Presidential campaign, he
said, ''seems like the Publisher's Clearing House Sweepstakes: Anybody can
enter, anybody can win.''

A Sign of Affection

Mr. Gore's joke, meant to spotlight some Democratic candidates' lack of national
experience, applies less to the other major party. The Republicans, in the words
of Peter Secchia, a Republican national committeeman from Michigan, ''like
candidates who are already trained.'' Whatever Vice President Bush's political
weaknesses may be, one of them is assuredly not a lack of experience. Much the
same can be said of the Senate minority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas.

Thus, the enthusiasm Mr. Baker's name evokes at Republican meetings is less a
negative commentary on the other candidates than it is a sign of the affection
for Mr. Baker among party regulars and the sense that he could emerge as a
unifying force at the end of a potentially bitter battle for the nomination.
This is a role that late-entering candidates have played throughout American
history.

But on the Democratic side, as Mr. Gore noted, the stature of politicians seems
to grow in direct proportion to their distance from the hustings.

Thus, Mr. Bradley's insistence that he does not regard himself as being ready to
be President comes off as statesmanlike humility - especially when he has been
hard pressed to say why he regards other candidates with little more experience
as quite prepared for the White House.

A Personal Explanation

In a recent interview, Mr. Bradley resorted to a highly personal explanation of
his own sense of himself, and his theory that the United States was such a
complicated land that, to understand it, one needed intense contact with its
regions through unhurried travel.

''I happen to think that if you do that, you understand America better than if
your whole relation to the country is from one tarmac to another tarmac,'' he
said.

But if the noncandidates look especially good, many analysts say that is in part
because they are preserving themselves from the scrutiny and attack that falls
onto those who enter the battle.

''They're able to demonstrate their strengths without having to expose their
weaknesses,'' said Al From, the executive director of the Democratic Leadership
Council. ''And their support is worth so much that there is no advantage in
attacking them, so they have a much freer ride in terms of criticism.''

Expert on the Military

Mr. Nunn is profiting from this phenomenon, say many Democrats. As the chairman
of the Senate Armed Services Committee, Mr. Nunn is seen mainly as a widely
respected expert on military and foreign policy, and as a moderate conservative
who could draw defectors back into the Democratic fold. But if he became a
candidate, Mr. Nunn's voting record would be open to severe criticism from his
more liberal adversaries.

A recent article in Congressional Quarterly, a magazine that closely follows
Congress and politics, offered a preview of such attacks: It noted that Mr. Nunn
had been well to the right of most Congressional Democrats on issues such as
voting rights, fair housing, abortion and the balanced budget amendment. On at
least one key issue, his recent vote in favor of American aid to the Nicaraguan
contras, Mr. Bradley would face similar scrutiny from his party. Several
candidates could not resist needling him about it at the recent dinner in his
honor.

Mr. Cuomo, whose record as Governor would doubtless be subjected to
excruciatingly detailed analysis if he ever decided to run, has been defending
the existing Democratic field and predicting that it would eventually yield ''a
star.''

''To be trite but terribly true, it is much too early to make any significant
judgment on this field of candidates,'' Mr. Cuomo said in an interview this
week. ''A good deal of the analysis is presumptuous, premature and evidences to
me a lack of knowledge of history.''

''It does not take a great deal to make a person a celebrity,'' he added.
''Stars are born in every primary.'' But he concluded: ''It is not a joy and
delight to have said no to pursuing the Presidency. Every once in a while you
have a twinge.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Howard H. Baker Jr. Senator Bill Bradley, Governor Cuomo and
Senator Sam Nunn, all top choices for Democratic Presidential nomination (AP;
NYT) (Pg. B9)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              326 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, JUNE 30, 1987

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words




International    A2-15

The President of South Korea is likely to agree to recommendations that he
accept sweeping political changes, including direct presidential elections this
year, government officials said.    Page A1

In Seoul, a collective sense of relief was evident. Although many people were
evidently pleased, they spoke more of their relief than of their excitement. The
last few weeks have been sobering ones.    A1

News analysis: 'People power,' Korean style, had become apparent in the recent
protests. Roh Tae Woo acknowledged that the people could not be ignored with his
decision to call for direct presidential elections.    A12

Roh may have improved stature     A13

The new U.S. embassy in Moscow can be salvaged if the top three floors are
demolished and rebuilt and a new six-story annex is built for the mission'smost
sensitive business, former Defense Secretary James R. Schlesinger said.    A1

Moscow's contacts with Teheran have been stepped up in an effort to ward off
future Iranian attacks on Soviet ships in the Persian Gulf, Administration
officials said. The officials did not say how they learned of the overture.
A3

Caspar Weinberger left Japan, saying he had told officials that both nations'
security had been undermined by a Japanese company's illegal sale to Moscow of
advanced equipment used to improve Soviet submarines.     A14

Europe may lift ban on Syrian contact     A3

Burma Journal     A4

Egypt may buy M-1 tanks     A6

Sakharov criticizes Academy     A15

National    A18-29, B20

Judge Robert Bork may be the choice of President Reagan for nomination to the
United States Supreme Court. White House officials spent the day sounding out
whether the appeals court judge could win Senate confirmation.    A1

The rescue of three pilot whales was completed by the New England Aquarium. The
three whales, which beached themselves last December and were nursed backed to
health, were returned to the sea.    A1

Albert Gore is running for President. The 39-year old Democratic Senator from
Tennessee declared himself a candidate from ''the New South'' who is ''eager to
help build a new America.''    A18

Fifteen groups were denied rights to freedom of speech and assembly by officials
and police agencies in connection with Philadelphia's celebration of the
Constitution bicentennial, a lawsuit filed by the groups charges.     A18

The V.A. was ordered to drop plans to close nine outreach centers that counsel
veterans suffering from the Vietnam-era version of combat fatigue. A Federal
judge ruled against the Veterans Administration.    A20

A plan to give condoms to prisoners to curb the spread of AIDS has been ruled
out by the Reagan Administration, an official said. But the Administration has
not ruled out separate Federal prisons for victims of the disease, he said.
A18

Healthy AIDS carriers are intriguing doctors trying to discover why they have
not become ill. Researchers believe studies of healthy carriers may offer clues
for curing or preventing the ailment.    C1

Cities face tougher fiscal times, according to a survey. A third of the
municipalities questioned said they were anticipating a decrease in general
revenues this year. A fifth said spending would be reduced.    A21

Blood donor charged in AIDS case     A18

NBC ordered to release tapes     A20

Rule on aliens eased for harvest     A22

Enigmatic murder case in Alaska     A23

New laws taking effect around U.S.     A24

Supreme Court Ruling reopens wound for ex-soldier     A29

Washington Talk    A28

Profile: Althea T. L. Simmons, N.A.A.C.P.'s chief lobbyist

The demonstrations capital

Regional    B1-7, B9

Hortense W. Gabel stepped down as a New York State Supreme Court justice amid
charges that she had been improperly influenced by Bess Myerson in a divorce
case. The judge retired 18 months before the end of her term.    A1

Tempers strained in Albany in an outpouring of mistrust and political
maneuvering as the legislative session neared a close with no final agreement on
the most politically volatile issue, a new government ethics code.    A1

A police officer was sentenced to a prison term of three and a half to 10 1/2
years. The officer, Robert Rathbun, was described by prosecutors as a ringleader
of a group of Brooklyn officers who regularly stole drugs and money from
dealers.    B1

Fighting to save a tax plan that would restructure New York City's personal
income taxes, Mayor Koch appealed to the State Senate to drop its efforts to win
more favorable tax treatment for capital gains income.    B1

Medgar Evers College's President resigned. Dr. Jay Carrington Chunn 2d left his
position a month after faculty leaders at the college met with the Chancellor of
the City University of New York to urge Dr. Chunn's dismissal.    B9

Criticism of a judge for delaying verdicts in cases before him has been rising.
Justice Edward J. Greenfield of State Supreme Court in Manhattan has come under
fire from other courts and from lawyers.    B3

A rise in health insurance rates was approved by the New York State Department
of Insurance. Starting tomorrow, 2.4 million Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield
subscribers in the New York City area will pay an average of 12.1 percent more
for insurance.    B4

A survey of subway station litter covering 200 stations found ''extensive'' or
''significant'' litter at about 15 percent of the token booths and platforms.
The survey was conducted by the Straphangers Campaign, a riders' group.    B3

Battery Park's city in a city     B1

Surfing mania at local beaches     B1

Historic power plant returns     B3

Extra pay for judges rejected     B3

Ameruso waives right to jury trial     B7

Church delays action on move     B8

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              327 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

KOREA'S RULING PARTY LEADER: SOME ARE CALLING HIM A HERO

BYLINE: By SUSAN CHIRA, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 923 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea, June 29


Three weeks ago, Roh Tae Woo was called a villain, the man whose nomination as
the presidential candidate of South Korea's ruling party touched off the worst
political protests this country has endured in more than seven years. Today,
some called him a hero, the man who stunned the nation by offering dramatic
concessions in a bid to resolve the crisis.

By proposing far more wide-ranging concessions than virtually anyone had
expected, Mr. Roh may have improved not only his own stature as a candidate, but
also that of his party, political analysts say.

Until today, the Government was on the defensive, pressed by an increasingly
confident opposition to give in to demands shared by an ever-broader spectrum of
South Korean society. With his proposals to hold direct presidential elections,
restore civil rights to the opposition leader Kim Dae Jung, allow freedom of the
press and respect human rights, Mr. Roh - and, by extension, the ruling party -
may now be able to present themselves as sensitive to the public's aspirations.
This image will undoubtedly help the governing party in what most analysts
believe will be a tough election ahead.

''After Mr. Roh made the announcement this morning, some of the party members
were moved to tears,'' said Hyun Hong Choo, a ruling party member who is close
to Mr. Roh. ''Now we can walk proudly and say we are the party that achieved
this move for greater democratization.''

Even those who view the ruling party with considerably greater skepticism agreed
that today's move would help its standing - within the Government and with the
public at large.

Like ruling parties in other countries, the Democratic Justice Party was formed
on the basis of support for President Chun, and until recently has been loath to
take the lead on policy issues. But as this political crisis deepened, some
ruling party members who wanted the Government to make concessions began to
press their views openly. The very manner of Mr. Roh's announcement - presented
as a party initiative to be approved by President Chun - had the effect of
distancing the party from the President and strengthening it as a political
institution.

''Through this dramatic deed, the ruling party has almost revolutionized the
political situation,'' said Choi Jang Jip, an associate professor of political
science at Korea University in Seoul who recently gained considerable attention
by joining an anti-Government protest. ''I don't think the ruling party can win
the election, but now they can survive.''

Today Mr. Roh seemed very much the candidate. He visited the hospital room of a
student, Lee Han Yol, who has remained in a coma since June 9, when he was hit
in the head by a tear gas canister. He burned incense at the National Cemetery
in the suburbs of Seoul to pay tribute to the nation's war dead. And he visited
a shrine dedicated to Adm. Yi Sun Shin, whose naval daring saved Korea from
Japanese invasion in the 16th century. Admiral Yi remains a powerful symbol of
patriotism and integrity for many Koreans.

Left the Military in 1981

Despite his efforts to invoke such symbols, Mr. Roh may still face considerable
obstacles in his candidacy, analysts here believe. Foremost among them is his
military background, a liability at a time when many Koreans are voicing their
dislike of military intervention in politics. A former general and close
associate of President Chun Doo Hwan, Mr. Roh graduated from the 11th class of
the Korean Military Academy - the class whose members, led by Mr. Chun,
engineered the military coup of December 1979.

He and Mr. Chun served together in South Vietnam, and after Mr. Chun came to
power, Mr. Roh headed the Defense Security Command, the army's political
surveillance network. He left the military in 1981, serving as sports minister,
Home Affairs minister and chairman of the Seoul Olympics Organizing Committee
before assuming the chairmanship of the ruling party.

''The public will consider him a military man, and that puts the opposition in a
strong position,'' said a professor of political science at Seoul National
University. ''Koreans like civilian rule, and that - not because they have good
programs for the future - is why the opposition has a chance'' to win a
presidential election.

But political analysts who have watched Mr. Roh over the years say that he has
demonstrated greater political savvy than many of ex-military men who have run
the country.

''He's behaving like a politician, which is a good thing,'' said a military
specialist. By contrast, he said, former President Park Chung Hee ''had great
political gifts, but he felt it beneath him to use them.''

Mr. Roh is described by those who know him as a patient man, a leading member of
the military who knew how to hold his own without alienating those above him.

''He does not fit into any easy, stereotyped category,'' the military specialist
said. ''He is neither the one who betrays his superior, nor is he slavishly
loyal. He is loyal, but independent.''

This trait may have emboldened Mr. Roh to take steps that President Chun had
resisted in the past. And while it is clear that he still faces considerable
obstacles to becoming president, there is no question here that he emerges
stronger today.

A measure of his strength was found today in opposition attitudes. Replying to a
question about the proposal, the opposition leader Kim Young Sam said, ''What
Roh Tae Woo showed today was great determination.'' On second thought, he said,
drop the word ''great.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              328 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GORE, ENTERING 1988 RACE, PROJECTS 'NEW SOUTH' IMAGE

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1199 words

DATELINE: CARTHAGE, Tenn., June 29


Standing on the steps of a red brick courthouse in this venerable farm town that
is misty with the imagery of the Old South, 39-year-old Senator Albert Gore Jr.
today declared himself a Presidential candidate from ''the New South'' who is
''eager to help build a new America.''

Before several thousand supporters who gathered along the main street of Mr.
Gore's hometown (population 2,672), the youngest Democratic candidate for the
Presidency promised to ''regenerate a sense of national purpose'' for ''a young
and eager and restless nation.''

Mr. Gore said the 1988 election should produce a President who could rival the
Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev. Without mentioning him by name, he called
the 56-year-old Mr. Gorbachev ''a leader who combines youthful energy and
innovation with experience.''

''The free world,'' Mr. Gore declared in a passage that drew some of the day's
loudest cheers, ''urgently needs a leader who can match him, test him, bargain
with him and make the most of this possibly historic opportunity for a safer,
saner world.''

Grasping the Initiative

Suggesting that the United States needed to regain the initiative, Mr. Gore went
on: ''We as Americans have always captured the imagination of people all across
the earth. This election offers a chance for the United States to once again
demonstrate that we have the capacity for self-renewal that the rest of the
world can only dream about.''

Mr. Gore, who would be the youngest President in American history if elected
next year, brings to the Democratic race a careful moderation developed in ten
and a half years in Congress - eight in the house, two and a half in the Senate
- and from a lifetime of watching his father, former Senator Albert Gore Sr.,
who spent 32 years in Congress.

The elder Mr. Gore virtually led the cheering today as he stood proudly behind
his son on the courthouse steps in this town at the heart of the family's
political base.

Carthage and the surrounding area turned out in mass for a down-home political
sendoff. Most of the stores shut down, many people took the day off from work,
and 200 Democratic women baked thousands of cookies to keep the crowd happy
under the hot sun.

Pressing Southern Advantage

Mr. Gore hopes to profit from the creation of ''Super Tuesday,'' March 8, 1988,
when 20 states, many of them in the South, will elect delegates to the national
convention.

The only Southerner among the seven Democrats now in the race, Mr. Gore has seen
his effort to consolidate support in the South stalled by speculation that
Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia would enter the contest.

Even Mr. Gore's own aides concede that he has not yet captured the imagination
of the South. And Mr. Gore himself noted that some in politics have suggested
that given his age he might have waited a few elections before runnng for
President.

But Mr. Gore was unabashed today in offering himself not only as a Southerner,
but as a young Southerner in tune with the region's changing political and
social climate.

''Here in Carthage, we are part of what is called the New South and we are eager
to help build a new America,'' he said. ''Along with other Southerners, we
eagerly anticipate the new and powerful role the South will play in selecting
our Presidential nominee next year and in helping to determine what kind of
America we will lead into the 21st century.''

''I am not running as a Southern candidate,'' he said at another point, ''but as
a national candidate from the South and proud of it.''

Science and the Military

A man with an easy smile, Mr. Gore has staked out his turf in Congress on a
variety of such esoteric issues as the depletion of the ozone layer around the
earth, the regulation of organ transplants and genetic engineering.

He also made himself a specialist on arms control and has been a leader, along
with Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, of a centrist alliance that has
sought alternatives both to President Reagan's policies and to those proposed by
the Democratic Party's more dovish wing.

The caution with which Mr. Gore approaches military questions was revealed in
his address here today.

In the prepared text, Mr. Gore's emphasis was on peace and the need to ''make
nuclear war obsolete.''

But when he gave the speech, Mr. Gore added passages that made clear he also
stood for military preparedness. ''I served in Vietnam,'' he said, reading from
the prepared text, and then added: ''I know the importance of protecting our
national security.''

Mr. Gore demonstrated the central role arms control will play in his campaign by
focusing almost entirely on that subject in an address to an American Legion
post in Manchester, N.H., where he flew after his announcement here.

In the speech, released here, Mr. Gore promoted his proposal to replace
multi-warhead missiles with mobile missiles that have only one warhead. This
could form the basis for an arms control agreement that would reduce the risk of
nuclear war by making it ''impossible for either the Soviet Union or the United
States to gain any advantage whatsoever from a nuclear first strike.''

On domestic issues, Mr. Gore placed himself squarely within the emerging
Democratic consensus, emphasizing in his speech here the need to rebuild
America's educational system, improve the training of its workers, provide
better health care and child care and combat homelessness. He said the United
States should stand for ''civil, equal and human rights.''

On trade, he said he would ''combat unfair trade practices,'' but urged the
nation to embrace ''perfectionism, not protectionism.''

Fame and Family

Mr. Gore, the father of four children, is married to a woman who may well be
better known than he is.

Mary Elizabeth Aitcheson Gore, 38, called Tipper, is a leader in the movement to
call on the recording industry to exercise greater self-restraint and to clearly
label rock songs and videos with explicit sexual or violent themes.

Mrs. Gore has run into strong opposition from some rock stars, but she argues
that she opposes censorship and likes rock music. Her concern, she says, is that
young children are being exposed to songs that seem to glorify rape,
sado-masochism and suicide. Her recent book, ''Raising PG Kids in an X-Rated
Society,'' is selling well.

Although well-liked in this town, Mr. Gore was born in Washington, and has a
nearly perfect establishment upraising.

He graduated from St. Alban's School, a prestigious private school in
Washington, and with honors from Harvard. He attended divinity and then law
school at Vanderbuilt University while he was working as a reporter and then
editorial writer at The Nashville Tennessean. He abruptly entered politics in
1976, when Representative Joe Evins announced his retirement.

The most moving moment in Mr. Gore's address here came after he noted his
experience as a Vietnam veteran. ''I know there are better ways to resolve our
differences than through war,'' he said. ''On the obelisk in front of me are the
names of eight young soldiers from Carthage who paid the ultimate price in that
conflict.'' Then, one by one, he read the names of the eight fallen heroes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Albert Gore Jr. supporter hanging campaign poster (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              329 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Democratic Presidential Contender;
Albert Gore Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 150 words




Current Job: U.S. Senator, Tennessee, since 1985.

Date of Birth: March 31, 1948; Washington.

Education: Harvard University, B.A., 1969; attended Vanderbilt University
Divinity School, 1971-72, and Vanderbilt University School of Law, 1974-76.

Religion: Baptist.

Military Service: Army, with rank of Specialist 5, 1969-71; served in Vietnam.

Married: To Mary Elizabeth (Tipper) Aitcheson, May 19, 1970.

Children: Karenna, 13; Kristin, 10; Sarah, 8; Albert 3d, 4.

Previous Government Position: U.S. Representative, 1977-85.

Other Major Positions: Investigative reporter and editorial writer, The
Tennessean, 1971-76; ran homebuilding business, Tanglewood Homebuilders, Inc.,
1971-76; livestock and tobacco farmer since 1973.

Poll Standing: Strength among Democrats in most recent New York Times/CBS News
Poll: 5 percent, 4th out of eight.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              330 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

15 POLITICAL GROUPS SUE OFFICIALS OF BICENTENNIAL

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 894 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, June 29


In what one civil liberties advocate called ''a case dripping with irony,'' 15
political and social action groups today sued city and Federal officials for
violating their constitutional rights in Philadelphia's celebration of the
bicentennial of the Constitution..

In their suit, filed in Federal District Court, the groups accused the officials
of spying on them, infiltrating some of their meetings and systematically
preventing them from holding protest demonstrations at bicentennial festivities.

The complaint asserts that May 25, the 200th anniversary of the opening of the
Constitutional Convention, organized demonstrators and individuals alike,
wearing buttons and carrying signs, were prevented from entering Independence
Mall, where they intended to protest American involvement in Central America. A
large crowd had already gathered there for a ceremony in which Vice President
Bush was the main speaker.

All of the groups in the lawsuit, which include protesters against United States
foreign policy, advocates of women's rights, religious organizations and
homosexual activists, contend that their sole objective was and is peaceful
dissent.

Free and Peaceful Expression

The objective of the lawsuit, said Mr. Steinhardt, is to end the reputed
infiltration of the groups by the police and to restrain officials and police
agencies from infringing free and peaceful expression in the remainder of the
bicentennial observance.

The next major event in that observance is scheduled for July 16, when 55
members of Congress are to come here to celebrate the achievement, on that date
in 1787, of the Great Compromise that settled the question of Congressional
representation and broke a deadlock that threatened to scuttle the convention
and its work. Federal District Judge John P. Fullam today set a hearing for July
8 on the plaintiffs' request for a preliminary injunction.

The organizations' complaint charges that they have been subjected to ''spying,
surveillance and infiltration by agents and informers without any legitimate
cause or purpose.'' These actions, it says, violate constitutionally guaranteed
rights of free speech, assembly and privacy, and ''chill and deter open, free
public discourse.''

In reports published over the weekend in The Philadelphia Inquirer, Police
Commissioner Kevin M. Tucker was quoted as saying that an undercover operation
to gather intelligence about various groups had been organized in connection
with security for the bicentennial observance. According to the reports, Mr.
Tucker said that an elaborate, nine-page set of guidelines for the operation had
been developed. ''Everything we have done is within the law and appropriate,''
he was quoted as saying.

Not Condoning 'Anything Illegal'

Mr. Tucker was said today by his second-in-command, First Deputy Commissioner
Robert Armstrong, to be traveling in Israel. Mr. Armstrong confirmed that the
nine-page set of guidelines existed, and said that ''we would not condone
anybody doing anything illegal.''

In a letter to the commissioner dated today, Mr. Steinhardt said that he was
''saddened and shocked to learn you have adopted a policy of using undercover
Philadelphia police officers to spy on groups engaged in peaceful and lawful
political activity.'' This, the letter said, ''offends the fundamental notion
that citizens have the right to associate among themselves to achieve political
and social aims without governmental interference'' and ''inevitably discourages
some from becoming active in those organizations.''

Today's lawsuit charged that on May 25, the police encircled and barricaded an
estimated 300 people who were protesting United States policy in Central
America, thus preventing them from entering Independence Mall. There a large,
genial crowd had gathered for bicentennial festivities and to hear Mr. Bush and
others.

Hobart G. Cawood, the superintendent of Independence National Historical Park,
said today that the group could have been accommodated at another adjacent site
in the park, had a permit been applied for, but that the group did not apply.
The area where the crowd was gathered had been allocated to We the People 200,
the public-private organization that planned and executed the celebration, he
said, adding that under park rules, individuals but not organized groups should
have been allowed to enter the Mall. Mr. Cawood, who was named as one of several
defendants in the suit, is also a top official of We the People 200.

The complaint in today's suit also charged that:

* Police officers told individuals they could not enter the Mall wearing any
button but a ''We the People 200'' button.

* A man accompanying one of the protesters was prevented from entering the Mall,
even though he wore no button and carried no sign. ''Don't give me any lip,''
the man, John Grant, said he was told by a park ranger. Mr. Grant identified
himself today at a news conference as a Vietnam veteran from Philadelphia.

* A park guard, shouting ''No signs,'' pulled protest signs out of the hands of
a couple.

A woman, it was charged, was denied access to the Mall by the Philadelphia
police because she wore a button reading, ''Free South Africa - End Apartheid.''
An officer told her, according to the complaint, that only ''Reagan people'' and
people without signs or buttons could enter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              331 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

V.A. IS ORDERED TO DROP PLANS TO CLOSE 9 COUNSELING CENTERS

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 487 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 29


A Federal judge today ordered the Veterans Administration to drop plans to close
several of the 189 popular storefront centers that counsel Vietnam veterans
suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder, the Vietnam-era version of combat
fatigue.

Last year the centers provided counseling for 140,000 veterans with alcohol,
drug, employment and other personality problems associated with the post-combat
syndrome.

The decision by Federal District Judge Thomas F. Hogan here upheld a complaint
by the Vietnam Veterans of America, a small but politically active veterans'
service organization.

Congress has extended the life of the program twice since it started in 1980 and
has been awaiting a Veterans Administration study of the program's value before
considering a further extension. The study was due April 1, but a spokesman said
today that ''it's been delayed.'' He would not elaborate.

Transfer of Counselors

This spring the Veterans Administration moved to close nine of the outreach
centers and transfer the counselors to nearby Veterans Administration hospitals.
A number of studies have shown that many Vietnam veterans, particularly those
disturbed by combat experiences, would not participate in treatment and
counseling programs at large Veterans Administration medical centers.

So far, one center, in Wilmington, Del., has been closed. The eight others were
scheduled to close this summer.

The veterans' lawsuit charged that the closings would defy Congressional
requirements that no action be taken on any of the centers before Oct. 1, when
Congress is to decide on the extension.

Today Judge Hogan said he agreed that the agency's action was ''inconsistent
with the law.''

Five of Congress Were Plaintiffs

The Veterans Administration has not given a reason for the closings except to
say that it needed ''the experience'' of closing a few outreach centers to
prepare for a the transfer of all 189 storefront centers to Veterans
Administration hospitals. Of the agency's $27 billion budget last year, about
$40 million was spent on the outreach effort.

Five members of Congress, all on committees involved in oversight of veterans
affairs, were among the plaintiffs in the case. They were Senators John F. Kerry
of Massachussetts and Terry Sanford of North Carolina, and Representatives Lane
Evans of Illinois and Thomas A. Daschle and Tim Johnson of South Dakota, all
Democrats.

In court pleadings, the Veterans Administration denied the plaintiffs'
assertions that the closings would deprive Vietnam veterans of needed
counseling.

However, in preparation for the court hearing on the injunction, lawyers for the
Vietnam Veterans of America obtained Veterans Administration staff documents
that cited widespread mistrust among Vietnam veterans of the agency's hospitals.

The agency told the court that staff members' criticisms of the closings had
been considered and rejected.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              332 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

'JACKET' ACTOR INVENTS HIS DIALOGUE

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, June 29


Lee Ermey's dialogue as a vicious Marine sergeant in ''Full Metal Jacket'' is a
poisonous torrent of obscenities spewed onto terrified recruits. Much of the
language is his own invention, remembered from his boot camp days as a
17-year-old farm boy and refined in the 30 months he served as a Marine Corps
drill instructor during the Vietnam War.

There are times when a role and an actor cannot be separated, when art picks up
life by the scruff of the neck and throws it onto the screen: Harold Russell,
whose hands were blown off in World War II, playing a handless sailor in ''The
Best Years of Our Lives'' in 1946; Dr. Haing S. Ngor, a Cambodian refugee,
playing the deadly games of ''The Killing Fields''; Dexter Gordon, a jazz
musician whose life has been scarred by alcohol, playing an alcoholic
saxophonist in '' 'Round Midnight.''

Mr. Ermey's 11-year career as a marine was ended by a rocket north of Da Nang in
1969. He will not talk about the war.

''If a person's wife and children were killed in a terrible automobile accident,
20 years later it will bother him to talk about it,'' he said. But Mr. Ermey is
still obsessed by the war, buying each new Vietnam novel immediately and
throwing half of them away in disgust after reading the first chapter. He is
trying to write a Vietnam novel himself. And he has made a career out of helping
to put the Vietnam War on film, as technical advisor on ''Apocalypse Now,''
''The Boys in Company C,'' ''Purple Hearts'' and now ''Full Metal Jacket,'' a
Stanley Kubrick film that follows some members of a platoon from their boot camp
haircuts to their deaths during the Tet offensive.

'I Get to Play Cowboy'

Dr. Ngor and Mr. Russell won Academy Awards for their performances and
disappeared into the real world. Mr. Gordon was nominated for an Oscar this
year, a detour from his career as a musician. To Mr. Ermey - a 43-year-old
extrovert with a shaggy sense of humor and shrapnel in his shoulder - acting is
the cat's meow, the icing on the cake.

''I love being in front of the camera,'' he said, with a grin that started at
his bushy eyebrows and ended at his chin. ''I get to play cowboy.''

After all, what is a drill instructor but an actor? ''Nobody can be that
nasty,'' he said.

When Mr. Ermey asked if he could audition for the part of Gunnery Sergeant
Hartman in ''Full Metal Jacket,'' Mr. Kubrick told him he wasn't vicious enough.
So he made up his own audition. He insulted, ridiculed and harassed the British
soldiers he was interviewing for roles as Marine recruits. The interviews were
videotaped. ''Stanley liked the dialogue so much he had it typed up, 45 pages,''
Mr. Ermey said, ''and he used some of it in the film.''

Inventing Viciousness

Mr. Ermey never rehearsed with Matthew Modine, Vincent D'Onofrio, Arliss Howard
or the other members of the film's platoon. When the camera rolled and he spewed
out invective, he said, ''It was terrifying to those actors.''

''My objective was intimidation,'' he said. ''No one had ever invaded their
private space. No one had ever put his head close to them. The first time I came
up to Vincent, all he had to say was 'Yes, sir' and 'No, sir,' and he was so
shocked he blew his lines three or four times.''

Mr. Ermey's own rehearsals were surreal. They took place in a 50-foot-long
rehearsal room while Leon Vitali, Mr. Kubrick's assistant, threw oranges and
tennis balls at him. ''I had to catch the ball and throw it back to Leon as fast
as possible and say the lines as fast as possible. If I were to slur a word,
drop a word or slow down, I had to start over. I had to do it 20 times without a
mistake. Leon was my drill instructor.''

Born in Kansas, Mr. Ermey moved to Washington State at the age of 11. He
enlisted in the Marines as soon as he graduated from high school, intending to
spend 30 years in the Marine Corps. Boot camp didn't change his mind. ''I was
strong,'' he said. ''I had five brothers, and my father was a strict
disciplinarian. I got a beating every day whether I needed it or not. And I was
a good shot. I was a country boy, so I knew how to shoot.''

'Macho' Commercials

In 1969, with his back and arm laced with shrapnel, he spent four months in the
hospital, and then used his sick pay to buy a brothel on Okinawa that he turned
into a drinking club. But he said he found it ''boring to stay in one place too
long'' and moved to the Philippines, where he married, went to college briefly,
and did television commercials for what he calls ''macho merchandise'' -rum,
watches, blue jeans and running shoes.

Then Francis Coppola went to the Philippines to make ''Apocalypse Now,'' and Mr.
Ermey's life was changed.

''I drank as much as I could hold and I smoked as much as I could manage,'' Mr.
Ermey said of the landscape of his life. ''The whisky went out the window eight
months ago and the cigarettes three weeks ago. I never had a problem with the
wild, wild women. When I want a cigarette, I run around the block a few times. I
want to live to be very, very old.''

Mr. Kubrick had asked Mr. Ermey to create a boot camp that was ''the closest
thing to a documentary,'' and, Mr. Ermey said, ''It's all real.'' Reality
extends to the dog clippers used to shear the recruits in the movie's opening
scene. When Mr. Kubrick couldn't find clippers that sheared close enough, Mr.
Ermey called a friend at the Marine Corps training base at Parris Island, S.C. -
the Marine base simulated in the movie -and was told to use clippers designed
for French poodles.

That does not imply that Gunnery Sergeant Hartman is Staff Sergeant Ermey.
''Heaven forbid!'' the actor said, looking mild and jaunty in a black-and-white
checked jacket and a shirt with tiny flowers. ''I love people. Hartman was
warped: too rough, too harsh, too demanding. But he was real.''

Mr. Ermey said he gave up ''a good job and more money'' - supervising quality
control at a nuclear power plant under construction - for ''Full Metal Jacket.''
Now he obsessively plays golf, fishes for bass and trout with his 5-year-old
son, and raises ''hundreds of different cactus'' at his house on the edge of a
southern California desert. And he waits.

''Of course, I want a career as an actor,'' he said. ''There are two years of my
life missing in a resume. So I don't have anywhere else to go.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lee Emory in ''Full Metal Jacket''

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company

                              333 of 333 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI CURRENCY MOVE

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 10, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 74 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 29


Vietnam's Foreign Trade Bank has opened the first foreign currency accounts for
Vietnamese who receive money from abroad, Hanoi radio said today. The report
added that the change allowed Vietnamese to exchange foreign currencies at
profit, use them in business transactions with one another or on trips abroad.
The accounts will handle currencies of the United States, Britain, France,
Switzerland, West Germany, Canada, Japan and Hong Kong.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
