
                               1 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 1, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Once and Future Candidate

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 475 words


Meg Greenfield of The Washington Post once described her generation as having
spent its adulthood through 1972 deciding whether to vote for or against Richard
Nixon. A slightly later generation can say something similar about Edward
Kennedy. He has not run for President in every campaign since 1968 but he has
invariably cast a shadow as a potential candidate. His withdrawal from
contention in 1988 ratifies the current direction of American politics.

Recall the 1968 Democratic Convention, when young protesters rioted against the
Vietnam War and the Chicago police rioted against the protesters. It was then
that Ted Kennedy first ran for President. The assassination of Robert Kennedy
only two months before had decapitated the hopes of his youthful legions. So
they briefly raised the youngest Kennedy to their shoulders in protest against
the Old Politics of Lyndon Johnson and Hubert Humphrey.

The surge soon collapsed, but a few days after the convention, Democrats around
the country received in the mail a pale green campaign button that read ''EMK
1972.'' By 1972, though, the death of a female companion in an auto accident at
Chappaquiddick haunted Ted Kennedy's hopes. And before the 1976 campaign, his
son's cancer also intruded.

In 1980, encouraged by vast popularity in the polls, he challenged President
Carter - only to see his 28-point lead overwhelmed by the crisis atmosphere of
hostages in Iran and Soviet troops in Afghanistan. And now, after five
Presidential elections, it is Senator Kennedy who, for many people, embodies the
Old Politics. That is to say the Old Liberal Politics, for the torch has been
passed, to the right.

The Senator has moved toward the political center; witness his sponsorship of
important crime legislation and his support for the Gramm-Rudman
budget-balancing bill. Yet people still see him as the Last Liberal, and to the
extent that betokens faithful concern for equal opportunity and for the poor,
it's a label he probably welcomes.

There is no shame, in any case, in merely being, after 23 years, an outstanding
Senator, which colleagues in both parties call him. Mr. Kennedy's opportunities
for achievement may even be enhanced by withdrawing from the 1988 sweepstakes.
His every act will no longer be discounted as motivated only by Presidential
ambition.

This withdrawal empties center stage for others in 1988; Ted Kennedy is unlikely
to be an obvious or formidable candidate any time soon. But one day the torch
may pass again, to voters concerned for the people left behind. Though other
Democrats will seek their support, this political generation may still have
Candidate Kennedy to contend with. Remember that Ronald Reagan was 69 years old
when he was elected President. It's possible to imagine a future button reading
EMK 2000; in that year, Ted Kennedy will be just 68.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 1, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

What Poets Do That Politicians Don't

BYLINE: By M. L. Rosenthal; M. L. Rosenthal is author of ''Poems 1964-1980,''
''Poetry and the Common Life'' and ''The Modern Poetic Sequence: The Genius of
Modern Poetry'' (with Sally M. Gall).

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 978 words


Statesmen, ordinary officeholders and political pundits rarely consult poets or
their work, except for an occasional misquotation or out-of-context citation
intended as a rhetorical flourish. Churchill and Roosevelt quoted Longfellow
across the seas in World War II; Yeats, for some reason, is the usual victim
nowadays.

At times, though, some self-ordained ''realist,'' brain-ossified by years of
power-karate - someone who hasn't contemplated a scruple or a fresh thought (let
alone a poem) in years, if ever - will choose to allude to poets. He will allow
that certain ideas may be all right for the poets but not for hard-eyed
''leaders'' who can tell up from down in the rat maze that must be our natural
habitat.

Poets, you see, are impractical dreamers who know nothing of the world. They
can't peer around corners like the experts who knew what we were doing in
Vietnam and why we bombed Cambodia. They share the naivete of all those ignorant
people to whom a nuclear freeze seems sensible, and who would like to see actual
disarmament and who haven't a clue why great governments keep encouraging killer
groups the world over.

They are not impressed by what Auden called ''the windiest militant trash / That
Important Persons shout.'' But they are indeed impressed, in matters of war and
peace, by what their fellow poets have observed and reported in poems of genuine
quality: the only kind of writ-ing that has to be absolutely free of cant.

One thing such poets have done is to focus on the essential fact of war, not the
smoke screen called ''foreign policy'' but the experience itself: the official
murder and victimization of multitudes. Even Homer's ''Iliad,'' the supreme
example of ancient war poetry, is crammed - despite its heroes in gleaming armor
and its gods and goddesses swooping into the fray - with unsqueamish close-ups
of sheer butchery. That marvelous poem is, in fact, an abattoir of the
imagination, rank with blood and death.

In later times, it was Walt Whitman who read the glamour out of war once and for
all. For instance, in the poem ''A Sight in Camp in the Daybreak Gray and Dim,''
Whitman, who served as a nurse in the Civil War, describes the war dead with
love and pity, seeing the face of the crucified Christ before him in his
climactic description. In the same way, Yeats, in his great sequences of the
Irish civil war, focuses with helpless dismay on the ''nightmare'' of a time
when ''a drunken soldiery / Can leave the mother, murdered at her door, / To
crawl in her own blood, and go scot-free.''

If we think of current events in Central America and elsewhere, we can hardly
say that the world's leaders have directly faced what Yeats faced in 1919 - the
central, physical, inescapably painful reality beyond all rhetoric and beyond
the improvised ambiguities of ''policy.''

Few people realize how drastically our outstanding modern poetry has wrestled
with the complexity, the intractability, the existential difficulties of
historical circumstances, and with the madness of subordinating individual lives
to the abstractions of power. But again, even Homer saw the bitter irony of the
way human beings spoil their own best possibilities.

Wilfred Owen, the young British poet who matured into a powerful truth-teller
shortly before he was killed in World War I, summed up the horror of what passes
for statesmanship in two lines of his poem ''Sensibility'': ''Wretched are they,
and mean / With paucity that never was simplicity.''

Poets naturally differ in their politics. I can hardly speak for all of them.
And yet, at this level of awareness and concern beyond politics in any ordinary
sense, almost all the poets I know personally and through their work are at one
in their preoccupation with a humane realism foreign to the Reagans and Nixons
of the world, and also to Harry Truman, who could say he'd never lost a night's
sleep over the Bomb. True, the point may well be made that poetry, be it ever so
penetrating and free of official pomposities, offers no solutions.

But one must ask: Don't the so-called statesmen with their so-called policies
confuse the ways they create misunderstanding, violent confrontation and
ideological prejudice with producing practical solutions? Did inventing the
Bomb, and then using it, and then proliferating and ''improving'' it - all the
result of deliberate policy - constitute a higher practicality? Is all the
technological talk about kinds and numbers and distribution of hellish weapons,
so nuclear and so suggestive of undisclosed assumptions and plans, calculated to
lead humanity to turn its back on war and on the waste entailed by forever
preparing for war and waging it?

The use of poetry resides in the intimacy and honesty indispensable to the high
exercise of an art - something almost totally neglected in schools, although it
is a vital key to education and to the emancipated mind (as are the other
literary forms and philosophy). In thinking of war and peace, we have first of
all the poets who have had immediate experience of war or have been very close
to it: Whitman, Owen, Robert Graves, Ramon Guthrie, Edward Thomas, Randall
Jarrell and many others. And beyond the projection of direct experience (like
Owen's picture of a gas-attack victim ''guttering, choking, drowning''), these
and other poets have an implied faith, based on their quick sense of language.

They believe - they know - that people can get out from under the poisonous
cliches of any system and come to terms as brothers and sisters. The difficult
questions would be easier if one great lesson of art, that everything we are and
feel can be revealed and shared frankly, without prejudice, were taken
seriously. Simple people everywhere are taught to stay simple - to identify with
and to die for platitudes. But it does not seem necessary for this to go on
forever.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 1, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TV: 'INTIMATE STRANGERS,' 10 YEARS AFTER VIETNAM

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 449 words


Straining to say something significant about Vietnam and moral values,
''Intimate Strangers'' ends up close to incoherent babble. The television movie
on CBS at 9 tonight stars Stacy Keach and Teri Garr as one of the more hapless
couples likely to be encountered in this new year.

The story, written by Norman MacLeod Morrill, begins in Saigon in the 1970's as
the American troops are being pulled out. Dr. Jeffrey Bierston (Mr. Keach) and
his wife, Sally (Miss Garr), a nurse, have just finished a life-saving
operation, and they arrange to meet later with their bags to join the
evacuation. She never makes it. Cut to 10 years later. Jeff is a successful
general practitioner - ''I treat tennis elbow, crabs and sunburn, that's the
kind of doctor I am'' - in Jacksonville, Fla., sporting a splendid sailboat and
a female friend (Cathy Lee Crosby). Just when he has about given up trying to
find Sally, she appears among a group of Vietnamese boat-people. She is
accompanied by a young Asian boy named George (Max Barabas), who seems to speak
perfect English.

It seems that Sally has spent most of the previous decade in a Vietnamese prison
camp, and she is understandably a bit tense about resuming her marriage. For one
thing, she is not happy to find that Jeff has ignored his potential as a master
surgeon. For another, she keeps having recurring nightmares about her camp
experiences. And her relationship to George seems to be a bit more complicated
than she is saying (the final revelation of truth is somehat less than
surprising).

Jeff, however, is unfailingly understanding, even as he finds Sally locking
herself in a closet with a hunting knife. His attractive friend pops up
periodically to make such grand announcements as ''this is the first time I've
ever wanted to fight for someone I love.'' And an old war buddy, now a
psychiatrist, agrees to look into Sally's problem although, as played by Max
Gail, this character has little to do except look affably thoughtful. Meanwhile,
Sally becomes involved with a Hispanic woman (Priscilla Lopez) who is running a
failing clinic for the poor where, at one of the story's frequent points of
unbelievability, a stabbing victim is rushed in for an emergency operation.

Directed by Robert Ellis Miller, who also directed Mr. Keach's film debut in
''The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter,'' the performers manage to look intensely
earnest even as the production grows more and more pointless. Only young George,
who spends most of his time sitting by and watching the grown-ups, is totally
sympathetic. ''Intimate Strangers'' was produced by John Bard Manulis, Gladys
Rackmil and Kenny Utt for Nederlander TV and Film Productions Inc.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Teri Garr in ''Intimate Strangers''

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 1, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CULINARY AMERICA: FOOD FASCINATION SWEEPS THE NATION

BYLINE: By CRAIG CLAIBORNE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1179 words


IN major metropolitan areas throughout the United States, some of the most
intriguing walks are through the well-decked halls of recently installed food
emporiums. It is as though the past decade had given rise to extraordinary
museums with edible works of art.

I thought of this recently when I navigated through crowds in one Manhattan food
gallery, Dean & DeLuca's. There were cooked terrines of fowl, including
partridge with orange flavor and squab with truffles. Nestled close by were
stuffed and trussed confits, savory preserves of duck and goose, ready to be
cooked and served or added, perhaps, to a fine winter cassoulet.

Great slabs of salmon from Norway and Scotland lay near an elaborate selection
of stuffed, fresh-made pastas - agnolotti, tortellini, tortelloni and raviolini
filled with chopped wild mushrooms, pesto sauce, pumpkin or ground veal blended
with finely chopped prosciutto and mortadella. Bottaga, or pressed tuna roe from
Sardinia, vied for space with zampone, cooked pig's foot with a savory ground
meat filling. Shoppers had their choice of six types of wild mushrooms and a
wealth of fresh truffles, black and white, from Italy or France. There was a
mountain of fresh shallots, a member of the onion family that, until recently,
was neglected by the majority of American cooks.

The message was clear: The United States has arrived gastronomically. As at no
other time, we are indulging ourselves in foods from the far reaches of the
globe. Here at home, we are producing everything from fruits to foie gras that
compare favorably with their European counterparts.

It is mostly price, not availability or familiarity, that limits access to these
items. Some of the most modest grocery stores and supermarkets carry impressive
displays of fine mustards, great virgin olive oils, goat cheeses, sun-dried
tomatoes - the whole epicurean experience once reserved for so-called gourmets.

Many foods that were novelties only a decade ago are taken for granted now.
Consider, for example, greens like arugula, raddichio and lamb's lettuce or
herbs like fresh coriander, chervil, ginger and basil, which I first encountered
20 years ago in a restaurant in Manhattan's Little Italy. My lunchtime host
recommended that I sample fettuccine with a basil-based sauce called pesto; it
was love at first taste.

For many Americans basil and other condiments entered the lexicon only recently
- but with a vengeance signaling a major shift in culinary tastes from the
provincial to the cosmopolitan.

The forces contributing to this shift have been many. There has been, for
example, a mechanical revolution. The food processor has come into its own,
along with professional cooking ranges and an array of machines for making
everything from ice cream to crepes. The American public has come to understand
that it is possible to create sophisticated dishes with relative ease in the
home.

Ten years ago, those who communicated about cooking and dining were an innocent
lot. Today, the public is being educated by a host of well-trained writers and
instructors; witness, for example, the explosion in books and articles on food,
the growing roster of cooking schools here and abroad, and the number of
Americans who travel to sample new dishes and new restaurants and who, on
return, reproduce their discoveries at home.

There has come a particular fascination with the cooking of Asia -China, Japan,
India, Thailand and, to a lesser degree, Vietnam and Cambodia - in part because
more Americans have visited those countries, in part because in the wake of war
and economic or governmental upheavals, many fine Asian cooks have migrated
here. The opening of China's borders helped foster interest in that nation's
cuisine. Recent exhibits, films and celebrations of India have enhanced interest
in Indian foods beyond curry.

At the same time, increasing numbers of young American men and women have
mastered the art of fine professional cooking and have discovered their ability
to improvise. Taking their lead from advocates of nouvelle French cuisine, young
American chefs like Jonathan Waxman of Jams and Anne Rosenzweig of Arcadia, both
in New York; Dean Fearing of The Mansion in Dallas, and Patrick O'Connell of The
Inn in Washington, Va., have initiated a great American homecoming. It is a
thorough appreciation of American foods, with imaginative European borrowings,
that concentrates on Cajun and Creole, Tex-Mex, barbecues and soul food. Mr.
O'Connell's preparation of black-eyed peas is one such example; he anoints this
generally pedestrian dish with a vinaigrette sauce, made with balsamic vinegar,
and thin slices of Virginia ham, smoked goose breast and hot, sauteed domestic
foie gras.

This justifiable pride in regional American cookery has not found us wallowing
in mom's pot roast, fruit-flavored gelatin desserts and blueberry cobbler.
Rather, it has meant that young chefs are taking domestic products - blue corn
meal, domestic goat cheese, American caviar, locally produced foie gras, wild
mushrooms, quail eggs, free-range chickens and the like - and are transforming
them into what may become the classics of the future.

Word of this American revolution has spread, until more of us than ever before
are able to discuss, without explanation or apology, dishes such as
bouillabaisse, coulibiac of salmon, kung pao chicken, hot and sour soup, spring
rolls, taramasalata, saltimbocca, gravlaks and duck a l'orange. We discourse and
dine on croissants and brioches and tartes tatin as easily as we once noshed on
danish.

The only disturbing note is the attitude of many who appreciate fine cooking,
and of many more who critique the subject. It is an attitude that says we are in
a period of ''overkill,'' in which too many foods have become too much a part of
our cuisine and for which the only appropriate response is ''Oh, that again?''
These same critics deplore quiche lorraine and ridicule anything that has kiwi
fruit in it, on it or around it.

It is an attitude I deplore. A quiche may no longer appeal as the most original
and elegant of dishes, but, like kiwi fruit, it is worth being integrated into
our new culinary culture.

What will we embrace next? A new recipe or dish, I think, that will be an
outgrowth of a cuisine we already have mastered. There will be borrowings from
foreign cuisines, to be sure, but less than in the recent past.

I am persuaded that we will see an enormous increase in sophisticated foods that
are ingeniously packaged so that they retain their just-cooked freshness while
being easy to prepare; just heat and serve sweetbread and truffle creations,
lobster in elegant sauces, a treasury of dishes with wild mushrooms, a variety
of ''preserved'' poultry dishes of the sort known to the French as confits, and
so on. Indeed, fresh and simple to prepare may become the bywords of the year.

Considering the thousands of hours that we spend at the dining table, we should
not only enjoy but revel in this culinary expansionism. I believe this nation is
finally learning that.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 1, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Once and Future Candidate

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 475 words


Meg Greenfield of The Washington Post once described her generation as having
spent its adulthood through 1972 deciding whether to vote for or against Richard
Nixon. A slightly later generation can say something similar about Edward
Kennedy. He has not run for President in every campaign since 1968 but he has
invariably cast a shadow as a potential candidate. His withdrawal from
contention in 1988 ratifies the current direction of American politics.

Recall the 1968 Democratic Convention, when young protesters rioted against the
Vietnam War and the Chicago police rioted against the protesters. It was then
that Ted Kennedy first ran for President. The assassination of Robert Kennedy
only two months before had decapitated the hopes of his youthful legions. So
they briefly raised the youngest Kennedy to their shoulders in protest against
the Old Politics of Lyndon Johnson and Hubert Humphrey.

The surge soon collapsed, but a few days after the convention, Democrats around
the country received in the mail a pale green campaign button that read ''EMK
1972.'' By 1972, though, the death of a female companion in an auto accident at
Chappaquiddick haunted Ted Kennedy's hopes. And before the 1976 campaign, his
son's cancer also intruded.

In 1980, encouraged by vast popularity in the polls, he challenged President
Carter - only to see his 28-point lead overwhelmed by the crisis atmosphere of
hostages in Iran and Soviet troops in Afghanistan. And now, after five
Presidential elections, it is Senator Kennedy who, for many people, embodies the
Old Politics. That is to say the Old Liberal Politics, for the torch has been
passed, to the right.

The Senator has moved toward the political center; witness his sponsorship of
important crime legislation and his support for the Gramm-Rudman
budget-balancing bill. Yet people still see him as the Last Liberal, and to the
extent that betokens faithful concern for equal opportunity and for the poor,
it's a label he probably welcomes.

There is no shame, in any case, in merely being, after 23 years, an outstanding
Senator, which colleagues in both parties call him. Mr. Kennedy's opportunities
for achievement may even be enhanced by withdrawing from the 1988 sweepstakes.
His every act will no longer be discounted as motivated only by Presidential
ambition.

This withdrawal empties center stage for others in 1988; Ted Kennedy is unlikely
to be an obvious or formidable candidate any time soon. But one day the torch
may pass again, to voters concerned for the people left behind. Though other
Democrats will seek their support, this political generation may still have
Candidate Kennedy to contend with. Remember that Ronald Reagan was 69 years old
when he was elected President. It's possible to imagine a future button reading
EMK 2000; in that year, Ted Kennedy will be just 68.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 2, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Team Intends to Search Another Laos Air Crash Site

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 92 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 1


A United States military team prepared today to fly to Laos on Thursday for a
preliminary survey of an air crash site that will be excavated for the remains
of American servicemen.

The six-man group, led by Lieut. Col. Joe Harvey of the Joint Casualty
Resolution Center in Hawaii, will proceed to a place where an Air Force AC-130
crashed during the Indochina war.

American officials have refused, at the Laotian Government's request, to reveal
the location. A previous crash site, excavated in February, yielded the remains
of 13 servicemen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 2, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE REVIVING A CHICAGO SLUM

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 835 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Jan. 1


Four years ago Argyle Street in the heart of this city's rundown Uptown area
resembled a ghost town after dark. Its commercial life was dominated by pimps,
prostitutes and drug pushers who assembled on unlit, crumbling sidewalks to ply
their trades.

Today Argyle Street is fast becoming a flourishing ''Little Saigon,'' The city's
small Vietnamese refugee community has turned it into an exotic pocket of
restaurants and shops with an Indochina flavor.

On weekends a festive atmosphere prevails as the 50 or so family-owned
businesses are crowded by Americans and Vietnamese, Cambodians, Laotians, and
Hmong from all over the Middle West.

The three-block strip, often called the Argyle International Area, is in the
lower-class, mixed ethnic community on the North Side where the Vietnamese blend
in easily. Most of the city's estimated 10,000 Vietnamese have settled in
concentrated pockets, providing a strong base for growth and change.

Ten years after their arrival, the impact they have had on the neighborhood is
becoming obvious.

Fledgling businesses, including restaurants, groceries, pharmacies and medical
centers, have revitalized commerce. The streets, particularly Argyle, are
cleaner, safer and brighter since the Vietnamese banded together to obtain new
street lights, sidewalks and signs from the city.

''We really care about this neighborhood,'' said one restaurateur, Lam Ton.
''When I first opened my restaurant here in 1983, I used to sweep the streets
myself. People used to look at me very oddly.''

Alderman Marion Volini, whose ward includes Argyle Street, observed: ''The
change has been astronomical. No one used to dare go there after 5 P.M. and now
there is a real night life.''

A Long Way to Go

But the Argyle International Area has a long way to go before rivaling the
success of Chicago's highly developed Chinatown on the South Side.

''These are very tiny businesses and some are really struggling,'' said Ngoan
Le, the executive director of the Vietnamese Community Center.

About 80 percent of the refugees who settled in the Chicago area after Saigon
fell 10 years ago decided to stay, said Edwin Silverman, coordinator of the
Illinois refugee resettlement program.

''The Vietnamese who decided to brave the cold and stay have really prospered,''
Mr. Silverman added. ''In fact, they've probably settled more rapidly than any
of the other refugee groups who came here.''

Refugees Bent on Survival

Most of the refugees arrived penniless, bent on survival, said Miss Ngoan.
Despite language and cultural barriers, many have struggled through the first
steps of economic assimilation.

''What has helped them gain capital is that many families from the same
neighborhood in Vietnam will live together in one small apartment so they can
pool their resources and live more cheaply,'' she explained. ''To save money
they are willing to put up with cramped quarters in rundown buildings in
low-rent areas.''

Mrs. Volini said: ''Argyle Street is a real example of the bootstrap ethic by
new arrivals. It's exciting for the people in Uptown to see the American dream
being relived before our eyes.''

She praised the priority that the Vietnamese placed on education, which has
driven up reading and mathematics scores in Uptown schools.

''People now see this as a desirable place,'' she added.

Lan and Lai Le agree. They recently opened a restaurant, Pagolac, with $60,000
Mr. Lai earned by working two full-time jobs for several years.

'Has a Lot of Potential'

''We opened here because we think the Chinatown atmosphere here has a lot of
potential,'' said Mr. Lai, who was a police investigator in Saigon in the
Vietnam War.

Just a few doors down, Mr. Lam, owner of the Mekong Restaurant, presides over an
established and thriving business that caters to an American crowd. Mr. Lam, a
former employee of the United States State Department in Saigon, is starting the
nation's first Vietnamese frozen food manufacturing business.

Like his compatriots, Mr. Lam, who is president of the Vietnamese Chamber of
Commerce, does not borrow from banks. ''Generally speaking, we Vietnamese have
not explored the banking system in the United States yet,'' he said.

The new arrivals find it difficult to establish credit, said Miss Ngoan. To
counteract this, the Vietnamese Community Center has set up a Business
Development Project to put together loan packages for businessmen.

The Vietnamese consider the Argyle Street area a permanent home.

''We are trying to encourage more Vietnamese to move to Chicago to strengthen
this base,'' said Mr. Lam. ''We think Chicago has a good atmosphere and business
opportunities for refugees.''

''Right now the competition here is very tough and our prices and profits are
too low,'' complained Pham Chau Nam, a pharmacist who runs a video store out of
his pharmacy and subleases parts of his small storefront shop to three
businesses.

To this Miss Ngoan observed with a shrug, ''It's hard, but it's a good start.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lam Ton (NYT/Steve Kagan)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SENDING AIDES TO HANOI BUT STILL RESISTS TIES

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1285 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 2


Although the United States is sending a high-level delegation to Hanoi next
week, there has been no visible movement toward formal diplomatic relations.

Officials believe Hanoi is ready for normal relations, partly as a balance with
its involvement with the Soviet Union, but also to rebuff China and to obtain
American investment in such fields as offshore oil exploration. Vietnamese
officials have welcomed private Americans who have urged reconciliation and
exchange programs. A group of educators is to visit Vietnam this week, for
example, to lay the groundwork for a teacher exchange.

But more than 10 years after the end of the Vietnam War, the United States
continues to resist diplomatic relations, citing as the latest obstacle the
presence of an estimated 140,000 Vietnamese troops in Cambodia. Hanoi, which
invaded in 1978, accuses China of having used Cambodia as a surrogate to attack
Vietnam.

''We will not normalize until this is resolved to allow the Khmer people to have
free choice,'' Richard L. Armitage, Assistant Secretary of Defense, said in a
recent interview.

Highest Delegation Since '77

Mr. Armitage is going to Hanoi with Paul D. Wolfowitz, Assistant Secretary of
State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, and with Richard Childress, political
and military affairs director of the National Security Council staff at the
White House.

It is the highest-level delegation since 1977, when Leonard Woodcock, then
president of the United Auto Workers, was sent by President Carter to explore
opening diplomatic relations. Those efforts fell victim to a series of events in
1978, including the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia and the establishment of
Chinese-American relations.

The talks next week are to focus on the other major issue between Hanoi and
Washington: accounting for Americans missing in action.

''The Vietnamese have indicated greater cooperation on this issue than was
evident heretofore,'' Mr. Armitage said.

In recent months, he said, Vietnam has returned remains of Americans at a faster
rate and has allowed an American team to search a B-52 crash site, the first of
a series to be explored.

Plan Presented by Hanoi

In August, Mr. Armitage said, Vietnamese officials presented the United States
with a plan to obtain and provide as much information on the missing as possible
by the end of 1987. Consequently, the Administration has adopted the view that
accounting for the missing is ''not a precondition to any sort of
normalization,'' as Mr. Armitage put it.

In a wider sense, however, it has political impact on American attitudes.

''They know fully and without a doubt that this issue is not going to go away,''
Mr. Armitage said. ''It is not a precondition. But it is a simple fact of life
that the American people will not stand for normalization until this problem is
resolved.''

The lingering preoccupation with the missing and the unwillingness to establish
diplomatic relations with Vietnam are seen by some Americans as symptoms of an
inability to heal the wounds of war.

''For Americans, there is no closure,'' said John McAuliff, director of the
U.S.-Indochina Reconciliation Project, a program of the SANE Education Fund.
''There has begun to be individual closure, with individuals making the trip
back to Vietnam. But more important, there is no societal closure in which one
can really say things are back to normal, the country is at peace.''

A Former Antiwar Activist

Mr. McAuliff, who was interviewed before heading for Vietnam with the educators,
is one of several antiwar activists who have turned their efforts to improving
American-Vietnamese ties. He believes that formal relations would have concrete
benefits for both sides.

Diplomatic recognition by Washington, he said, ''would encourage sectors of the
Vietnamese Government that take a more reformist and liberal approach and a more
trusting approach to their people.''

There could also be joint research, he said, into the effects of dioxin, a toxic
chemical contained in the defoliant Agent Orange, which was used by United
States forces in Vietnam.

Dioxin has been found in the soil of some American communities. Its effect on
health could be measured by examining South Vietnamese residents who have high
levels in their bodies, Mr. McAuliff said. Effect on Vietnamese in U.S.  He said
normalization would also make it possible for Vietnamese living in the United
States to visit Vietnam and would have an effect on their politics here.

''As long as there is not normalization,'' Mr. McAuliff said, ''it kind of feeds
the hopes of the right-wing activists in the Vietnamese community that they can
somehow stage a return. Once the U.S. recognizes that there is a single, unified
Vietnam, it really does say to people, 'Look, you have to make your lives here
now.' ''

From Vietnam's standpoint, American officials and Asian diplomats observe,
relations with Washington could help an ailing economy. The present trade
embargo inhibits Vietnam's purchase of spare parts for American equipment left
behind at the end of the war. It has also created a vacuum into which the Soviet
Union has stepped with an estimated $1 billion a year in aid.

Since North Vietnamese troops rolled into Saigon in April 1975 and the last
Americans left in helicopters from the United States Embassy roof, Vietnam has
been drawn into a relationship of both dependence on and wariness of the Soviet
Union. Dependent for aid to its flagging economy and military strength against a
hostile China, it has entered into elaborate trade, diplomatic and military
agreements with Moscow.

Determined to Be Autonomous

But Vietnamese officials also emphasize their determination to remain
autonomous, an effort that took several forms in the first years after 1975. One
was a demand for United States ''reparations'' for damage caused in the war as a
condition for diplomatic ties.

One Hanoi official recently said that condition was ''a mistake'' and had
infuriated Americans. The demand was dropped in December 1977.

In addition, Vietnam initially resisted Soviet pressure to use American-built
military bases in Cam Ranh Bay, Da Nang and elsewhere. The aversion has
diminished over the years, and the Russians have gradually gained a military
presence.

According to Mr. Armitage, an average of 25 Soviet Navy vessels, including
submarines, are moored in Cam Ranh Bay at any given time. MIG-23 jet fighters
and long-range aircraft are based there and at Da Nang, he said, with the MIG's
scheduled to be turned over to the Vietnamese.

Still, in conversations with Westerners, Vietnamese officials stress their
desire not to become to the Soviet Union what the Philippines are to the United
States, an allusion to the freedom of the United States to use bases in the
Philippines as it wishes.

Fear of China Is Deep

But Vietnam's fear of China, rooted deeply in history, keeps Hanoi close to
Moscow and is used as an argument to keep Vietnamese troops in Cambodia. Some
Americans note the long historical record of Vietnam's trying to expand into
Cambodia.

But Vietnamese officials see two ways out: building up their allied Cambodian
forces until they are able to of maintain a pro-Vietnamese regime in power, or
arriving at some political solution involving the Cambodian anti-Vietnamese
guerrillas that would permit Vietnamese withdrawal before 1990, when Hanoi has
said its troops will depart.

For the moment, at least, this has frozen the Vietnamese-American relationship.

''They will only withdraw,'' Mr. Armitage insisted, ''if they have succeeded in
their plan to suborn Khmer culture. I don't think that's possible. They tried
that in the 1800's.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 3, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PRESS NOTES;
ONE NEWSPAPER DIES, BUT RESCUE ATTEMPTS ARE CONTINUING FOR TWO OTHERS

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 994 words


By midafternoon on New Year's Eve the newsroom of The Columbus Citizen-Journal
in Columbus, Ohio, was silent after publication that morning of the newspaper's
last issue.

The Citizen-Journal lost its place as the city's morning paper to The Columbus
Dispatch, a larger-circulation evening daily that switched to morning
publication Jan. 1.

Efforts by Scripps-Howard Newspapers, the chain that owns The Citizen-Journal,
to sell the unprofitable paper by its Jan. 1 deadline were unsuccessful, despite
a dramatic last-minute effort by an Ohio businessman to raise enough money to
keep it going.

But in two other cities where second-ranked newspapers are fighting for their
lives, the prospects of survival seem brighter.

On Monday a bankruptcy court in St. Louis cleared the way for the sale of The
St. Louis Globe-Democrat to two local businessmen who say they will spend $5
million to revive the paper. It ceased publication Dec. 6 after filing for
protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.

John B. Prentis, one of prospective owners who would become publisher if the
sale was completed, said that various issues involving the pape. But he
predicted that The Globe-Democrat would resume publication by Jan. 13 and be
back in competition with The St. Louis Post-Dispatch.

In Baltimore there is also optimism that a buyer will be found for The
News-American, an unprofitable evening paper that has been put up for sale by
its owner, the Hearst Corporation.

''Interest has been very, very high, and I am extremely optimistic that we can
consumate a sale by the end of the first quarter,'' said Richard Cohen, senior
vice president of Henry Ansbacher Inc., the investment bank representing Hearst.

The News-American, an evening paper that is the city's smallest daily, competes
with The Sun, a morning paper, and The Evening Sun, both owned by A. S. Abell
Publishing Company.

Crucible in Phoenix

For Phoenix's newspapers, The Arizona Republic and The Phoenix Gazette, the last
week has been a crucible that remains fiery.

A local politician called a news conference the day after Christmas to disclose
that the glamorous and heroic war record of Darrow (Duke) Tully, publisher of
both papers, was a hoax.

Mr. Tully admitted he had never been in the military and immediately resigned,
expressing both regret and relief that 30 years of lying were over.

To the newspapers, their credibility at stake, fully reporting Mr. Tully's fall
became a matter of pride.

''We've been covering this thing like white on rice,'' said Arthur J. Thomason,
one of the reporters involved.

The Republic printed the news on Dec. 27, accompanied on the front page by a
picture of Mr. Tully in an Air Force uniform with rows of medals he said he had
won win as a fighter pilot in Korea and Vietnam.

The next day there was a long article that quoted Mr. Tully on how the hoax
began. He said that his love for airplanes led him to join the Civil Air Patrol,
where he began to boast about a mythical war record. ''It just built and built
and I was suddenly under an avalanche,'' he said.

Mr. Tully also said he confessed his fabrication in September to William Shover,
the newspapers' director of communications and corporate services. Mr. Shover
advised his chief not to make a public announcement and was quoted as explaining
that for Mr. Tully to do so ''would be harmful to his family, to him personally
and to the organization.''

Mr. Shover is one of three people named by the newspapers' owner,
Indianapolis-based Central Newspapers, to oversee them until a replacement for
Mr. Tully is found. His advice was the object of scorching criticism by Pat
Murphy, a columnist for The Republic. ''Shover engaged in a cover-up,'' he
wrote, describing the incident as ''a cloud of shame.''

Mr. Thomason said reporters had been dispatched far and wide to look into Mr.
Tully's background. According to one recent article, they could find no
documentation of an electrical engineering degree from Purdue listed on his
official biography.

''We're going to tell it all,'' Mr. Thomason said.

Neither Mr. Shover nor Mr. Tully returned numerous telephone calls seeking
comment.

'Man of the Year'

Last Sunday's syndicated television show on the process of selecting Time
Magazine's ''Man of the Year'' was billed in advertisements as a ''revealing
documentary'' with Eric Sevareid as the host.

The program was revealing, but it was not, strictly speaking, a news
documentary, according to Henry Siegel, chairman of LBS Communications, the
syndicating company that found sponsors for the program and arranged for it to
be aired on 104 stations.

''It was a promotional program'' to stimulate magazine sales and burnish Time's
image, Mr. Siegel said, adding that there were plans to make the program an
annual presentation.

''Fortunately, the selection wasn't the terrorists,'' he added, explaining that
such a choice might have hurt viewership, which was ''reasonably good but
expected to be higher.''

The hourlong program, whose production was overseen by Time's public affairs
department, began with a meeting in October of Time's top editors, who agreed,
albeit reluctantly, that the obvious choice was Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet
leader.

But the show then cut to Henry Anatole Grunwald, editor in chief of all Time
Inc. publications, who was on a ''news tour'' of the Far East, including China.

Mr. Grunwald returned, persuaded that Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese leader, would
be an excellent candidate for ''Man of the Year'' because of his efforts to
introduce a market economy to China.

As the program disclosed, the other editors readily agreed with Mr. Grunwald,
both for editorial and marketing reasons, and so the Chinese leader was chosen.

Mr. Gorbachev's picture was on Time's cover several times in 1985. The Chinese
leader, although he was ''Man of the Year'' in 1979, was depicted on the cover
only once in 1985.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 4, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SOCIET PANS 'ROCKY' AND 'RAMBO' FILMS

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 981 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Jan. 3


A group of Soviet cultural officials and artists today denounced the movies
''Rocky IV'' and ''Rambo: First Blood Part II,'' saying they were part of a
deliberate propaganda campaign to portray Russians as cruel and treacherous
enemies.

Sitting behind the same table in the Foreign Ministry press center where Soviet
spokesmen usually condemn United States Government policies, the group -
including the poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko - singled out the two popular movies
starring Sylvester Stallone as representative of what they called a rash of
anti-Soviet propaganda in American movies and on television.

In ''Rambo: First Blood Part II,'' Mr. Stallone plays an anti-Communist Vietnam
veteran who returns to Southeast Asia to try to rescue American prisoners,
killing more than a dozen Russians in the process. In ''Rocky IV,'' as
prizefighter Rocky Balboa, he battles a villainous Soviet boxer.

Georgi A. Ivanov, a Deputy Minister of Culture, told a news conference that
American films are ''pushing onto the screens a new type of hero, a killer with
ideological convictions.''

Killing With 'Perverse Relish'

This new hero, he went on, ''kills 'Reds' and Russians not for money but with a
kind of perverse relish.'' Such fare, he said, was part of ''an anti-Soviet
campaign mounted in the United States.''

The announced subject of the news conference was the resumption of
American-Soviet cultural exchanges, but the panel devoted much of the 90-minute
briefing to criticizing American films.

Mr. Yevtushenko, who created a stir at a congress of Soviet writers recently
when he called for an end to censorship in Soviet literature, described movies
like Mr. Stallone's as a form of pornography.

''I call them war-nography,'' Mr. Yevtushenko said.

Genrikh Borovik, a secretary of the Soviet Writers' Union, said Hollywood was
''using art to sell hatred and fear.''

Mr. Borovik also cited the movie ''Red Dawn'' as another example of virulent
anti-Soviet propaganda.

''Red Dawn,'' which was popular in 1984, depicts American high school students
resisting Soviet invaders who occupy their Colorado town, imprison many of its
citizens and gun down an unarmed schoolteacher.

New Attitudes About Killing

Mr. Ivanov said the popularity of films like ''Rambo: First Blood Part II'' and
''Rocky IV'' meant that ''a new generation of Americans is being brought up to
consider killing as something natural or even necessary.''

Mr. Ivanov said of the Stallone films: ''I suppose some people will try to
explain it all away by referring to so-called freedom of expression. It could be
dismissed as rubbish except for the damage it does to the consciousness of
Americans.''

''Critics say that 'Rambomania' is growing like a forest fire in the United
States,'' he said.

Mr. Ivanov also criticized a television miniseries called ''Amerika,'' which is
scheduled by ABC for broadcast during the 1986-87 season. Set a decade after the
United States has fallen to the Russians without a fight, the program portrays a
materially deprived and politically fearful America run by villainous Soviet
agents.

The Spirit of Geneva

''Americans are being brought up with the idea that you can only deal with a
Russian with a gun,'' Mr. Ivanov said.

The ''Rocky'' and ''Rambo'' movies have been huge successes at the American box
office, despite generally poor reviews that scorned their preoccupation with
violence and slaughter, and criticized their anti-Soviet political subtext as
simplistic and their caricatures of Russians as absurd and sometimes vicious.

Mr. Ivanov said Russians were puzzled by the films because they seemed to
contradict the spirit of improved relations that was produced by the meeting
between President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, in Geneva
in November.

Americans are often harshly depicted in Soviet films. In 1984, for example, a
10-part television series called ''Tass Is Authorized to State'' pitted Soviet
intelligence agents against a group of ruthless American spies from the Central
Intelligence Agency, including one who poisoned his boss.

Americans as Psychopaths

A 1983 film, ''Incident in Quadrant 36-80,'' portrayed Americans as violent
psychopaths in a drama in which a United States submarine accidentally fires
missiles at Soviet warships.

Despite the official criticism, Muscovites said recently that video cassettes of
Stallone films were among the most sought-after by Russians who own video
players.

One Muscovite looking for a cassette of ''Rambo: First Blood Part II,'' seemed
untroubled by the carnage. ''I hear a bunch of Russians are killed,'' he said,
laughing at the irony that the movie was in demand in Moscow. The ''Rambo''
movies, like most other Western films, are banned in the Soviet Union and
cassettes are available only on the black market.

Mr. Ivanov announced at the news conference that several Soviet groups,
including the famed Kirov Ballet of Leningrad and the Moiseyev Dance Company,
would perform in the United States in 1986. He did not say when or where.

A new cultural exchange agreement was signed by the United States and the Soviet
Union at the end of the summit meeting in November.

Mr. Yevtushenko, apparently trying to put some distance between himself and the
representatives of the Soviet cultural establishment at the news conference,
said, ''Cultural exchanges can't be handed over completely to bureaucratic
organizations.''

He suggested that American and Soviet poets, artists, composers, filmmakers and
others organize an unofficial group to monitor the exchange.

Other members of the panel were Tikhon N. Khrennikov, a composer; Igor A.
Moiseyev, the founder of the Moiseyev dance company; Stanislav I. Rostotsky, a
film director; Mikhail Sagatelyan, a writer, and Aleksandr V. Churlin, Deputy
Director of the Foreign Ministry Cultural Department.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Yevgeny Yevtushenko (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM SAYS CHINA HAS STEPPED UP ITS ATTACKS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 638 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 4


China has stepped up its border attacks on Vietnam in the last week in an effort
to deter Hanoi from beginning dry-seaon operations against guerrilla armies in
Cambodia, a Vietnamese general said today.

According to the officer, Maj. Gen. Tran Cong Man, a veteran combat commander
against both the French and the Americans and now editor of People's Army, the
Chinese began on Dec. 28 ''to create maximum military pressure on Vietnam so
that they could prevent a major offensive in Cambodia.''

He said Peking, to ''realize its promise to the Khmer reactionaries,'' had been
firing up to 20,000 shells a day into four border provinces, most of them aimed
at the Vi Xuyen district of Ha Tuyen Province. He added that over the last month
there had been two battalion-sized infantry assaults in that district.

The general also said the Chinese had been conducting a major propaganda
campaign among the Hmong tribal people along the border area. He said the Hmong,
who are also found in Laos, Thailand, Burma and southern China, were being
encouraged to press for a separate ethnic state.

The general said that the scale of Khmer Rouge and other guerrilla attacks had
been reduced in the last year or two, but that the number of guerrilla strikes
might have increased.

General Man, who as editor of People's Army has made three tours of the
Cambodian battle areas, said the Khmer Rouge ''in small groups of 20 or 30''
were active in the suburbs of the Cambodian capital of Phnom Penh. #150,000
Vietnamese Troops Vietnam is believed to have at least 150,000 soldiers in
Cambodia to support the Government of Heng Samrin that it installed on Jan. 7,
1979. Hanoi has said it hopes to withdraw its troops by 1990.

Today, however, when asked if there was any hope of settling the military
situation in Cambodia sooner than that, General Man was not optimistic.

''The fighting must continue for some time,'' he said. ''It is not possible to
stop soon.''

The general said the Khmer Rouge forces had been using more artillery in attacks
against the Vietnamese and were using smaller and more difficult to detect
plastic mines along the Thai-Cambodian border.

General Man dismissed recent Khmer Rouge radio reports of mutiny in the
Cambodian Army. He also rejected reports of major military successes against the
Vietnamese.

''We consider what they say as anecdotes,'' he said, ''like selling bearskins
without having killed the bear.''

General Man said he was not able to comment authoritatively on a recent Khmer
Rouge radio broadcast that the rebels had briefly captured the Cambodian town of
Takeo, 45 miles from Phnom Penh.

Chinese Threat Called a Constant

General Man said that in the border conflict with China, which he characterized
as a source of considerable pressure on Hanoi, there had been no need to
reinforce the military presence there because the Chinese threat was a constant.
He said the level of fighting had not matched that of seven years ago when China
invaded Vietnam in an effort to teach Hanoi a lesson for having overthrown the
Chinese-backed Cambodian Government of Pol Pot.

General Man would not comment on Vietnamese plans for the next few months in
Cambodia, saying that much of what happenes would depend on the three anti-Hanoi
guerrilla armies.

The armies, grouped together as the Resistence Coalition Government of
Democratic Kampuchea, have been troubled over the last few weeks by an open
rebellion in the ranks of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, the
larger of two non-Communist groups in the coalition.

The front has been all but taken over by a dissident committee seeking to oust
the front's founder, Son Sann. On Thursday, an offical of the front acknowledged
in Bangkok that Mr. Son Sann was no longer able to visit the border camps where
his followers live.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
CAMBODIANS AT ODDS

BYLINE: By Richard Levine and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 304 words


The loose coalition of Cambodian guerrilla groups fighting the
Vietnamese-supported Government in Pnom Penh was wracked last week by what Son
Sann, one of its leaders, called ''open rebellion.''

Mr. Son Sann, who is 74 years old and a former Prime Minister of Cambodia, said
in Bankok that he had ''put an end'' to the mutiny. But an official of his Khmer
People's National Liberation Front said Mr. Son Sann was no longer able to visit
the camps near the Thai-Cambodian border where most of his followers live.

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former Cambodian Chief of State and leader of
another group in the coalition, also was unhappy with the dissidents. He said in
Peking yesterday that they are pro-American but they ''don't like Sihanouk.''

The dissidents, who include military officers, said they needed a clearer
mandate to pursue the guerrilla war without political interference. ''The
situation in Cambodia is becoming ripe for insurrection,''said Abdul Gaffar
Peang Meth, a dissident spokesman. ''We have to push as many troops as possible
inside.'' The Son Sann group says it has 15,000 soldiers, but most of the
anti-Government fighting has reportedly been done by the Communist Khmer Rouge,
which also belongs to the coalition.

Yesterday in Hanoi, a Vietnamese general said small groups of 20 to 30 Khmer
Rouge guerrillas have been active in the suburbs of Pnom Penh, the Cambodian
capital.

Maj. Gen. Tran Cong Man, editor of the Vietnamese Army newspaper, also said
China had renewed its attacks along the Vietnamese border last weekend to deter
North Vietnamese operations against the Cambodian guerrillas during the dry
season. Hanoi has said it hopes to withdraw its forces from Cambodia by 1990,
but General Man seemed in no hurry to leave. ''The fighting must continue for
some time,'' he said. ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
NEW TALKS SET ON VIETNAM MIA'S

BYLINE: By Richard Levine and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 270 words


The United States and Vietnam do not agree about much, but Hanoi has evidently
accepted Washington's insistence that it must cooperate in accounting for the
1,797 Americans listed as missing in the war that ended in 1975. This week, the
most senior United States officials to visit Hanoi in eight years are to meet
with Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thac to lay the groundwork for closing the
books.

The Vietnamese ''have evidenced greater cooperation on this issue'' of late,
said Richard L. Armitage, an Assistant Secretary of Defense.

He will be accompanied to Hanoi by Assistant Secretary of State Paul D.
Wolfowitz; Richard Childress, a senior National Securitry Council aide, and Anne
Mills Griffith of the League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in
Southeast Asia. Mr. Childress and Mrs. Griffith went to Vietnam in September for
talks that the State Department said had been the ''most positive'' to date.

In November, Americans and Vietnamese searched a site near Hanoi where a B-52
bomber crashed in 1972. However, bone fragments that they unearthed are believed
unlikely to help identify missing Americans.

Vietnam has said it wants to clear up the issue of the missing, presumably to
pave the way for diplomatic relations with Washington and to mitigate its
dependence on the Soviet Union, which provides $1 billion a year in aid.

Washington, however, insists that relations cannot begin until the estimated
140,000 Vietnamese soldiers occupying Cambodia are removed. ''We will not
normalize,'' Mr. Armitage said, ''until this is resolved to allow the Khmer
people to have free choice.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A CASE FOR PEACE PROFITEERING THEORIST OF GUNS AND BUTTER

BYLINE: By Paul Kennedy; Paul Kennedy, the Dilworth Professor of History at Yale
University, is completing a book, ''The Dynamics of World Power, 1500-2000.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1898 words


When he set out to write a book about the relationship between economic power
and military conquest, Richard Rosecrance spent two years finishing his first
draft - then he threw it out. ''I realized I hadn't found the right focus,'' Mr.
Rosecrance said in a recent telephone interview from his office at Cornell
University. ''I wanted to attempt something new - to combine the role of
economics and the role of strategy and defense in a general work of
international relations. No one had tried to bring these two things together in
that way. So I started over.'' The result was ''The Rise of the Trading State,''
a book the author hopes will lend historical perspective to the trade-offs
between economic and military power, and stimulate new debate on the
alternatives now facing American policy makers. ''Nations have really always had
a choice as they make their way in the world,'' he said. ''They can expand and
conquer territory, or they can decide to stay just within their own borders and
develop their own economic strength through development at home and trade
abroad.'' For the United States, the problem of balancing economic and military
strategies is becoming increasingly acute. ''It can't be all or nothing,''

Mr. Rosecrance said. ''For example, you can't maintain a trading world without
some military power. But the question is how much you have to have. ''I think
the growth of American military strength was inevitable, because you are called
to defend your interests or decide which ones you want to have. But if we are
going to have an economic growth strategy in this country, I think our military
spending is pre-empting a lot.'' History demonstrates, he said, that ''when you
get overextended militarily and are spending so much to maintain your military,
you are forecasting your own decline. I think that is the problem of the United
States today.''- Mark A. Uhlig

THE RISE OF THE TRADING STATE Commerce and Conquest in the Modern World. By
Richard Rosecrance. 268 pp. New York: Basic Books. $19.95.

IN the latter half of the 19th century, two major yet contradictory processes
were occurring in the great-power system. The first, boosted by the new
technology of steamships, railways and telegraphs, was the emergence of a truly
cosmopolitan commercial nexus, an international division of labor based on the
economic complementarity of foodstuffs, raw materials and industrial products,
and chiefly financed through a credit and insurance system centered in the city
of London. By 1913, to offer but one statistic, the volume of world foreign
trade per capita was 25 times that of 1800, as more and more countries were
drawn into this network of international commerce and finance.

The second process, however, divided people from people rather than bringing
them closer together. It consisted of increased tensions among the great powers,
manifested not only in colonial rivalries but also in military alliances, arms
races and an outpouring of jingoistic fears and hatreds. All this, too, was
exacerbated by technology, since the ''firepower revolution'' caused by
high-explosive shells, quick-firing artillery, machine guns, mines and torpedoes
was going to make the future battlefield a bloodier place than ever before. And
the cost of sustaining modern armies and navies (and, later, air forces) was
also going to be horrific. In short, one trend pressed toward international
cooperation and interdependence, while the other pressed toward violence and
destruction.

Now it was of course true, as Richard Rosecrance, a professor of international
and comparative politics at Cornell University, points out in his brilliant
book, ''The Rise of the Trading State,'' that these two contrary poles had
always existed. The tension between the warrior who sought to defeat and plunder
other societies and the merchant who desired to trade peacefully with them could
already be seen in classical times. On the whole, the military-territorial
approach prevailed over the commercial one, although between the 14th and 17th
centuries Venice, the Hanseatic League and the Netherlands were good early
examples of what Mr. Rosecrance terms the trading state, whose modern-day
exemplars are Japan, Singapore and Switzerland.

Moreover, many of those earlier trading entities were merely regional in their
operations, and some were avowedly mercantilistic, seeking to monopolize
commerce and markets rather than to share in the free interchange of goods and
to accept the international division of labor. It was only after the widespread
propagation of ideas associated with Adam Smith's ''Wealth of Nations,'' the
conversion of early-19th-century Britain to the cause of free trade and the
coming of steamships and railways that the prospects for a cosmopolitan world
order really took off. Even those great powers that still retained or increased
their tariffs were ineluctably drawn into it.

Yet if the merchants and bankers of the late 19th century rejoiced, the warrior
element was certainly not eliminated. Various learned works, the most famous of
which was probably Norman Angell's 1910 best seller, ''The Great Illusion,''
argued that war had become so costly and counterproductive to each belligerent
that no rational state could ever contemplate using it as a means of policy. But
the awful fact was that, even in an age when Germany was Russia's leading
trading partner and Britain was Germany's chief market, the military staffs on
each side were coldly perfecting their operational plans. World War I, simply by
its occurrence, proved Angell's rosy assumptions wrong, although ironically it
also showed how expensive and frightful large-scale war had become.

World War II witnessed what Mr. Rosecrance calls ''the triumph of the
military-political world.'' By 1945, the fascist states had been overwhelmed and
the globe was dominated by two superpowers, each possessing fantastically more
military force than King Louis XIV or Kaiser Wilhelm II had ever dreamed of. Yet
the decades following also witnessed several important countertrends. To begin
with, world trade took off at a rate that eclipsed even that of the mid-19th
century. In addition, the breakup of the old colonial empires added many more
states to the global community, none of which could compete in the great-power
stakes but many of which were able to take advantage of Marshall Plan aid and
the open-market commercial order established by the Bretton Woods Conference
after the war.

Finally, two of the most militaristic states of previous times, Germany and
Japan, were now forced by the United States to redirect their formidable
energies into industry and trade, and so became regional engines for the further
growth of international commerce. It is ironic, in retrospect, to see how
deliberately the American Government forbade them to possess weapons and
compelled them to become trading states, with the United States acting as their
protector. During the same period, the creation of A-bombs and H-bombs was
demonstrating that the large-scale use of military force was becoming ever more
questionable. Nuclear warfare, or even sustained conventional fighting between
the superpower blocs, would be mutually devastating. The dialectic between
''commerce'' and ''conquest'' has therefore reached a more intense stage than
ever. A trading nation like Japan, keeping its armed forces to a minimum and
placing all its bets on an interdependent and peaceful world order, has become
so successful that it is on the point of overtaking the Soviet Union in terms of
gross national product. Many European and Asian nations are similarly committed
to a cosmopolitan trading system and its concomitant, the desire that
international relations reflect the ideas of the merchant and not the warrior.
This view is not, of course, shared by countries such as Libya, Syria, Israel,
Cuba, Vietnam, Iran, Iraq and others; but the problems they all face, and the
sacrifices they require from their peoples, are hardly any recommendation to
follow their sense of priorities. T HE two powers most seriously affected by the
rise of the trading state, Mr. Rosecrance convincingly argues, are Russia and
America. For all the costs of their baroque arsenals, their effective political
influence is not in proportion to their military power. The amount of their
gross national product devoted to armaments, especially in the Soviet Union but
also in this country, is a drain on productive investment and leads to an
erosion of their long-term strength. For what is the use of spending $300
billion a year on defense if one's economic competitiveness is shrinking year by
year? What does it profit the Soviet Union to have military control over the
sullen peoples of Eastern Europe when that region is an increasing economic
liability and diverts its army into police duties?

Which goal, therefore, should the leaders of the United States aim for? Toward
further militarization of the economy, in an attempt to regain the national
security it possessed half a century ago? Or toward the trading state, accepting
economic interdependence and turning swords into plowshares? In today's real
world, this cannot be an absolute vote for one alternative or the other; as Mr.
Rosecrance puts it, the United States has to find a suitable position between
the military and commercial poles. To do this will require judgment and
statesmanship of an extraordinarily high order and, without doubt, a President
who can properly understand the delicate relationships between economics and
strategy.

The above is but a brief summary of what is a thought-provoking discourse.
Intertwined with his forays into history is Mr. Rosecrance's running commentary
on how the various contending theories of international relations appear in the
light of this new assessment. The book is extremely well written, and it
discusses the objections and exceptions to the main themes in a way a mere
reviewer cannot cover. Above all, it is simultaneously relevant and plausible:
relevant because it deals with some of the most vital challenges facing today's
decision makers as they wrestle over economic policy and military security, and
plausible because it catches so well the dynamics of the shifting economic
balances - and opportunities - in this late-20th-century world.

For all Mr. Rosecrance's elegance and balance, his survey left me feeling uneasy
- not at his clever book, but at the very different ways in which people and
states have reacted to the problems he describes. The title alone, ''The Rise of
the Trading State,'' implies a tendency and an optimism it would be nice to
share, but both past events and current passions make it difficult to believe
that the world is at last headed in the direction Adam Smith prescribed for it.
In so many ways, unrestricted free trade exacerbates tensions among peoples,
rather than ameliorating them. And however much international bankers favor
laissez-faire economic policies, vast numbers of farm workers and industrial
hands do not - especially in a century in which (unlike Smith's time) the wage
differences between the north and the south are so immense.

ABOVE all, there is the persistent strength of the ''military-political world.''
In this country alone, it would be difficult (impossible?) to persuade the
Pentagon and its supporters to move some way from the military to the commercial
pole. It is mind-boggling to contemplate the ruling class of the Soviet Union
agreeing to a cosmopolitan world order, with all that implies politically and
socially, even if Russia's economy is at present suffering badly from its
obsessions with arms and conquest. Four decades of rivalry between the United
States and the Soviet Union, and their present arms race, make it difficult to
see how either could change into a trading state, even if it is clearly more
profitable for it to do so. Condemned to be what they are - military giants in a
bipolar world - the two countries have security concerns that prevent them from
competing with Japan, and so they steadily lose ground economically. The irony,
as compared with 1945, is stunning.

In 1912 Lord Esher, a confidant of King Edward VII's, a strategic adviser to the
British Government and a man who had devoted most of his life to the study of
military affairs, chanced to read Angell's ''Great Illusion,'' with its
confident forecast that the new world economic system had made war impossible.
It was an impressive and moving book, Esher conceded, and many of the facts
about the commercial interdependence of the great powers were undoubtedly true.
Yet he still wondered whether the emotional and ''warrior'' qualities in man
would not reject such rational and businesslike arguments for compromise and
peace.

Two years later, Esher had his answer. Perhaps it is true, as Richard Rosecrance
would like to argue, that the logic in favor of the trading state is much
stronger in an age when hydrogen bombs make war a colossal stupidity for both
sides. But man's atavism, and his curious attachment to the armed nation-state,
are not things that even the joys of cheap Toyotas, cut-rate European wines and
inexpensive Taiwanese textiles are likely to eliminate in our lifetime.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing; Photo of Richard Rosencrance (Harvey Feroschneider)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOMEONE HAD BLUNDERED, BUT WHO?

BYLINE: By Ronald H. Spector; Ronald H. Spector, a historian at the University
of Alabama, is the author of ''Eagle Against the Sun: The American War With
Japan'' and ''Advice and Support: The Early Years of the U.S. Army in Vietnam.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2091 words


PEARL HARBOR The Verdict of History. By Gordon W. Prange with Donald M.
Goldstein and Katherine V. Dillon. Illustrated. 699 pp. New York: McGraw-Hill
Book Company. $19.95.

''AND I WAS THERE'' Pearl Harbor and Midway - Breaking the Secrets. By Edwin T.
Layton with Roger Pineau and John Costello. Illustrated. 596 pp. New York:
William Morrow & Company. $19.95.

ALL nations seem to have certain events in their history they feel are too
important, too baffling, too traumatic to be left to the historian.

For the United States one of those events is undoubtedly the Japanese attack on
Pearl Harbor in 1941. Most Americans are content to learn about (and forget
about) most personalities and events in our history in schools and colleges and
then keep them filed away in textbooks and museums. Not so Pearl Harbor. There
have been more than 100 books published on the subject; yet new ones continue to
pour out and the public continues to peruse them with troubled fascination. Now
there are two more 600-page books on that landmark event, both of which claim to
offer new facts and new explanations for what many Americans still consider a
unique and inexplicable disaster. Each book is the product of a team effort,
with each team reporting that it has examined thousands of documents and has at
last found the explanation.

''Pearl Harbor: The Verdict of History'' is a massive and detailed sequel to the
late Gordon Prange's even more massive and detailed ''At Dawn We Slept,''
published in 1981. The present volume deals with the question of responsibility
for the Pearl Harbor disaster. Although there is some new detail and more
sustained discussion in this book than in ''At Dawn We Slept,'' the conclusions
drawn by Prange and Donald Goldstein and Katherine V. Dillon (Prange's
associates, who completed both books after his death) remain essentially the
same as those of the earlier work. The fundamental causes of the American
defeat, the authors believe, were the skill, boldness and luck of the Japanese
in planning and carrying out the operation and the inability of American leaders
in Washington and Hawaii to truly believe in and act upon the notion that the
Japanese could make a surprise air attack on Pearl Harbor.

The discussion, though lengthy, is logically organized and clearly presented. As
with any work of such scope on so controversial a topic, few readers will agree
with every conclusion. I found unconvincing the authors' argument that the
decision of Adm. Husband E. Kimmel, the Navy's commander at Pearl Harbor, to
leave his wife on the mainland when he went to Hawaii provides a key to his
character (''No man who is genuinely self-assured doubts his ability to function
simultaneously as husband and worker''). Adm. Chester Nimitz, Kimmel's
successor, ''functioned'' successfully at Pearl Harbor for four years without
his wife.

A more serious problem is that, despite claims by Mr. Goldstein and Miss Dillon
that the book has been updated since Prange's death, there are few references to
works published after the mid-1970's, or indeed the 60's, or to records, other
than some of those on code breaking, that have become available in the last 10
years. To give one example, their discussion of President Roosevelt's
''freezing'' of Japanese assets in July 1941 fails to take account of new
interpretations of that important action by such scholars as Irvine H. Anderson,
Robert Dallek and Jonathan G. Utley. Indeed, the considerable body of recent
research on the Japanese-American crisis of 1940-41 is largely ignored in the
section on the President, his advisers and American foreign policy. This gives
the book a dated quality that detracts from what is otherwise a useful reference
work. Regardless of the reader's views, however, he will find this book a useful
introduction and guide to the major arguments and areas of controversy.

If proof were needed that the Pearl Harbor controversy remains alive and well,
it is amply provided in the late Rear Adm. Edwin T. Layton's ''And I Was
There,'' written with Roger Pineau and John Costello. Ostensibly a memoir
concerning the career of the distinguished naval officer who served Kimmel and
Nimitz as a fleet intelligence officer and later founded the Naval Intelligence
School, it is also intended as an explicit reply to Prange's earlier work.
Captain Pineau and Mr. Costello are longtime critics of Prange, questioning not
only the soundness of his work but his scholarly integrity as well. Captain
Pineau has publicly charged that portions of ''At Dawn We Slept'' were ghosted
years ago by a research assistant and in this book it is claimed that Prange's
objectivity is suspect because of his earlier service as a historian at Gen.
Douglas MacArthur's headquarters, where, according to Captain Pineau, he
attempted to obstruct and mislead Navy historians trying to get at the truth
about the Pacific campaigns.

''And I Was There'' is intended to set the record straight on blame for the
remarkable catastrophe at Pearl Harbor and credit for the almost equally
remarkable victory at Midway six months later. In Layton's view the root cause
of Pearl Harbor lay in the fact that he and Kimmel were ''shortchanged'' by
Washington of intelligence information that would have provided them with timely
warning of the likelihood of an attack on Pearl Harbor. This is an old argument,
raised before by many people - including Kimmel himself - ever since the fact
that the United States was reading Japanese diplomatic codes before Pearl Harbor
became generally known at the end of World War II. So-called revisionist
historians have argued that Roosevelt and his advisers deliberately withheld
intelligence derived from these intercepts from the commanders at Pearl Harbor
to insure American entry into World War II.

Layton and his co-authors make no such charges against Roosevelt or his key
civilian advisers but attribute the blame for shortchanging Kimmel to the
incompetence, bureaucratic feuding and empire building of the responsible
officers in the Navy Department, particularly Capt. (later Admiral) Richmond
Kelly Turner, then director of war plans in the office of the Chief of Naval
Operations. These same officers, they charge, then lied and engaged in collusion
and intimidation to cover up their errors and omissions. Layton and his
collaborators go beyond the official Pearl Harbor inquiries to discuss the
intercepts of Japanese naval messages, in the cipher called JN-25, that were
available to the Navy Department at the time of the Pearl Harbor attack. Until
more information is released for declassification it is impossible to say how
many of these messages, or how much of their content, could be read by code
breakers in 1941, but Layton argues that if even 10 percent had been readable
they would have provided important clues to Japanese intentions. A S for Midway,
Layton and his co-authors suggest that the same sort of fumbling and bumbling at
the Washington level almost sabotaged the brilliant intelligence achievements of
Nimitz's code breakers in Hawaii, led by Comdr. Joseph J. Rochefort,
achievements that made the American victory possible. Following that success,
the Washington bumblers - chiefly the director of the Office of Naval
Communications, Capt. Joseph Redman, and his younger brother, John Redman, head
of the Navy Department's code breaking organization - sought to disguise their
mistakes and claim credit for the Midway intelligence breakthroughs. To this end
they pursued a vendetta against Rochefort, blocking Nimitz's recommendation for
the award of the Distinguished Service Medal, which Rochefort richly deserved,
and maneuvering him out of his intelligence post at Pearl Harbor into obscure
and unrewarding assignments. The story of the injustice done to Rochefort has
been told before, notably in Clay Blair's ''Silent Victory'' and Wilfred J.
Holmes's ''Double-Edged Secrets,'' but Layton and his collaborators have
produced new documentation to show that the conduct of those who had a hand in
it was even shabbier and more malicious than previously suspected. If there is
any moral to this disgraceful episode it may be that when one is dealing with
bureaucrats paranoia is never entirely out of season.

Layton and his co-authors apparently believe Kimmel and Lieut. Gen. Walter
Short, the Army commander in Hawaii, can be grouped with Rochefort as innocent
victims of the incompetence and devious machinations of the Navy Department.
Despite the new information presented in ''And I Was There,'' I found that
argument, as well as the authors' general indictment of Prange, unconvincing.
Rochefort's immense contributions to victory in the Pacific War have long been
recognized by historians (if only recently by the Navy Department). Kimmel and
Short, most writers (including Prange) now agree, were unjustly saddled with the
entire blame for the Pearl Harbor disaster during the war and dealt with far too
harshly. Prange's ''At Dawn We Slept'' and the even earlier book by Roberta
Wohlstetter, ''Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision,'' both contain devastating
indictments of Washington's errors and omissions in processing, analyzing and
disseminating intelligence to the commanders at Pearl Harbor. Yet neither those
authors nor I believe Washington's failures absolve Kimmel and Short of all
blame or make either of them merely ''a victim of circumstances.''

One of the most serious criticisms of Kimmel, for example, was that he failed to
conduct as much aerial reconnaissance as he might have. Layton's defense against
this charge is misleading and incomplete. He writes that ''at no time did Kimmel
receive any intelligence, or hint, that there was any threat to Pearl Harbor
from any direction but from the southwest.'' This leaves out of account the fact
that, as the Prange book points out, two of Kimmel's principal air chiefs,
Comdr. (later Admiral) Arthur C. Davis and Rear Adm. Patrick Bellinger, both
told the joint Congressional committee investigating Pearl Harbor after the end
of the war they had believed ''the greatest possibility of a successful air
attack lay in an attack coming in from a sector of the north because of the
prevailing wind conditions.'' There is also the written evidence of an official
report on Hawaiian air defenses, completed in March 1941, which, as the Prange
book points out, predicted that an air attack was most likely to come from the
north or northwest. Kimmel had sound military reasons for making his decisions
about reconnaissance, but they were not the only reasonable decisions he could
have made - and they turned out to be wrong.

More significantly, Layton and his co-authors hardly mention the role of Short
and the Army or the general failure of Army and Navy commanders at Pearl Harbor
to coordinate their efforts and keep each other informed about their
capabilities and their concepts of their mission and responsibilities. Indeed,
after 45 years Layton seems still to suffer from some of the single-service
myopia that played such a large part in the Pearl Harbor disaster.

Whatever the state of preparedness at Pearl Harbor, however, would not the
receipt of the intelligence that Washington failed to send (and which the
authors analyze in such detail) have changed the entire situation and put the
commanders on alert? This is the heart of the Layton argument and it can never
be conclusively answered. Yet the evidence presented by other instances of
surprise attack in recent history suggests that the answer is no. Successful
surprise is far from rare in recent military history, from the German surprise
in the Ardennes in 1940 to Hitler's invasion of Russia to the Battle of the
Bulge, the Tet offensive in Vietnam in 1968 and the 1973 Yom Kippur War.

In a recent book, ''Knowing One's Enemies,'' edited by Ernest R. May,
distinguished historians analyzed the intelligence systems of the great powers
before both world wars. They found that in most cases the intelligence agencies
of those countries did provide some warning of surprise attack when one was in
the offing -in the cases of France and Russia excellent and detailed warnings -
but that more often than not the warnings were ignored. These studies suggest
that Prange's emphasis on the states of mind and preconceptions of the principal
commanders in Washington and Pearl Harbor is still a more important clue to
explaining the Pearl Harbor disaster than even the most intriguing revelations
about code breaking or espionage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the Congressional committee that investigated the attack on
Pearl Harbor; Photo of Vice Adm. P. N. L. Bellinger; Photo of Capt. Joseph J.
Rochefort in 1945

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By Nancy Ramsey

SECTION: Section 7; Page 17, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 317 words


A SENSE OF HISTORY: The Best Writing From the Pages of American Heritage.
(American Heritage/ Houghton Mifflin, $29.95.) Pewter candlesticks and
patriotism once sprang to mind when American Heritage magazine was mentioned.
But the 30-year-old magazine has a tradition of publishing graceful, informative
essays, more than 50 of which, spanning the time of the first European
settlements to the end of the Nixon Presidency, have been collected in ''A Sense
of History.'' The subjects range from why Washington and Lincoln were our
greatest Presidents, to the legend of Johnny Appleseed, to explanations for
Lyndon Johnson's failure in Vietnam.

Daniel P. Mannix's lively essay on L. Frank Baum, the author of ''The Wonderful
Wizard of Oz,'' precedes an anecdotal account of tornadoes by C. W. Gusewelle, a
columnist for The Kansas City Star. Malcolm Cowley's moving tale of the
courtship of Nathaniel Hawthorne and his future wife, Sophia, follows George
Howe's suspenseful recreation of ''The Minister and the Mill Girl,'' a
19th-century New England scandal. The collection contains a survey of more than
50 prominent writers and public figures who were asked what incident in American
history they would most like to have witnessed. The labor leader Victor Gotbaum
chose the post-election morning in 1948 when Harry S. Truman heard that he'd won
over Thomas E. Dewey; John Kenneth Galbraith opted for the scene in the White
House when Richard Nixon, having decided to resign, asked Henry Kissinger to
kneel and pray with him. While the general tenor of the essays is adulatory, a
few that are mildly critical seep through. Robert L. Heilbroner writes of Andrew
Carnegie, who loved money but was ashamed of his acquisitiveness. ''In the
failures of Andrew Carnegie we see many of the failures of America itself. In
his curious triumph, we see what we hope is our own steadfast core of
integrity.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUBURBAN COWBOY AND OTHERS

BYLINE: By Robert Ward; Robert Ward's latest novel is ''Red Baker.'' He is
currently story editor of ''Hill Street Blues.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1054 words


THE MAN WHO LOVED LEVITTOWN By W. D. Wetherell. 145 pp. Pennsylvania: University
of Pittsburgh Press. $12.95.

THERE are 10 stories in this collection, and by my reading 4 of them are
unforgettable. They are so strong, so well executed, that I can see why the
University of Pittsburgh Press chose to give its 1985 Drue Heinz Literature
Prize for short fiction to W. D. Wetherell. The remaining stories, however, are
uneven, and a couple are utterly sentimental.

The title story in ''The Man Who Loved Levittown'' is a brilliantly realized
inversion of that old, tired literary maxim: nothing ever happens in the suburbs
except another affair, another martini and one more trot around the back nine.
Mr. Wetherell's suburbia is that of the working class, circa 1954. His narrator
and hero, Tommy DiMaria, is one of the original settlers of Long Island's first
''planned community'' - Levittown. DiMaria doesn't think that living in the
suburbs is conformist, or cancer to the spirit:

''Sure they were little boxes when we first started. But what did we do? The
minute we got our mitts on them we started remodeling them, adding stuff,
changing them around.

''There wasn't anything we wouldn't do for each other. Babysit, drive someone
somewhere, maybe help out with a mortgage payment someone couldn't meet. . . .

''I'll never forget those years. The fifties. The early sixties. We were all
going the same direction . . . thanks to Big Bill Levitt we all had a chance.
You talk about dreams. Hell, we had ours. We had ours like nobody before or
since ever had theirs. SEVEN THOUSAND BUCKS! ONE HUNDRED DOLLARS DOWN! We were
cowboys out there. We were the pioneers.''

Alas, the ''pioneers'' lose their sense of community as the generations change.
Younger people begin to move into Levittown, working-class hippies who laugh at
the DiMarias' dreams. DiMaria loses his wife, is pressured by real-estate
salesmen to sell his house and move to Florida. He hangs on even after all his
friends are gone, and in the end performs a ritualistic act of violence. This is
powerful stuff, a brilliant weaving of personal and political themes told in a
colloquial voice that is both plaintive and funny and is ultimately haunting.
The story deserves to be anthologized often. The second story in the book, ''If
a Woodchuck Could Chuck Wood,'' is nearly as moving. It is a bitter tale about a
country boy's realization that he is poor and likely to remain so. Worse for
him, in order to win his bitter father's approval he turns his back on his
grandfather, the one person in his life who offers him love and hope.
''Woodchuck'' is a tragic, heartbreaking story, written with economy, and one is
not likely to forget it.

Only slightly less good is ''Volpi's Farewell,'' about an aging retired opera
singer, Volpi, and his young son, Ricky. Both Volpi's and Ricky's love lives are
in tatters; Volpi is in love with ''a girl half his age,'' and Ricky is smitten
by the leading lady in his sixth-grade production of ''La Boheme.'' This is a
bittersweet, touching tale with a wonderful, brave conclusion.

The funniest and toughest story in this ambitious collection is called ''North
of Peace.'' A wasted antinuclear organizer, Sanders, finds himself lost in a
backwater town in Vermont. He goes into a laundromat, where he meets a
provincial young woman with an emotionally disturbed 4-year-old boy. Sanders
works on her conscience, trying to instill her with activist fever. Indeed, he
begins to feel desperate to convert her: ''It was as if all his journeying came
down to this - the girl voluntarily taking a leaflet from his hand.'' He finally
succeeds in his task, but with a result more brutal, and ironic, than he is
capable of understanding. Again, in this story every sentence, every word leads
inexorably to the final powerful sentence.

Of the remaining six stories, I'd say that only ''Nickel a Throw'' is memorable.
It seems like a scenario from ''The Twilight Zone,'' or perhaps a genteel
rendering of a Stephen King horror tale. A man sits on a perch above a dunking
tub at a local charity carnival. He hurls insults at his neighbors so they'll
try to hit a target beneath him and send him into the drink. In an almost
supernatural twist, he begins to know exactly where each person's soft spot is,
and he homes in on it: '' 'Drunk driver,' Gooden says, probing. 'You were drunk,
you killed a kid.' '' The story takes a further surrealistic twist when Gooden
hallucinates that President Reagan is throwing a ball at him. In the end he
nearly loses his mind, and his neighbors take a measure of revenge. It is an
allegory of the artist's tentative and often hostile relationship to society,
and a clever one. But the hallucination seems false. Dragging in the President
makes the piece seem stagy and overdone. It might have been better at half its
length, and with a stronger, less polite conclusion.

Mr. Wetherell, who is the author of a novel, ''Souvenirs,'' and a book of
essays, ''Vermont River,'' is to be commended for trying to deal with political
realities in these short fictions. However, his thematic exposition sometimes
overpowers the characters, especially in ''Why I Love America.'' Here a down and
out black man named Rufus becomes the literacy teacher to a couple of Asian
immigrants, Kim-cha and Kim-choo. They want to learn English so they can go out
and make a living, but Rufus is so furious over the death of his son, Rufus Jr.,
in Vietnam that he teaches them his own private language of pain. The words he
teaches them are ''porter, unemployment, dishwater, heartbreak, welfare, pain,
underdog'' and so on. The whole tale is rather preposterous, just an excuse for
the author to vent his spleen, but against what? America? Racism? Capitalism? I
don't know and I don't care, because Mr. Wetherell has not convinced me that
either Rufus or the Asians with the adorable names are anything more than
sentimental confections.

Several of the other stories suffer from this kind of sentimentality, especially
the long closing tale, ''Spitfire Autumn.'' Still, 4 gems out of 10 is very high
for any collection. Mr. Wetherell is a passionate writer who, when he's not
waxing sentimental or standing on the soapbox, has a sharp, fresh eye and a
complicated view of our dislocations, pains and dreams.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SENTIMENTAL THEME LACKING IN IMPACT

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 16, Column 5; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 600 words


SOME plays are apt to induce guilt in theatergoers. Such plays often deal with
ailments or death, or confront issues such as apartheid or war.

How can one who is in accord with the author and in sympathy with the subject
turn away unaffected? Unfortunately, a touching, timely or timeless theme is
sometimes exploited, not explored. That was the case with the recent Broadway
failure, ''The Boys of Winter,'' which transmitted the agony of soldiers in the
Vietnam War into agony for the audience.

While ''Crystal Clear,'' at the Long Wharf Theater Stage Two, does not use
diabetes and blindness to pompous effect, it is a wildly unfocused work that
tries to cover too vast a terrain. There is something overly sincere and showy
about it.

Richard is a diabetic art dealer who is having an affair and falling in love
with a social worker, Thomasina, who has been blind from birth. At the same
time, he is having an affair with Jane, an art restorer whom he does not love,
but who is in love with him.

Thomasina has ostensibly made peace with her disability, and talks about getting
''more mileage out of my senses.'' Richard even refers to her as ''superblind''
because she seems such a model of adjustment. Meanwhile, he is losing his sight,
gradually and then completely, but he is deluded into hoping that it is only
temporary.

The petty jealousies of Jane, who wants Thomasina out of the way and Richard to
be dependent on her, are the stuff of soap opera. Jane, with her references to
''the sighted world,'' is a most understandable character, but is incompletely
and unfairly realized. She is almost made to be a condescending ''heavy'' and
she ought not to come off that way. It is too pat a dramatic device. An ultimate
revelation about Thomasina does not have the emotional impact that one expects.

Perhaps the worst problem is that the play was ''devised'' out of improvisations
by Phil Young, who also directed it. That has resulted in a cornucopia of
cliches. Richard is advised that ''money's not everything,'' to ''face reality''
and ''wake up, you're living in a dream world.'' Is that what ''devising''
rather than writing does?

When Richard is finally told by Thomasina of ''the pity and the prejudice and
the pain'' of being blind, we get the feeling that ''Crystal Clear'' could be
television's next contender for a ''disease of the week'' show.

In his staging, Mr. Young, whose play was developed in London, has embellished
the script with side gags that sometimes work and sometimes do not. Failing to
light a cigarette or fumbling for an ashtray may be a source of comic relief
once, but done twice, it is forced.

Hugh Landwehr's vivid set - a shambles of a studio apartment, later less
cluttered - engages the audience even before the play begins.

The actors are earnest. When Jack Coulter, who is making his professional stage
debut as Richard, cries out that he is ''just trying to get through this with as
few bruises and burns as possible,'' he is powerful, indeed. Sofia Landon is
more victimized by the role of Jane than transcendent of it, and Jessica Harper
is a delicate, through rather too understated, Thomasina. Miss Harper appeared
as drained and moved by the end of the play as we all should have been.

''Crystal Clear'' turns into a romantic triangle with cross purposes and
confused priorities. The conclusion is awash in sentimentality. Too bad that so
much of that is flaunted along the way.

''Crystal Clear,'' devised and directed by Phil Young, at the Long Wharf Theater
Stage Two, 222 Sargent Drive, New Haven. 787-4282.

Through Jan. 26.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jessica Harper and Jack Coulter in ''Crystal Clear''

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
American Delegation Is en Route to Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 133 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 5


A high-level American delegation arrived in Thailand today on its way to Hanoi
for talks on Americans missing in action from the Vietnam War.

The team, led by Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard L. Armitage and
including Paul D. Wolfowitz, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and
Pacific Affairs, is the highest-level group to visit Vietnam since the war ended
in 1975.

The team will fly to Hanoi Monday, said Col. Paul Mather, a Bangkok
representative of the Hawaii-based Joint Casualty Resolution Center.

The team is scheduled to meet with Vietnamese officials on Monday, Colonel
Mather said.

The United States lists 1,797 missing in Vietnam and has put pressure on Hanoi
for as full an accounting as possible. Vietnam has promised to resolve the
problem within two years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Don't Let These Jobs Disappear

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 238 words


In its rush to adjourn, Congress failed to extend the targeted jobs tax credit,
allowing it to expire on New Year's Eve. The lawmakers will have to move quickly
in the session starting Jan. 22 to avoid the cruel sacrifice of jobs for 623,000
disadvantaged Americans.

The tax credit was created in 1978 to ease unemployment among poor youths, the
handicapped, Vietnam veterans, welfare recipients and other groups. A business
hiring such a worker can claim a tax credit of $4,500 on the first $12,000 in
wages paid during the first two years.

The House liked the idea well enough to include a one-year, $2,400 credit in the
tax revision it passed at the end of the session. But early Senate action on
this bill is not likely. The House Ways and Means Committee voted to grant the
prospective credit in the meantime, until March 15, while the Senate Finance
Committee has agreed to extend the existing credit until August. But the
extensions await reconciliation and passage. The effective deadline is early
March, when state job services, having completed outstanding paperwork, are
likely to disband their targeted-jobs units. That could also bring to a halt the
screening of 13,000 weekly tax-credit job applications by state and community
organizations. The small- and medium-sized businesses that make the most use of
the credit would likely stop hiring. Every week that Congress delays jeopardizes
thousands of jobs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Fasting Veteran Seen As Threat to Reagan

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 160 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, Jan. 5


A Vietnam veteran who ended a 51-day fast on behalf of American servicemen
missing in Vietnam after President Reagan promised to talk with him is a
security risk, the Secret Service says in arguing against any meeting.

Gino Casanova, a 34-year-old former marine who lost 45 pounds in his fast, which
ended Dec. 5, has said he will resume fasting if Mr. Reagan fails to meet with
him on the missing servicemen issue.

''The Secret Service has looked at his record and we have determined that he
should not be permitted to speak with the President,'' William Corbett, a
spokesman for the Secret Service, said Friday. He refused to elaborate on Mr.
Casanova's record, except to say, ''It would be more than a series of parking
violations.''

Mr. Casanova, who lived in a bamboo cage during the fast, termed the Secret
Service conclusion ''a bunch of hogwash,'' and said his most serious criminal
conviction was a third-class misdemeanor for simple assault.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 7, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AND HANOI EXPRESS SATISFACTION AFTER TALKS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 970 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Tuesday, Jan. 7


Two days of high-level talks between the United States and Vietnam on the issue
of Americans missing in action from the Vietnam War ended today with both sides
expressing satisfaction with negotiations but calling for quicker progress on
unresolved cases.

It was announced that a round of technical discussions would take place late
next month to consider what the Vietnamese described as 50 new reports of
remains. The two sides also talked about the opening of an American technical
office here but decided such a move was unnecessary at this point, according to
the American side.

The United States delegation, the highest to come to Vietnam since the war, was
led by Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard L. Armitage, who spoke to
reporters after the final session today. He was joined at the news conference by
Hoang Bich Son, the Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Minister, who headed Hanoi's
delegation.

Meeting With Foreign Minister

The Americans met earlier this morning with Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach.
Mr. Thach, leaving the Foreign Ministry guest house, a former French colonial
governor's palace, said that while both sides were pleased with the discussions,
they sought quicker progress.

Mr. Son said later that a two-year timetable for resolving the question of
missing Americans, which Vietnam announced in July, would now go into effect.
But he and Mr. Thach said they hoped the issue could be resolved in less than
two years.

The United States has made a fuller accounting of missing Americans a
prerequisite for better relations with Vietnam. A total of 1,797 Americans are
unaccounted for in Vietnam and around its shores.

Talks on Prisoners of War

While the United States has largely agreed with Vietnam that there is almost no
likelihood that any missing Americans are still alive, there have been repeated
reports in the United States of evidence that some Americans are being held
prisoner.

The issue of prisoners of war was raised this morning, according to Foreign
Minister Thach. ''I have assured them that there is no one alive in our hands,''
he said.

Officials said the atmosphere around the talks had been businesslike and devoid
of ceremony.

Over the last year both the Vietnamese and the Reagan Administration have said
they have been encouraged by progress on the issue of the missing Americans. In
July the Vietnamese returned the remains of 26 Americans killed during the war,
most of them downed airmen.

In November Hanoi allowed the first joint excavation of an American B-52 crash
site near Hanoi.

The United States delegation at the talks here included Paul D. Wolfowitz, the
Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs; Richard K.
Childress of the National Security Council, and Ann Mills Griffiths, executive
director of the National League of Families, which represents the relatives of
missing Americans.

Also in the delegation were Col. Howard Hill of the Defense Department and M.
Lyall Breckon, director of the State Department's Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia
section.

The Vietnamese Delegates

The Vietnamese delegation included Mr. Son; Nguyen Dy Nien, an Assistant Foreign
Minister; Tran Hoan, director of the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry's North
American Department, and Nguyen Can, the Deputy Director of North American
Affairs.

The United States had insisted that the meeting be confined to the issue of
missing Americans. The Vietnamese sought to broaden the discussions to other
issues holding up American diplomatic recognition of Hanoi.

Washington has said there will be no diplomatic relations or economic help until
Vietnamese troops leave Cambodia. Hanoi toppled the Khmer Rouge Government there
seven years ago today and now occupies the country with more than 150,000
troops.

Hanoi is openly acknowledging that it would like to link the opening of any
American liaison office in Hanoi with the opening of a Vietnamese mission in
Washington.

Hanoi Seeks Warmer Ties

On Saturday, Vo Dong Giang, a Minister of State at the Vietnamese Foreign
Office, told reporters that it was only fair that if the Americans were present
in Hanoi, the Vietnamese should be present in Washington.

Asian officials and diplomats based in Hanoi said the Vietnamese attached great
importance to the meeting with the Americans because Hanoi needed to improve
relations with Washington for several reasons.

Diplomats describe the Vietnamese leadership as uncomfortable in an exclusive
alliance with the Soviet Union.

The Vietnamese, they say, would like to be able to play Washington and Moscow
off against each other in the region, where both Soviet and American strategic
interests are at stake.

Vietnam would also like warmer relations with China, which would give Hanoi even
more leverage in dealing with the great powers, diplomats say.

Reconstruction Is Aim

In a meeting with reporters on Monday while the first session of the talks was
in progress, Mr. Giang, the Minister of State, was asked why Vietnam wanted
better relations with Washington. ''We do not want to improve relations only
with Washington,'' he said. ''We want to improve relations with all the people
around us because we need a peaceful framework for reconstruction.''

There are those close to Hanoi who contend that Vietnam, now one of the world's
poorest countries, continues to hold out hope for some kind of American
reparations for the war or at least for American help in development.

But even without recompense, Vietnam appears to believe that it would gain
substantially from United States recognition in terms of unofficial aid from
American and international organizations. A number of private American
humanitarian organizations say they would like to aid the Vietnamese but have
been blocked by the diplomatic situation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 8, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Free Our Presidents From Re-election Campaigns

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 162 words


To the Editor:

If the Committee for a Single Six-Year Presidential Term is truly serious about
wishing to remove the Presidency from the test of re-election, then let it
advocate a single four-year term. None of the arguments put forth justify
lengthening the Presidential term by two years.

A six-year Presidential term makes me shudder. Would President Nixon have taken
six years to negotiate a cease-fire in Vietnam instead of four? Would President
Reagan feel free to invade Nicaragua? Would taxes always be raised but never
lowered?

It is condescending to the American people to argue that the pressure of getting
re-elected leads to timid Presidents. The essence of leadership is to persuade
people of the need for reform and sacrifice, and people will respond if the
changes proposed are needed and fair. The arguments of the committee chairmen
sound like those of a schoolterm papers if only they didn't have to be graded.
MARK WESTON New York, Dec. 31, 1985

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 8, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Lessons of the Alger Hiss Case

BYLINE: By Richard Nixon; Richard Nixon was a member of the House Committee on
Un-American Activities when Whittaket Chambers came before it in August 1948.
This article is adapted from a speech delivered this fall to the Pumpkin Papers
Irregulars, a club of students of the Alger Hiss case.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1393 words


What are the lessons of the Hiss case?

The world is, of course, very different today. This fall, I took an
around-the-world trip that took me to many countries I had visited 32 years ago
when I was Vice President. On the first trip, many non-Communist educators,
labor leaders and journalists honestly felt that the Communist model of the
Soviet Union or China might be the best and fastest way to economic progress for
newly independent countries in the third world.

That is not the case today. Why? It was 65 years ago that a starry-eyed American
newspaper reporter, Lincoln Steffens, returned from the Soviet Union and wrote,
''I have been over into the future and it works.'' Today, the world has seen
that future and it doesn't work. It doesn't work in Eastern Europe. It doesn't
work in the third world: Cuba, Nicaragua, Ethiopia, Angola and Mozambique are
economic disaster areas. Most significant, it doesn't work in the Soviet Union.
The only economic success stories are in non-Communist countries.

The Communists have lost the ideological battle - and we see it today even in
espionage. The Americans recently charged with spying for the Soviet Union have
almost without exception done so for money and not because they believed in the
Communist system. Alger Hiss, Whittaker Chambers and the other members of the
espionage group they belonged to in the 1930's did not do what they did for
money. They were true believers who had lost faith in the American system and
felt that Communism was the wave of the future.

The Hiss case did, neverthless, hold a number of lessons - for the country and
for me personally.

One of the most important concerns the breadth and depth of Soviet espionage
activities in the United States in the 1930's. Some of Hiss's supporters scoffed
at the documents and microfilms that Chambers turned over to the House Committee
on Un-American Activities and the courts in 1948 and 1949. Such people contended
that the material was unimportant and was not damaging to American security.
What they failed to recognize was that anyone who had access to these copies of
State Department cables would have been able to break the State Department's
code. That meant that the Russians were probably able to read all messages using
that code in the period before World War II when the Soviet Union was allied
with Nazi Germany.

Beyond this, the skeptics overlook the fact that what Chambers turned over was
merely his last haul: He testified that at least 70 other times he had collected
a similar amount of papers from Hiss and had delivered them to a Soviet contact.
They also fail to recognize that Hiss was only one of Chambers's contacts and
that Chambers was only one of several couriers who collected documents and
turned them over to Soviet agents.

A second major lesson of the case concerns the mistake, often made in the media
and in intellectual circles generally, of confusing style and substance. Most of
the reporters covering the Hiss case were obsessed with style. Although he was a
senior editor of Time magazine, Chambers was poorly dressed, pudgy,
undistinguished in appearance and in background. Hiss, in contrast, was a
striking representative of the fashionable Eastern establishment - a graduate of
Harvard Law School, clerk to a Supreme Court Justice, an aide to Franklin D.
Roosevelt at the Yalta conference and one of the major organizers of the United
Nations conference in San Francisco. He had impeccable social and intellectual
qualifications, and the list of people who he said would vouch for his character
ranged from Adlai E. Stevenson to John Foster Dulles. He, in effect, pleaded
innocence by association.

All of this had an enormous impact on the media.

They were so dazzled by Hiss's background and his brilliant conduct on the
witness stand that they failed to see that beneath the unimpressive exterior,
Chambers was a stronger, more intelligent man.

In another lesson, a more personal one, the Hiss case - and my association with
Chambers, in particular - had a profound effect in shaping my attitude toward
the war in Vietnam. It began with Chamber's comment about the war in Korea:
''What people do not understand is that for the Communists, the war in Korea is
not a war about Korea, it is a war about Japan.'' I tried to analyze the war in
Vietnam in the same way.

From my vantage point, the war in Vietnam was not just about Vietnam but about
Cambodia, Laos, Indonesia, Angola, Ethiopia and Nicaragua. It is fashionable,
today, to deride the domino theory, but any sophisticated observer of foreign
policy recognizes that on the world scene, when one domino falls, others do not
fall immediately or even adjacently. What happens is more like a move in chess
than a move in checkers: In chess, a move on one part of the board can affect
any other part of the board.

We are recovering from the Vietnam syndrome, but calls for ''no more Vietnams''
are raised even today by those who oppose a strong United States role in Central
America or other areas of the world where the Communists are engaged in direct
or indirect aggression. The American defeat in Vietnam did not just affect
Vietnam. It encouraged our enemies and discouraged our friends. But most
damaging of all, it weakened the spirit and will of Americans to play a
responsible role in the world.

The Hiss case also affected my political career. The Presidential election of
1960 was one of the closest in United States history: A shift of 12,000 votes in
Illinois and one other smaller state would have changed the result. A friend of
mine, post-morteming the election a few days later, blames the journalistic
antipathy directed against me during the campaign: ''If it had not been for the
Hiss case, I think you might have been elected.'' I replied that without the
Hiss case, I would probably not have been nominated.

I trace my candidacy back to the 1952 campaign, when domestic Communism was a
major issue. Eisenhower recognized this; he did not want to address the issue
himself and did not want to leave it to Joe McCarthy, whom he bitterly disliked.
When Eisenhower chose me as his running mate, he told me, ''One of the reasons I
picked you was that you got Hiss and got him fairly.'' He urged me in the
campaign to talk about the case because a lot of people thought McCarthy had
gotten Hiss.

The final lesson, for me, grew out of the greatest mistake I made during my
investigation of the case - in my questioning of Mrs. Hiss before the House
Committee on Un-American Activities. By the time she came to the stand, I was
tired and felt that the case had already been broken; as a result, I did not
follow up as I should have. She played her role with consummate skill: She was
very feminine, delicate and somewhat detached from the whole unpleasant subject
- and it was hard for me to believe that she could possibly have been aware of,
let alone a part, of a Communist conspiracy.

I should have remembered what Chambers had told me about her -that she was the
''red hot'' of the two. He pointed out that in the case of Communist couples -
and, in fact, of extremists both left and right - the wife is often more
extremist than the husband. It has been my observation since that in the
political arena men often tend to be pragmatic: They are willing to compromise
to achieve their objectives. Women seldom will do so. They tend to be total
idealists, true believers, whether the cause is on the left or the right.

The most moving moment of the Hiss hearing came near the end of Chambers's
testimony. I asked him: ''Can you search your memory now to see what motive you
can have for accusing Mr. Hiss of being a Communist? . . . Is there any grudge
you have against Mr. Hiss over anything he has done to you?''

He replied: ''The story has spread that in testifying against Mr. Hiss, I am
working out some old grudge or motives of revenge or hatred. I do not hate Mr.
Hiss. We were close friends, but we are caught in a tragedy of history. Mr. Hiss
represents the concealed enemy against which we are all fighting and I am
fighting. I have testified against him with remorse and pity, but in a moment of
history in which this nation now stands, so help me God, I cannot do
otherwise.''

Chambers is dead. Alger Hiss still lives. But history will record that Chambers
was on the right side.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 8, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Movie Helps CBS Lead In TV Ratings for Week

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 243 words


The CBS movie ''Intimate Strangers'' defeated the college football competition
on NBC and ABC on New Year's night and helped the second-ranked network achieve
its third weekly ratings victory of the season, according to figures released
yesterday by the A. C. Nielsen Company.

''Intimate Strangers,'' starring Terri Garr as a nurse who escapes from Vietnam
after 10 years, pre-empted regular CBS series and was the week's No. 3 show,
with a 26.4 rating. NBC's coverage of the Orange Bowl, which determined the
national championship when Oklahoma beat Penn State, ranked 14th, with a 21.3
rating. ABC's coverage of the Sugar Bowl, matching Miami and Tennessee, was 61st
out of 63 shows, with a 6.8 rating.

For the week, CBS had five shows in the Top 10 and averaged an 18.7 rating. NBC
had the five other highest ranked programs, including the No. 1 ''Cosby Show,''
and finished with 17.9. ABC, in third place, did not have a single program in
the Top 25 and averaged 12.0, the worst regular season performance since ABC had
11.9 New Year's Week one year ago.

The calendar affected ABC's prime-time schedule. It was the first week without
''Monday Night Football''; ABC's normally winning Tuesday night lineup was hurt
by low viewing on New Year's Eve, and the network's most popular series,
''Dynasty,'' was pre-empted by the Sugar Bowl.

Midway through the 30-week regular prime-time season, NBC leads with a 17.6
rating to CBS's 16.8 and ABC's 15.3.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 9, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

The Presidency;
The Reagan News Conference: A Comparison

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 983 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 8


President Kennedy did it with his quick wits, President Johnson did it with
sheer force of personality, and President Nixon did it with a tenacious grip on
his material, at least until he became bogged down in the sour futility of the
Watergate period.

Ronald Reagan is unlike any of them, or so it seemed to someone who had watched
the news conferences of Presidents Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, Ford and Carter but
had never, until Tuesday night, watched one given by Mr. Reagan.

Not that Mr. Reagan failed to dominate the proceedings; far from it. But he
dominated them despite misstatements, errors of fact and a meandering mode of
presentation that would have defeated most of his recent predecessors.

Mr. Reagan began his first formal news conference in almost four months with two
fumbles in three sentences. Reading from a prepared text discussing recent
terrorist attacks, he called the Vienna airport the Vietnam airport and called a
young American killed in one attack Marsha instead of Natasha Simpson.

There were other such flubs scattered through the 35 minutes that he spent
before the cameras in the East Room of the White House. Citing United Nations
resolutions on the Middle East, he gave their numbers as 442 and 238 instead of
242 and 338; he described Mikhail S. Gorbachev as the Secretary General rather
than the General Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party; he stated incorrectly
that today's lower tax rates produced revenue equal to the same percentage of
gross national product as the higher tax rates in effect before 1981.

No Prime Minister, answering parliamentary questions from hostile and often
disrespectful opposition leaders skilled in debate, could survive many such
sessions. He or she would be hounded from office.

But a Prime Minister is a chief of government, not, like a President, a chief of
state and chief of government in one. And therein lies one of Mr. Reagan's great
advantages: the general disposition of Americans, including reporters, to treat
the President with the deference due to a symbol of national unity, unless, like
Mr. Nixon, he raises suspicions that he has forfeited that respect.

Only once Tuesday night did the President face a question that might be termed
aggressive. That was when Sam Donaldson of ABC News suggested that Mr. Reagan
had not understood what he was signing when he authorized polygraph, or
lie-detector, tests for security purposes.

The President parried it with a joke.

Mr. Reagan has also learned, in a way no earlier President learned, to use to
his advantage the grand stage set that the White House provides.

To most television viewers who saw him emerge from behind a closed door, stride
purposefully down a long, imperially furnished, red-carpeted corridor, then
fairly bound onto a platform framed in the doorway to the East Room, much of the
message - vigor, authority, relaxation - had been communicated before he spoke.

At the same time that he capitalizes on the majesty of his office, Mr. Reagan
manages to seem regular, easy, nice.

The White House regulars were called upon by name - Helen, Mike, Bill, Chris,
not Miss Thomas, Mr. Putzel, Mr. Plante, Mr. Wallace. And Sarah McClendon, a
Washington correspondent of long-standing who has been in the hospital for hip
surgery, got a special welcome-back (in the course of which the President
dexterously half-apologized for not holding a news conference for so long) and
the right to ask the first question.

That balance between the outspoken, common-sense, average man and the sober,
more reflective national leader was maintained throughout. On one occasion, Mr.
Reagan drew a laugh - the kind of laugh drawn by an uninhibited child who says
what his elders may only think - when he said of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the
Libyan leader: ''I find he's not only a barbarian but he's flaky.'' But later,
asked whether he thought the Libyan was emotionally or mentally unbalanced, the
President replied, ''Oh, no.'' He had used the term ''flaky,'' he said, only in
the sense that it is used ''in conversation with someone.'' After denouncing the
terrorists and their works, he was careful to suggest that many of them might be
misguided and misused rather than evil, describing them as ''poor souls that are
fanatic enough that they can be told that they got a free ride to heaven if
they'll go out and give up their own lives to kill someone else, innocent
people.''

Each of the legendary one-liners serves a subtle purpose. ''I'd be happy to
welcome him,'' the President said when asked whether Colonel Qaddafi might
attack Washington, suggesting that he was ready to step outside to settle the
argument - a political plus on a night when Mr. Reagan had again drawn back from
the idea of military retaliation.

There were other grace notes as well, notably Mr. Reagan's ready concession that
it might be difficult to persuade American allies to go along with sanctions
against Libya: maybe they would, he said, and maybe they wouldn't, ''but we're
going to go on with what we think has to be done.'' The quiet determination of
the Western sheriff.

And at the end, Mr. Reagan managed to communicate, with a slightly baffled look
and a shrug of the shoulders, that he would have been happy to keep talking with
his good friends there for hours.

The session may not have been the crisp, detailed articulation of American
policy that some seek from a President; the text of the session, certainly,
would not contain the policy nuggets with which other Presidents' news
conferences were littered.

Mr. Reagan, often dubbed the Great Communicator, communicates not on an
intellectual but on an emotional level - rather like, it seemed to this
onlooker, a cross between Roosevelt and Eisenhower, the only two other
Presidents of the past half-century who shared with Mr. Reagan, this deeply into
their tenure, the same kind of popularity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of the present and five previous Presidents of the United States
(NYT, UPI & AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

National Archives;
'Uncle Sam Speaks'

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 727 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 9


Never mind the Government's long campaign by way of Presidential warnings,
Administration seminars and fact-finding missions to stir the public about a
Communist threat in Central America. What about the Federal campaign by way of
simple paper broadside to stir the public to consume more carp?

''Eat the Carp!'' the Government exhorted the citizenry 75 years ago in a notice
posted on walls around the land. ''Catch the carp; buy the carp; cook the carp
properly and eat it.''

Whatever the fate of that initiative, it could hardly have been as ultimately
successful a venture in official persuasion as the 1929 poster showing an
elegant woman poised with plume at letter writing before the image of a bi-wing
airplane and the dictum: ''Air Mail Is Socially Correct.''

The carp broadside, the airmail poster and 115 more graphic slices of American
history are being retrieved from a vast storehouse at the National Archives for
a show called ''Uncle Sam Speaks'' opening next month at the archives.

The posters and broadsides are simple, charming forerunners of modern methods of
Government persuasion and information, often deeply tinged with history. The
show begins with one of George III's final exhortations to the colonies: ''By
the King, A Proclamation Suppressing Rebellion and Sedition'' from Aug. 23,
1775, and is followed a few months later by the Continental Congress's
contumacious rebuttal: ''In Congress.''

The modern Government, encrusted with public relations specialists, seeks to
broadcast information to the citizenry through electronic and print news. But it
still relies on posters for important parochial coverage, and today's ''green
card'' broadsides of instructions for new immigrants could undoubtedly be
treasured objects of nostalgia decades from now as naturalized citizens look
back upon their life.

The show, running for a year beginning Feb. 21, will offer a kind of Rorschach
of American history, a pastiche of collective emotion. There is manhunt anxiety,
for example, in the wanted broadside for John Wilkes Booth: ''$100,000 Reward.
The Murderer of Our Late Beloved President Abraham Lincoln Is Still At Large.''
There is Puritanical guilt etched in every clause of the Continental Congress's
proclamation of a national day of ''Fasting, Humiliation and Prayer.'' There is
grim candor in the modern F.B.I. poster about molestation: '' 'Scuse Me, Kids,
But If Someone Touches You and You Don't Feel Right About It, Ask Someone You
Trust for Help.''

''The most surprising discoveries are the little things,'' said Nancy Allyn, the
exhibit researcher for the show who has been going through the archives'
collection of 15,000 posters and countless broadsides.

She noted revealing differences in public atttitude reflected in the posters for
the two World Wars, most dramatic in the willingness to depict the beached body
of a dead sailor in the World War II poster, ''A Careless Word . . . A Needless
Loss.'' ''They never would do that in World War I,'' Miss Allyn said, recalling
the heroic, never fallen posture of American troops in those posters.

The show, being readied with careful chemical baths and paper restorations by
Kitty Nicholson, an archives conservator, will resurrect some forotten works by
known artists. These include ''The Sowers,'' an agriculture poster by Thomas
Hart Benton, ''Syphilis Keep Out'' by Ben Shahn for a public health campaign and
''Sitting Bull'' by Leonard Baskin for the Interior Department.

Wars are a large source of vivid exhortation, from the Revolution through the
Civil War (''To Arms! To Arms!!'' announces an 1861 Confederacy broadside) to
Eisenhower's classic broadside as the conquering general of Germany announcing
occupation (''We come as conquerors but not as oppressors''). From the Vietnam
War, Miss Allyn chose a poster that, in her view, echoes a defensive tone in
that anti-war era about Marine recruitment: ''We Don't Promise You a Rose
Garden.''

The nation's peacetime growth is reflected by such posters as ''Indian
Territory, That Garden of the World, Open for Homestead'' in 1866 and ''Last
Chance for Cheap Homes!'' in 1880. The show will offer examples from the private
sphere, too, most memorably the poster image of a vaguely evil-looking child
with a hard-eyed smile, pointing from the advertisement: ''Say! You ought to
drink Hires' Rootbeer.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of posters

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 10, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Executive Resigns Post At Realtors Association

BYLINE: By Geraldine Fabrikant and Eric Schmitt

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 481 words


No one has ever accused Jack Carlson of being wishy-washy.

''I look for a challenge, make my contribution, then move on to another
challenge,'' said Mr. Carlson, who yesterday resigned after seven years as
executive vice president of the National Association of Realtors, the nation's
largest trade organization.

Mr. Carlson - who is 52, has served in three Administrations, run unsuccessfully
for the Senate and taught at several universities - was vague about his future.
''I don't have anything on my radar screen now,'' he said in a telephone
interview.

The association, based in Chicago, with 706,000 members nationwide, said that
William D. North, senior vice president and general counsel, would succeed Mr.
Carlson until a permanent replacement was named.

Colleagues and critics of Mr. Carlson agree that the Utah native has transformed
the association into a vigorous lobbying body. It has a political action
committee that spends $10 million a year on national, state and local
candidates, more than any other such committee. But they differ on his
effectiveness.  ''Carlson has put together a good economic research shop whose
influence in the housing industry has increased,'' said Kenneth T. Rosen,
chairman of the Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics at the University of
California at Berkeley.

Congressional sources, however, said that Mr. Carlson was often unwilling to
compromise with sympathetic legislators.

''He's politicized the realtors even more than they already were, but he didn't
gain any more influence,'' said Gerald R. McMurray, staff director of the House
Subcommittee on Housing.

From 1979 to 1982, Mr. Carlson's first three years with the association, housing
sales plummeted 55 percent. Since 1982, however, he said home sales have
rebounded 65 percent.

It was during that time, Mr. Carlson said, that the association amassed its
political war chest and advocated lower minimum interest rates for
seller-provided financing, removing barriers for mortgage-backed securities and
improving legal services for smaller brokers.

Mr. Carlson was senior staff economist of President Johnson's Council of
Economic Advisers from 1966 to 1968, during the Vietnam troop buildup. Later, he
became assistant director of the Office of Management and Budget during the
Nixon Administrations, and was Assistant Interior Secretary for Energy and
Minerals during the mid-1970's.

In 1976, Orrin G. Hatch defeated Mr. Carlson in the Republican Senate primary in
Utah.

Immediately before joining the realtors association, Mr. Carlson was vice
president and chief economist of the Chamber of Commerce of the United States.

Mr. Carlson holds a doctorate in economics from Harvard University, a master's
in public administration from Harvard and an M.B.A. from the University of Utah,
where he did undergraduate work. He is married and has seven children.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 11, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

JOSEPH KRAFT, CAPTIAL COLUMNIST WHOSE WORK RAN IN 200 PAPERS

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 956 words


Joseph Kraft, the widely syndicated Washington columnist and author of books and
articles on national and foreign affairs, died last night at the Washington
Hospital Center, apparently of heart failure. He was 61 years old and lived in
the capital.

Mr. Kraft, whose syndicated columns were written in recent years for The Los
Angeles Times and printed in The Washington Post and 200 other newspapers in the
United States and abroad, had a long history of heart trouble.

He had become ill in recent weeks, entered the hospital about 10 days ago,
shortly after writing his last column, and died at 7:10 P.M., according to a
hospital spokesman. The spokesman would not give the cause of death, but
Elizabeth Pozen, an assistant to Mr. Kraft, said heart failure was apparently
the cause.

In a 35-year career Mr. Kraft was an editorial writer for The Washington Post, a
staff writer for The New York Times, a frequent contributor to The New Yorker
and other magazines, a correspondent for Harper's Magazine in Washington, and a
columnist for 15 years for Field Newspapers and, since 1980, for The Los Angeles
Times Syndicate.

Many Interviews, Much Study

In Washington and in American journalism, he was known as a fiercely
independent, widely traveled columnist with a liberal bent, a sharp eye for
detail and an authoritative voice on national politics, domestic and foreign
affairs and a host of other subjects.

In his three columns a week - the number was cut to two in the past year - Mr.
Kraft sometimes offered reportorial exclusives, but more often he provided
insights and opinions on public affairs that reflected many interviews with
leaders and a careful study of public records.

He was an early and outspoken opponent of American involvement in the Vietnam
War, a dogged commentator on the Watergate affair, a strong advocate of detente
and a critic of United States military and economic dominance in the world. He
often urged the nation's opinion-makers to pay more attention to the values of
what he called Middle America.

''I believe he coined the term 'Middle America' in the 1960's,'' said Anthony
Day, the editor of the editorial pages of The Los Angeles Times. ''By that, he
meant the middle-class America whose views were often overlooked by the
opinion-molders on the two coasts.''

Tributes From Colleagues

A dark-haired man with spectacles and an intense, restless manner, Mr. Kraft
over the years spent much of his time traveling abroad and interviewed many of
the world's leaders on a grueling schedule that may have contributed to heart
attacks he suffered in the 1960's and 1970's.

''The main thing about Joe Kraft is that he tried to deal with the causes of
human suffering, rather than the results,'' said a fellow columnist, James
Reston of The New York Times.

''With the possible exception of Izzy Stone,'' Mr. Reston said, ''no journalist
of his time in Washington studied the official documents more carefully,
questioned officials more precisely or worked so hard, knowing he had so little
time, to fight for the facts against the television pretenses of contemporary
politicians.''

Mr. Reston was referring to I. F. Stone, former publisher of a weekly Washington
newsletter.

Katherine Graham, the chairman of The Washington Post, called Mr. Kraft ''a
brilliant, sensitive journalist with an incredible variety of talent,'' and
Anthony Lewis, a columist for The New York Times who worked with Mr. Kraft years
ago, called him a ''scholar-journalist, something that is not very usual.''

Author of Four Books

Mr. Kraft had only one foray into politics, as a speechwriter for John F.
Kennedy in the 1960 Presidential campaign. He was a member of the panel of
questioners for the television debates between Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter
in the 1976 Presidential election.

He wrote four books: ''The Struggle For Algeria'' (1961); ''The Grand Design:
From Common Market to Atlantic Partnership'' (1962); ''Profiles in Power''
(1966), and ''The Chinese Difference'' (1973). He frequently wrote long profiles
and letters from Washingtron and abroad for The New Yorker, and contributed
articles for other magazines.

Joseph Kraft was born in South Orange, N.J., on Sept. 4, 1924, the son of David
Harry and Sophie Surasky Kraft. He entered journalism at the age of 14, covering
high school sports as a part-time correspondent for The New York World-Telegram.

In World War II Mr. Kraft joined the Army, in which he studied Japanese and was
a cryptographer. Resuming studies after the war, he was graduated from Columbia
University with a bachelor's degree in 1947 and studied at Princeton University
from 1948 to 1951.

Began Columns in 1965

He was an editorial writer for The Washington Post in 1951 and 1952, a staff
writer for Sunday sections of The New York Times from 1953 to 1957, and a
Washington correspondent for Harper's from 1962 to 1965, when he began writing
columns for distribution by Field Newspapers Syndicate.

Mr. Kraft, who joined The Los Angeles Times and its syndicate in July 1980, won
many honors, including the Overseas Press Club Award for distinguished reporting
in 1958, 1973 and 1980; Columbia University's John Jay Award for Distinguished
Professional Achievement in 1983. In 1983, the French Government made him a
Chevalier in the Legion of Honor.

''He brought great distinction to his profession and to this newspaper,'' said
Tom Johnson, the publisher and chief executive officer of The Los Angeles Times.

Mr. Kraft is survived by his wife, Polly Winton Kraft, an artist whom he married
in 1960; a brother, Gilman, of Los Angeles, and two stepsons, Mark Stevens of
New York, who is an art critic for Newsweek, and David Stevens of Denver.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Joseph Kraft

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 11, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ON THE LITERARY CONGRESS AND WRITERS' PROBLEMSnomics and;
Americans Exclude The Globe

BYLINE: By Edward Hoagland; Edward Hoagland, essayist and novelist, is author of
''African Calliope'' and other books.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 726 words


The American branch of PEN, the writers' organization, is a yeomanly group that
holds contests for first novelists and protests the incarceration of writers who
are prisoners of conscience abroad. Next week, for the first time since 1966, it
hosts the annual congress of its parent body -a rare occasion when American
writers in any numbers take notice of a world beyond our own borders.

Writers, like other affluent citizens here, do make the rounds of the countries
that were regularly visited, for example, by Henry James. They know London,
Venice, Geneva as vacationers, but I would guess that five times as many have
been to Tuscany as to the whole continent of Africa; that more have visited
Barcelona than all of South America. We have no tradition of travel writing
except in connection with the exploration of our own continent or else as
''innocents abroad.''

In no other developed country, I suspect, has the intellectual community
remained so unfamiliar with and uninterested in the changing postwar world; and
much of the extraordinary ignorance of most Americans about what has been
happening elsewhere since 1945 is due to the fact that their eyes and ears -
their writers - have stayed home.

Exceptions exist, like Philip Roth's championing of Eastern European authors,
John Updike's brilliant African novel ''The Coup,'' Paul Theroux's Asian
travels, and various writers have followed our troops to Vietnam and lately into
the Salvador-Nicaragua imbroglio. But nothing has occurred among American
literati in the past 40 years that corresponds to the opening outward of writers
in the decade or two that followed the First World War. They went to live in
Europe, which then seemed as venturesome as going with serious purpose to Brazil
or South Asia might be nowadays; and they came back - Hemingway, Fitzgerald and
the rest - with books that were new to their time and place, a mini-golden age
of literature.

We are a continental country with, locally, much to explore. We are also a
nation of immigrants. For many writers, America itself has had the qualities of
a foreign land, pre-empting their curiosity and energy as they recapitulated the
discoveries of generations that had come before. And we are an entrepreneurial
society that thrusts upon its better-known authors a special style of celebrity
-self-important, self-celebratory. Many successful novelists turn into
pouter-pigeons, addicted to a constant deference, and probably wouldn't be much
good at travel-writing anyway no matter where they went because the genre
requires a certain modesty and self-effacement, an openness to unexpected
sights, to timid or argumentative voices.

But leave out these pouter-pigeons. Imagine if some of our young writers who do
''minimalist'' short stories traveled to quarters of the world where life no
longer seemed minimal to them. Our fiction has become ingrown, repetitive and
tired, and without advocating that Americans start writing novels about Lagos or
Sao Paulo, I am suggesting that breathing a little foreign air might infuse
vigor into it. They might return possessed by a salubrious anger, or a despair
that no longer seemed facile, or even a belief in God.

And suppose a dozen of our neoconservative theorists were to get off the
Washington-London-Bonn axis and travel through an equatorial continent for a few
months instead of merely jeering sight unseen at the three-fourths of the human
race that lives in the third world. Western intellectuals had an obvious agenda
to address after the Second World War. First, they needed to sort out and
attempt to record the unspeakable enormities of the Nazi war. Second, to begin
to consider what the world might be coming to, with new forms of totalitarianism
and nuclear weaponry. And third, to try to explore the new societies and nations
arising nearly worldwide in an age like none before. But among Americans only
the first of these imperatives has been gone into thoroughly. The dead have been
memorialized, but the living in their myriad millions have been neglected by
intellectuals to the point of bankruptcy in numerous magazines of opinion here,
while many of our fiction writers - who should have needed no ''agenda'' apart
from the promptings of the heart - have allowed their temperaments to shrink to
miniaturist provincialism and minimalist response.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JOSEPH KRAFT, THE JOURNALIST, DIES; CAPITAL COLUMNS WIDELY PRINTED

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 895 words


Joseph Kraft, the widely syndicated Washington columnist and author of books and
articles on national and foreign affairs, died Friday night at the Washington
Hospital Center, apparently of heart failure. He was 61 years old and lived in
the capital.

Mr. Kraft, whose syndicated columns were written in recent years for The Los
Angeles Times and printed in The Washington Post and 200 other newspapers in the
United States and abroad, had a long history of heart trouble.

He became ill in recent weeks, entered the hospital about 10 days ago, shortly
after writing his last column, and died at 7:10 P.M., according to a hospital
spokesman. The spokesman would not give the cause of death, but Elizabeth Pozen,
an assistant to Mr. Kraft, said heart failure was apparently the cause.

In a long career, Mr. Kraft was an editorial writer for The Washington Post, a
staff writer for The New York Times, a frequent contributor to The New Yorker
and other magazines, a correspondent for Harper's Magazine in Washington, and a
columnist for 15 years for Field Newspapers and, since 1980, for The Los Angeles
Times Syndicate.

Many Interviews, Much Study

In Washington and in American journalism he was known as a fiercely independent,
widely traveled columnist with a liberal bent, a sharp eye for detail and an
authoritative voice on national politics, domestic and foreign affairs and a
host of other subjects.

In his three columns a week - the number was cut to two in the past year - Mr.
Kraft sometimes offered exclusive reports, but more often he provided insights
and opinions on public affairs that reflected many interviews with leaders and a
careful study of public records.

He was an early and outspoken opponent of American involvement in the Vietnam
War, a dogged commentator on the Watergate affair, a strong advocate of detente
and a critic of United States military and economic dominance in the world. He
often urged the nation's opinion makers to pay more attention to the values of
what he called Middle America.

''I believe he coined the term 'Middle America' in the 1960's,'' said Anthony
Day, editor of the editorial pages of The Los Angeles Times. ''By that, he meant
the middle-class America whose views were often overlooked by the
opinion-molders on the two coasts.''

Tributes From Colleagues

A dark-haired man with spectacles and an intense, restless manner, Mr. Kraft
over the years spent much of his time traveling abroad and interviewed many of
the world's leaders on a grueling schedule that may have contributed to heart
attacks he suffered in the 1960's and 1970's.

''The main thing about Joe Kraft is that he tried to deal with the causes of
human suffering rather than the results,'' said a fellow columnist, James Reston
of The New York Times.

''With the possible exception of Izzy Stone,'' Mr. Reston said, referring to the
former publisher of a Washington newsletter, ''no journalist of his time in
Washington studied the official documents more carefully, questioned officials
more precisely or worked so hard, knowing he had so little time, to fight for
the facts against the television pretenses of contemporary politicians.''

Katherine Graham, the chairman of The Washington Post, called Mr. Kraft ''a
brilliant, sensitive journalist with an incredible variety of talent,'' and
Anthony Lewis, a columnist for The New York Times who worked with Mr. Kraft
years ago, called him a ''scholar-journalist, something that is not very
usual.''

Mr. Kraft had only one foray into politics, as a speechwriter for John F.
Kennedy in the 1960 Presidential campaign.

He wrote four books: ''The Struggle For Algeria'' (1961), ''The Grand Design:
From Common Market to Atlantic Partnership'' (1962), ''Profiles in Power''
(1966) and ''The Chinese Difference'' (1973). He frequently wrote long profiles
and letters from Washington and abroad for The New Yorker, and contributed to
other magazines.

Joseph Kraft was born in South Orange, N.J., on Sept. 4, 1924, the son of David
Harry and Sophie Surasky Kraft. He entered journalism at the age of 14, covering
high school sports as a part-time correspondent for The New York World-Telegram.

In World War II Mr. Kraft joined the Army, in which he studied Japanese and was
a cryptographer. Resuming studies after the war, he graduated from Columbia
University with a bachelor's degree in 1947 and studied at Princeton University
from 1948 to 1951.

He was an editorial writer for The Washington Post in 1951 and 1952, a staff
writer for Sunday sections of The New York Times from 1953 to 1957, and a
Washington correspondent for Harper's from 1962 to 1965, when he began writing
columns for distribution by Field Newspapers Syndicate.

Mr. Kraft, who joined The Los Angeles Times and its syndicate in July 1980, won
many honors, including the Overseas Press Club Award for distinguished reporting
in 1958, 1973 and 1980; and Columbia University's John Jay Award for
Distinguished Professional Achievement in 1983. In 1983, the French Government
made him a Chevalier in the Legion of Honor.

Mr. Kraft is survived by his wife, Polly Winton Kraft, an artist; a brother,
Gilman, of Los Angeles, and two stepsons, Mark Stevens of New York, who is an
art critic for Newsweek, and David Stevens of Denver.

A service is scheduled at 4 P.M. Tuesday at the Navy Chapel in Washington.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Joseph Kraft, (UPI,1976)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OUT TOWNS;
GENERATION GAP: 60's ACTIVIST, CONSERVATIVE SON

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 28, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 938 words

DATELINE: GUILFORD, Conn., Jan. 10


Jeremy Pinchot is 16 now and lives in a suburb of New Haven, but when he was
young, he lived on a commune in upstate New York and had a ponytail like most of
the boys there. On the commune, his family shared a one-room cabin. Jeremy went
to school in a barn.

His mother, Cindy Pinchot, a blacksmith, saw from an early age that Jeremy
wasn't like the other children. ''He enjoyed being different,'' she said. ''He
wanted to wear a suit and tie from the time he was a little boy.'' He insisted
on haircuts.

Jeremy remembers this, too: ''I remember being very young and wanting to wear
bow ties. It was a form of rebellion.''

Then there was the time when Jeremy was traveling with his parents through
Europe in a Volkswagen van. Mr. and Mrs. Pinchot are both very liberal, and
during that period, they often discussed the merits of Western European
socialism. On the way to Denmark, Jeremy - 6 or 7 at the time - offered what may
have been his first political statement. ''I hate Communism,'' he said.

Last year Jeremy's parents enrolled him in the Hammonasset School, a small
private high school started during the Vietnam years as a progressive
alternative school. Jeremy helped form a Young Republicans club, the first at a
Connecticut high school.

''This would have never happened here three or four years ago,'' said the
headmaster, Don Grace.

There have been Hammonasset clubs dedicated to spreading peace, reducing nuclear
weapons, eradicating hunger - but there has never before been one dedicated to
the proliferation of Republicans.

''People cannot believe it,'' said Jeremy. ''I warned them.'' Most of the
teachers took it pretty well, he said.

A few of his club posters have been torn down, including one that made fun of
people supporting a nuclear freeze. A student wrote in the school newspaper,
Generic News, that Jeremy's poster was ''Nazi propaganda.'' Jeremy responded
with a letter three times as long.

To form the Young Republicans, Jeremy met with state party officials. ''I was
nervous,'' said Jeremy. ''It was my very first involvement in any major group.
I've never been in Boy Scouts or anything.''

In the spirit of the school, students come dressed every conceivable way, some
in jeans, some punk, some in wild colors. ''There are so many styles, nothing is
bizarre,'' said Todd Nissen, a teacher. ''Except for Jeremy.'' He wears a tie
and jacket, just as he talked about in his commune days. ''Isn't he a little
doll?'' said a school secretary.

His teachers are impressed with how much he reads. He devours the National
Review - William F. Buckley is a hero - and, to see what the other side is up
to, he reads The New Republic.

Jeremy loves President Reagan. ''I hate to bring in the age factor - he hates
that,'' he said, ''but Ronald Reagan can do some pretty incredible things for
his age.''

Jeremy would like a career in law, writing or politics. ''I'm not going to rule
out the fact that I'd like to be a Republican senator,'' he said.

His heroes include the journalists George Will and Sam Donaldson. As far as
nonfamous heroes, Jeremy said, ''My Dad, he's very intelligent.''

The Pinchots have always been freethinkers. Gifford Pinchot, Jeremy's
great-grandfather, headed the United States Forest Service, helped found the
Bull Moose Party and was a progressive Pennsylvania Governor.

It is hard to name a social cause from the 1960's that Jeremy's father, Peter
Pinchot, missed. Mr. Pinchot marched in civil rights protests, was a
conscientious objector, attended Berkeley and transferred to Columbia in time
for the student takeover. He studied Gestalt therapy and Rolfing, supported
George McGovern, fixed up a Volkswagen van and ran a commune.

After a barn on the commune was burned down by a deranged Vietnam veteran, Mr.
Pinchot said, he and his family left, got involved in Scientology for a while,
and then rehabilitated housing in poor neighborhoods. Mr. Pinchot is currently
working on a master's degree at Yale in environmental studies.

Mrs. Pinchot is a regular at the Saturday antinuclear-arms vigil in the Guilford
town center. ''I know it's not changing the world,'' she said, ''but I think
people should be aware.''

Said Jeremy: ''I have no idea what she does there, I've never been. But I think
it's great. If she's interested, I can't put her down.'' While his mother is
gone for vigil, Jeremy baby-sits for his two sisters.

If there is one thing all the Pinchots agree on, it's that everybody should
speak his mind. ''No one ever told me to shut up,'' said Jeremy.

For a time as a youngster, he had a subscription to a gun magazine and liked to
wear military fatigues and put camouflage grease on his face. ''I did draw the
line when he wanted to wear combat fatigues to a wedding,'' Mrs. Pinchot said.
''It wasn't appropriate.''

The Pinchots love their conservative son, though they can't say for a fact how
he got to be that way. With all the causes the Pinchots have explored, Jeremy
has been in 11 schools in 10 years and has had to learn to adapt.

''Jeremy's been more adult than I have in some ways,'' Mrs. Pinchot said. ''From
a very young age he always acted very responsible.''

One night this week after Mrs. Pinchot fixed dinner, Jeremy went upstairs to do
his homework. He read a little from ''All Quiet on the Western Front'' and
reviewed a few pieces of legislation for the Model Congress Club at school. Then
he read an article in The National Review linking liberalism and socialism.

At 8 o'clock, Mrs. Pinchot went out. She had a rehearsal in Norwalk with her new
rock-and-roll band. She sings and is learning to play the guitar.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photoof Jeremy Pinchot with his parents Cindy and Peter and his sister
(NYT/Bill Burkhart)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Rock Activism

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 222 words


To the Editor:

Robert Palmer's article on rock in 1985 [''Rock Flexed Its Social and Political
Muscles,'' Dec. 29], was historically near-sighted as well as conveniently
values-oriented. Rock ''flexed its social and political muscles'' in the 1960's
over Vietnam. There were the Fugs and Bob Dylan, among others. Many groups sang
and participated in anti-war rallies and benefits, and in the 1960's, many rock
stars were themselves politically active.

In the mid 1980's, social/ political messages and projects are more consciously
constructed and involve non-activists reaching out to adopt issues and causes.
This is not to impute the contribution or importance of these efforts to either
politics or music, just to make note of the difference.

Much current social and political activity represents what Mr. Palmer refers to,
in a more restricted context, as the ability to combine ''a love of America's
heartland and its values with a canny commercialism.''

Along these lines, the resurgent ''populism'' of American rock may also
represent an attempt to pick up the old country and western fans, who, we've
been told, are abandoning their music along with their farms. Country and
western's social muscle-flexing has been no less self-interested; the Farm Aid
Concert is a case in point. LILY M. HOFFMAN New York City

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
WRITERS, POLITICS AND REALITY

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1352 words


William F. Buckley Jr. meets Norman Mailer and Kurt Vonnegut on ''Firing Line''
today in a very civilized, seldom acerbic, encounter. Mr. Buckley represents a
conservative philosophy, of course; Mr. Mailer and Mr. Vonnegut are somewhere
left of center. In a way, their putative topic - ''What does PEN have to
offer?'' - is a guise. PEN, an acronym for poets, essayists and novelists, opens
its 48th international congress tomorrow in New York. On ''Firing Line,'' Mr.
Mailer and Mr. Vonnegut say that PEN is not a political organization, although
Mr. Buckley is suspicious. The real topic, however, isn't PEN; the subject is
something larger: Where have our artists, writers and intellectuals been
politically, and where are they going now? ''Firing Line'' will be shown at 1
this afternoon on WNET/Channel 13.

Mr. Buckley is gracious to Mr. Mailer and Mr. Vonnegut, and they are cordial to
him. All three presumably have met many times at testimonial dinners, on various
rostrums and at places where literary lions gather. At the same time, all three
are members of what is now often called the ''new class'' - opinion makers,
theorists, reformers from both left and right, whose status is defined not so
much by what they own as by what they do, and whose strength is their use of
words. Television is one of their venues. Some members of the new class deal
only with the printed word, although the best-known among them appear frequently
in our living rooms. Mr. Buckley, in fact, is now celebrating the 20th
anniversary of ''Firing Line.''

Mr. Buckley begins the program today by reading from his clipboard; his
expression suggests he is displeased. The theme of the PEN congress, he notes,
is ''the imagination of the writer and the imagination of the state.'' A moment
later, he quotes something Mr. Vonnegut once said: that artists and writers
remain politicized because of Vietnam. There is some desultory sparring about
this, and then Mr. Buckley again quotes something Mr. Vonnegut said: ''I hope to
eventually destroy the American Army as an effective fighting force.''

Mr. Mailer and Mr. Vonnegut both chuckle; Mr. Buckley is less amused. ''My
politics are grotesque,'' Mr. Vonnegut says cheerfully, while Mr. Mailer adds:
''Mr. Vonnegut is famous for his sense of hyperbole.'' Actually, the discussion
is getting into an interesting area. Members of the new class are not required
to submit their ideas to any test of experience or practical politics. They may
be as grotesque or as full of hyperbole as they choose.

Credit Mr. Buckley, meanwhile, with never using the words ''left'' or
''leftist'' as he questions Mr. Mailer and Mr. Vonnegut about PEN. Good manners
and cultural conventions preclude the use of words like that. On the other hand,
it's clear where everyone's sympathies lie. Mr. Buckley asks how PEN could oust
Chile from membership in 1978, while allowing Communist dictatorships to remain.
In his reply, Mr. Mailer, now the president of PEN's American chapter, mentions
the United States invasion of Grenada.

Eventually, there is a discussion about the Soviet Union. Mr. Mailer, who has
often described the United States as ''carcinogenic'' and ''plastic,'' says
insouciantly that between 1917 and 1967, one million people were murdered in the
Soviet Union each year. ''The point,'' he says, ''is that the Soviet Union is
not killing people like that anymore.''

Mr. Buckley, paraphrasing George Orwell, then notes that the object of a
totalitarian state is to reach a point where it doesn't have to bother murdering
anyone.

''By that measure,'' Mr. Mailer says smartly, ''America is far ahead of the
Soviet Union and is becoming the perfect totalitarian state.''

There is often a goofiness about the way arists and writers view world affairs.
Objective data does not matter. (Even the bitterest Soviet emigre has never
claimed that the Cheka, OGPU or NKVD murdered one million people a year for 50
years.) The depressing part, however, is not the goofiness; it's when the
self-righteousness, anti-Americanism and bad manners come in.

Thus, Gore Vidal (whom Mr. Mailer cites favorably on ''Firing Line'' for his
views on international economics) appeared on the CBS ''Morning News'' during
the Geneva summit. Ostensibly, Mr. Vidal was there to plug his new book, but
politics was more beguiling. President Reagan, he said, was ''gaga,'' adding:
''You have this sort of zombie wandering about. He doesn't know where Geneva is
- he thinks he's in Nicaragua.''

This wasn't amusing, although Mr. Vidal seemed to think it was killing. A moment
later, he talked about the time he ran for the Senate in California. ''The
system was even more corrupt than I expected,'' he said. ''All the politicians
were bought by the aerospace industry.'' However, what really finished his
campaign, he said, was the arrival in California of Senator Edward M. Kennedy.
Mr. Vidal told Maria Shriver, the co-host of the ''Morning News,'' who is also
Mr. Kennedy's niece, that everything was the fault of ''your Uncle Teddy.'' Mr.
Vidal said that Mr. Kennedy got all the publicity.

Mr. Vidal, of course, is a prominent man of letters; Mr. Mailer and Mr. Vonnegut
are prominent, too. They are also public performers, exposing their psyches and
politics. In the 1980's, exposure is part of the game. Since the 1930's, it has
been assumed that writers and intellectuals as a group stood somewhere on the
left. ''The radical movement of the 30's. . .created the American intellectual
class as we now know it in its great size and influence,'' Lionel Trilling wrote
in the 1960's. Since then, whole communities of other creative people have
joined the writers and intellectuals. There is not much diversity in their
views, and sometimes there is a paranoid strain.

Mr. Vonnegut, for example, appeared on public broadcasting recently in a program
originally produced by the BBC. ''The lies we have been fed about nuclear
energy,'' he said, ''have been as cunningly crafted as the masterpieces of
Benvenuto Cellini. If we let them, they will kill everything on this lovely
blue-green planet with their rebuttals to what we say here today - with their
vicious, stupid lies.''

Mr. Vonnegut did not identify the lies or who was telling them, nor did he say
why he was singling out nuclear energy, rather than nuclear weapons. On the
other hand, it didn't matter. Nuclear energy, nuclear weapons, nuclear
proliferation all become one and the same. A great dark force hovers over our
lives, and we are manipulated by unseen hands. The paradox is that this is a
view that unites both left and right. Mr. Vonnegut's counterpart here would be
someone like the Rev. Jimmy Swaggart, the television evangelist. Conspirators
are the enemies on both sides. If the Communist conspiracy doesn't get us, then
the military-industrial complex will.

Mr. Mailer gives us a taste of this on ''Firing Line.'' You may think that
Watergate has been reported, analyzed and judged. Mr. Mailer does not.
Watergate, he says, involved ''five different conspiracies,'' and we will not
know the truth about what really happened for 50 years. Mr. Buckley reminds Mr.
Mailer then that he has also said the murder of John F. Kennedy was a
conspiracy. Mr. Mailer ignores him. The wonderful thing about conspiracies is
that, while it can't be proved they exist, it can't be proved they don't exist.
Conspiracies explain why the world is the way it is. A belief in conspiracies
excuses the need for serious thinking.

Meanwhile, Mr. Buckley presses on. It is true he is conservative, but his
strength as an interviewer is that he doesn't allow it to get in the way of his
questions. This is one reason ''Firing Line'' has lasted 20 years. ''Will PEN
crystallize a position on the imagination of the state, identifying
governments?'' he asks. No, Mr. Vonnegut answers, but a ''number of remarkable
minds will examine it.'' And what does Mr. Mailer hope to gain from the
meetings? ''I hope that my mind will be improved,'' he says. That's fair enough,
and Mr. Buckley doesn't push. ''Firing Line'' is touching on important issues.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOCIAL DRAMA SPEAKS WITH NEW FORCE

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2763 words


An impressive and rather surprising feature of the ongoing theatrical season is
the prominence of works of pith and moment. They come in new and old shapes,
grave and funny, domestic and imported. Whether their appearance signals a
resurgence of a theater of ideas remains to be seen, but these plays are doing
well enough to suggest there is an audience out there that is not averse to
being faced with the serious side of life. Shepard, Shawn and Shaw, Fugard and
Frayn speak to us of such matters as apartheid, extermination camps,
prostitution, urban dislocation and the macho mania of the American male.

Divergent as their interests and approaches are, all belong in a tradition of
social theater that has flourished and waned within living memory. The phrase
''social theater'' evokes the 1930's with its politically committed writers, led
by Clifford Odets, who were out to change the world - or at least the capitalist
world. And so we had plays like ''Waiting for Lefty'' and ''Awake and Sing!,''
with their kitchen poetry and glowing visions of some kind of socialist society.
If such works seem dated now, that is a chronic danger of addressing
contemporary issues.

In the 1940's, Arthur Miller became our foremost practitioner of social theater,
drawing on Ibsen as well as Odets for his first play, ''All My Sons,'' about the
corruption of American business, followed by ''Death of a Salesman,'' about its
cruelties. When Congressional investigations of Communists were the political
fashion, Mr. Miller weighed in with ''The Crucible''; the plot was based on a
case of witch-hunting in Colonial New England, but no one was left in doubt
about the real subject.

As conditions and concerns changed, so did the subjects and tone of the
playwrights. In the 1950's, Britain's Angry Young Men, led by John Osborne,
seemed determined with their explosive language to destroy all bourgeois life in
England. The decline of England has served more recently as a subject for the
stylish David Hare, who in ''Plenty'' traced it to the Suez invasion in 1956.
Earlier this season, Mr. Hare gave us ''A Map of the World,'' which contained a
scathing view of the liberal idealization of the third world.

On this side of the Atlantic, the dispiriting war in Vietnam inspired young
American playwrights of the 1960's and 70's to comment on the uses and
consequences of American power, in some cases with considerable power of their
own.

The works on great issues available on and off Broadway this season have little
in common other than the weightiness of their subjects. They range from the
classic Shavian play of ideas to the emotional and physical acrobatics of Sam
Shepard to Athol Fugard's deeply felt confrontations to Michael Frayn's
intricate stagings to Wallace Shawn's exercise in speaking at length about the
unspeakable. They succeed and fail in different ways, but taken together they
demonstrate the continuing vitality of the stage as a vehicle of social comment.

The most powerful work now on Broadway, by general accord, is Athol Fugard's
''Blood Knot.'' No doubt Mr. Fugard has resorted to the word ''apartheid'' in
one or another of his plays, but I cannot recall it. What stays with us from
works like ''A Lesson From Aloes'' and '' 'Master Harold'. . . and the Boys,'' a
version of which was shown on television a few weeks ago, are the painful and
destructive distortions of relationships in a color-divided society. Mr. Fugard
does the dramatist's work of tracing political decisions from the print of the
statute books to life's blood.

In ''Blood Knot,'' his tale of two brothers, or half-brothers, one black, one
who might pass as white, the symbols are simple. The word ''prejudice'' is used
to describe a white boss's calling a black man ''boy''; the word ''inhumanity''
is used to mean making a black man whose feet hurt stand all day at a gate. Very
simple, yet they strike deeply as drama.

The story of a misdirected attempt to find a woman friend for the black-looking
brother is slight and contrived, but the emotions between the brothers are large
and honest. The white-looking one has retreated or been driven back from his
effort to become part of white society and now is striving to find safety for
himself and his brother in a very dangerous country. Even their shack has been
infected by apartheid. Close as they are, the brothers are separated by their
experience and, ineradicably, by their appearance. For a black man in so
unnatural a society, a touch of whiteness is a special kind of curse.

Mr. Fugard has written plays that are more coherent and work better on the
stage, but his very appearance here with his old friend, the black actor Zakes
Mokae, makes a special kind of statement. The two first played their roles 25
years ago in South Africa, and their joining together again, grayer, weighted
with the years of fruitless struggle, is itself an immensely moving piece of
drama.

Another portentous subject is being raised on one of the stages of the Public
Theater -nothing less than the Nazi murders of the Jews and others who offended
the Aryan ideal. One character climaxes the proceedings with a matter-of-fact
comparison of the victims of the Nazis to cockroaches. The play, of course, is
''Aunt Dan and Lemon,'' by Wallace Shawn, the story of a girl's (Lemon) growing
up under the influence of a brilliantly peculiar friend of the family (Aunt Dan)
to become a politely unwholesome specimen of womanhood.

If we are to take this work seriously, connections have to be made between the
big final speech that has drawn so much attention and what has gone before in
the play. The theme of the speech, delivered by Lemon with tea party decorum and
no tinge of irony, is that despite some rudeness on the part of the Nazis, one
has to concede that they went about their business efficiently and candidly. As
Lemon puts it, ''Now when people say, 'Oh, the Nazis were different from anyone,
the Nazis were different from anyone,' well, perhaps that's true, at least in
one way, which is that they observed themselves extremely frankly in the act of
killing, and they admitted frankly how they really felt about the whole
process.'' Otherwise, as Lemon sees it, the Nazis only did what any group would
do in similar circumstances, what in fact the settlers of the West did to the
Indians and what apartment dwellers do to cockroaches.

Now, Lemon is an invalid, the sick-in-body daughter of a sick-in-mind father, so
her admiration of the Nazis may exemplify a sick view of things. But the play
clearly has larger ambitions. Most of the lines up until the final monologue are
given to the immoderately articulate Aunt Dan. The woman had a passion for Henry
Kissinger and expounded endlessly during the Vietnam war on how this
misunderstood and ill-appreciated public figure was sacrificing himself for the
national welfare. It was Kissinger, she insisted, who made the tough decisions,
including the need to kill people, that had to be made if America were to retain
''a certain way of life.''

Lemon extends this argument to the Nazis - they did what had to be done to
retain their desired way of life. If she wished, she could make the same case
for the South African regime, Josef Stalin, Idi Amin and any other tyrant who
has graced our globe. To link Henry Kissinger to Adolf Hitler is audacious, but
it requires a more rigorous case than Mr. Shawn attempts. As his play stands, it
is defamation on the cheap, and the comparison of the millions slaughtered by
the Nazis to cockroaches is an empty shock tactic. If this play is meant as an
updated ''It Can't Happen here,'' then Lemon and Aunt Dan must typify some
aspect of Western society, but they are highly untypical, even as fringe groups
go in this country. In any case, Mr. Shawn loads the argument. The one character
who takes exception to Aunt Dan's line of reasoning is Lemon's soft-hearted
mother; she speaks haltingly in behalf of a compassion that Lemon rejects, but
otherwise the stage is left to Aunt Dan's unanalyzed Realpolitik and Lemon's
extravagant extension of it.

Though it is inconceivable that the author agrees with Aunt Dan, his attitude is
withheld from us. As a presence - he takes three roles in his play - Mr. Shawn
projects puckishness, and perhaps he means to be amusing. The notion of the
imperious Henry Kissinger as martyr has its funny side. But the joke, if it is a
joke, goes on far too long, and doesn't connect with what comes before or what
follows. The question at the end of the evening is, does this play mean
anything? (Leave aside the imposed and implausible action portions of the mostly
sedentary exercise, in which a woman we scarcely know kills a man we don't know
at all.) To choose a subject of the dimensions of the Holocaust carries a
considerable responsibility for a writer. He need not be grim, but if he wants
to be taken seriously, then he has to seem to be serious. Mr. Shawn comes off as
merely naughty.

Another recent inhabitant of the Public Theater was David Hare's ''Map of the
World,'' which made its trans-Atlantic journey this year, not long before a film
version of his earlier play, ''Plenty,'' opened in movie houses.

The chief attraction of ''A Map of the World'' is a withering series of speeches
by an Indian novelist about the realities of the Third World that polite people
tend not to discuss in public. In speaking out elegantly about the repression,
corruption and incompetence of the rulers of many of the states that gained
independence after World War II, Mr. Hare is highly iconoclastic. Unfortunately
for his play, the Western leftist with whom the novelist is supposed to be
debating is merely a foil; Mr. Hare has not given him lines of biting rebuke.
Moreover, the plot is complicated by a movie that is being made of the
proceedings, and the conclusion on a note of reconciliation of the generations
fizzles. But ''A Map of the World'' leaves no doubt that here is a man who can
write about ideas.

In his polished new play, ''Benefactors,'' Michael Frayn uses a domestic issue
as a way into the relationship of two couples, and through them, perhaps, to the
disillusionment of an era. We begin with a happily married young architect who
has been given the biggest assignment of his career, to put up an enormous
apartment complex in a rundown area of London. His enthusiasm reflects the surge
of social planning of the early 1960's - and like so much of that, it turns
sour. Compromise after compromise is forced on him by all manner of political
pressures, economic considerations and the rules of engineering. But the
decisive obstruction comes from a band of locals, led by an alleged friend of
the architect, a failed journalist, joined by the architect's wife, who wants to
preserve neighborhoods rather than bulldoze them.

It is not easy in a work of this sort to balance social conflicts and personal
conflicts. In ''Benefactors,'' the public controversy is subordinated to an
exploration of the individual relationships, and the play moves away from the
issue with which it begins to concentrate on a domestic quadrangle; the
controversy over the housing project comes to seem something of a dramatic
convenience.

The diabolical, yet possibly justified journalist, the play's main force, is
driven more by envy than by any principles of civic planning, and his wife is
simply in love with the architect. Finally, the characters, except for the poor
architect himself, are divorced from their ostensible causes in a way that
Fugard's people never are. They are tossed by motions that finally have more to
do with the craving for a home of one's own than with plans for transforming
other people's quarters. It's a case of public housing gone private.

Still, the ideas with which the play begins are not lost; they resonate through
Mr. Frayn's language and compel us to think about our times in a way that calls
up the memory of Britain's Angry Young Men of the 1950's.

Where Mr. Frayn goes from the public to the private, the versatile Sam Shepard
travels in the other direction. He transmits through his plays a weird vision of
America, or a corner of America, that is as difficult to shake off as a vivid
dream.

Mr. Shepard is having quite a run this season, with two of his plays - ''A Lie
of the Mind'' and ''Curse of the Starving Class'' and a movie version of
another, ''Fool for Love,'' himself in a leading role, all drawing audiences and
all featuring odd and rather comical people. In his ambitious new work, ''A Lie
of the Mind,'' he seems to be writing, as he has before, about a species of
American male - hunter and warrior, baffled by existence off the field of
slaughter. It is not surprising that such fellows, Westerners all, are
exasperating to live with. Their sons, attempting to rival them in manliness,
are asking for rejection. Their wives endure or rebel, but can't break through
the shell of machismo. These families exist together in a kind of humorous hell.

We may assume that the American flag, which is made much of in ''A Lie of the
Mind,'' is meant as a symbol of the bloodier aspects of the American dream. A
father, whose sole interest, outside of his painful feet, is hunting, tends the
flag like a babe even as he ignores his own desperate children; a son wraps
himself in it, in a hopeless attempt to emulate his lost drunken hero of a
father.

There are sharp observations about America in Mr. Shepard's plays, but they must
be extracted from some very bizarre goings-on. A troubling question is how much
of his characters' actions can be attributed to the national madness that Mr.
Shepard discerns, and how much is just their own old-fashioned eccentricity or
lunacy. When in ''Curse of the Starving Class,'' a character delivers a speech
about the land being poisoned by developers, one scarcely knows how to take it.
The language is rich, but we listen to these people in the way we might listen
to inmates of a mental institution, for what their ravings tell of the patients'
delusions. The readiness to interpret plays about crazies as reflecting the
craziness of our society seems to me a romantic view of insanity - the lunatic
as prophet.

That does not detract from the fascination or the humor of ''A Lie of the
Mind.'' Mr. Shepard directed it as an exercise in catatonia, with characters
struggling to break out of the prisons into which they are confined by genetics
and bad luck. In his remarkable explorations of a certain kind of madness, he
comes as close as any working playwright to resembling a homegrown Dostoyevsky.
The great man who again and again was able to combine private and public in a
sparkling dramatic mix is also represented in New York this season, as he is in
most seasons. Like other of George Bernard Shaw's plays, ''Mrs. Warren's
Profession'' is as much about issues on the world stage as about the characters
on the stage where it is being performed. This was one of Shaw's ''unpleasant''
plays, in which as he explained, ''dramatic power is used to force the spectator
to face unpleasant facts.''

Its central message cannot strike many in the audience as new. Prostitution,
Shaw tells us, is caused ''simply by underpaying, undervaluing and over-working
women so shamefully.'' Or, in Mrs. Warren's words, ''The only way for a woman to
provide for herself decently is for her to be good to some man that can afford
to be good to her.'' Yet there is enough here to sustain a work written nearly a
century ago, and it would be surpassed by Shaw's later displays of the art of
using the theater as a social force.

In plays like ''Major Barbara'' and ''Pygmalion'' and even in the lesser ''Arms
and the Man,'' which was seen here last year, Shaw achieved the miracle of
transforming the topical into the enduring. Their strengths lie in his
intellectual agility and his skill in creating characters who speak brilliantly
for a set of ideas, his shrewdness as a social observer, his facility as a
dramatist and, surpassingly, his style.

He was so adroit a juggler of ideas and words that one may forget how serious a
public man he was, how engaged with the issues he wrote about. After nearly a
century, those issues - exploitation, war, women's role in society, political
cant in all its manifestations - remain oppressively with us, and what he wrote
of them remains serious and funny. We can only speculate on whether any of the
works that today seem so pertinent will speak to other generations, as Shaw
hoped his would, with ''intellectual interest'' and ''humane concern.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Sam Waterson, Kathryn Pogson, Harvey Keitel, Roshan Seth,
Athol Fugard and Uta Hagen

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LOOKING BACK AT A MAN AHEAD OF HIS TIME

BYLINE: By William E. Schmidt

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1179 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA


AFTER easily winning re-election in October, Andrew Young was inaugurated last
week to a second term as Mayor of Atlanta. Mr. Young later talked about the
political progress blacks have made in the South in recent years, as well as the
enduring legacy of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., his longtime friend and
mentor. Dr. King's memory will be celebrated Jan. 20 with the first national
observance of the holiday marking his birthday. Here are excerpts of the Mayor's
conversation with William E. Schmidt, chief of The New York Times Atlanta
Bureau. Question. Blacks serve as mayor in Atlanta; Charlotte, N.C.; Birmingham,
Ala., and New Orleans. In Virginia, a black has been elected Lieutenant
Governor. Are blacks now full political partners in the South?

Answer. When you add to it the fact that you've got significant participation in
almost every Southern state legislature and at the rural level, the county
commission level, the board of education level, I'd say we are 60 percent of the
way there. We are not all the way there; there is still a significant
under-representation. But almost every barrier has been broken down to some
extent. Q. What has accounted for the gains we have seen?  A. In a real sense,
the tragedy of Martin Luther King Jr. I think Dr. King was very much taken for
granted in his lifetime. It was not until his death, and the violent reaction to
his death, that the private sector as well as the Federal Government began to
see that this was not just a moral issue, that this was an issue of practical
governance. It was a practical necessity to include a volatile minority in the
mainstream of the society, or that volatile minority had the capacity to destroy
the society. And that suddenly opened up the universities, and it suddenly
opened up the job market at the executive level. It took a tragedy like that to
bring the nation to its senses.

Q. Has Atlanta, and the South in general, come to terms with racial questions
better than the North?

A. We've had to. Neighborhoods are fairly well integrated, in the sense the
rigid residential patterns that you have in Chicago or New York don't exist
here. The housing pattern was a rural housing pattern, where black and white
farms were side by side, so black and white colonies emerged all over the place.

Q. What about the economic progress of blacks over the last two decades. Despite
gains, isn't there still a large black underclass?

A. Yes, but when I was coming up, in the 30's, 70 percent of the black community
was in the underclass and 30 percent was in the mainstream. Now that is almost
reversed. I think that's a tribute to what happened not only in the 60's, but
you also have to give the New Deal credit for that, because the same thing is
almost true of the white community. Q. In what way?  A. At the time of the New
Deal, in the 30's, a good percentage of white America was uneducated,
unemployed, did not own homes, was living just a little bit out of serfdom. And
Franklin Roosevelt got us all started. The civil rights movement was a
continuation of that. I always put together the Tennessee Valley Authority and
the civil rights movement. One transformed the economic infrastructure, and the
other the social and political infrastructure. It was the presence of cheap
electricity, lower interest rates, water projects, that laid the foundation for
the New South that came along as a result of the courts, as a result of
education, as a result of the demonstrations.

Q. Organizers of the first observance of the King holiday have had difficulty
raising funds. Do you think America is really interested in the holiday?

A. I think we still don't know what the holiday is about. The holiday has the
name of Martin Luther King, but we're not celebrating Martin Luther King
demonstrations, which is what much of the white community sees, or his challenge
to America on foreign policy. What we are celebrating is that this society did
something that no other society has ever done: It took people from completely
opposite ethnic and economic backgrounds and brought them together and enabled
them to live together and work together almost as a family, without violence.

Defining the Legacye

Q. Is that how you would define the King legacy?

A. Everyone wants to identify with the fulfillment of Martin Luther King's
dream, but none of us have effectively articulated it. I know I don't need a
holiday to celebrate a good friend, a great minister, an outstanding leader.
There has got to be something beyond just the person, just the man. And really,
what we're celebrating, it suddenly dawns on me, is the survival of America.

America right now without Martin Luther King would look like Beirut. I mean,
everybody in Atlanta had guns. You grow up in the South, white or black, and you
learn how to shoot. I came from a nonviolent family, but even in my house there
was a .38, two .22's and a shotgun. And my wife's father had a whole gun closet,
and everybody in her family could use them.

Q. You are talking about the threat of armed violence?

A. If, when they bombed Martin Luther King's house in 1955 and everybody brought
their guns out, he had said, 'Let's go get 'em,' it would have been a different
America. You had people coming back from the Second World War who had been
trained by the U.S. Government in demolition techniques; there was no shortage
of military experience. The society could not have survived had it not been for
this ideal of nonviolence: that either we will live together as brothers or
we'll perish together as fools.

Q. But you believe it will take time for people to understand all of this?

A. I frankly think the holiday is ahead of its time. I knew it was coming but
thought it would take more like 50 years. In 50 years, I think, we will better
be able to appreciate what Martin Luther King has done. The stuff on Vietnam is
still controversial. We want to celebrate Martin Luther King, but we don't want
to celebrate all of him. We want to celebrate his domestic vision, but we are
still not very comfortable with his international vision. I just think the
significance of all these events hasn't been articulated to the point that
everyone can buy into it. Q. Like whom, as an example?  A. Republicans have been
very uncomfortable with it. The business community is very uncomfortable with
it. That's why we don't have any money. Ironically, it was the business
community and the black community that made it all possible. I mean, Birmingham
was not settled with George Wallace. It was settled with a coalition of the
black community and the business community. The same thing happened in Atlanta.
And all of the judicial decisions that desegregated the South were made by
Eisenhower-appointed judges, interestingly enough, at a time when blacks in the
South were Republican. The business community and Republicans are not sure what
to do with this holiday, but Martin was so right on so many issues and so far
ahead of his time, that even a holiday 20 years later is hard-pressed to
celebrate his vision.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Andrew Young during Selma voting rights march, 1965, and as
mayor of Atlanta (Woodfin Camp/Dan Budnik; NYT/Alan S. Weiner)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM HAS TROUBLE AFFORDING ITS IMAGE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1159 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


''You Americans have given the world a false impression of Vietnam,'' a European
with long experience in Indochina said last week, just before Hanoi welcomed the
highest-level United States delegation to visit Vietnam since the war ended.
''These people are not giants.'' The theme is repeated by diplomats, aid
officials, scholars and the few business representatives who somehow manage to
trade with Vietnam. The country they describe is not the vanquisher of two large
Western armies or the conqueror of Pol Pot. It is a very poor, chronically
undernourished, badly administered nation riven by ministerial rivalries in the
capital and gestures of defiance in the provinces, whose authorities hew to the
old Vietnamese adage that ''the power of the emperor stops at the village
gate.''

Foreigners from East and West not party to the affair say they are fascinated if
not mystified by the emotional links that persist between the Vietnamese and
Americans. For the Vietnamese, the focus on the United States, where friends and
family of many live, is constant. To Americans, Vietnam might be just another
poor third world country clamoring for attention - except for the war, and those
who never came back.

In American perceptions, Hanoi remains a threat to all of Southeast Asia because
of its overthrow seven years ago of Pol Pot's Government in Cambodia and its
domination of Laos, which have angered and frightened Vietnam's other neighbors.
The Reagan Administration has said it will not recognize Hanoi until Vietnamese
troops leave Cambodia.

Yet the Vietnamese need all that American diplomatic recognition can offer. They
hope for, among other things, the relaxation of a Western and Japanese aid
embargo, a way out of increasingly unproductive economic dependence on Moscow
and help in manuevering China into a Cambodian settlement. For aid, at least,
time is short - the average weight of a Vietnamese citizen is dropping at the
rate of a pound or two a year, international health officials say, and the
country is nearly bereft of medicines except for supplies sent by relatives
abroad. Last week, Vietnamese officials were acknowledging that a decade after
uniting the country under socialism, Hanoi has been unable to suppress the
private traders who still manipulate the vital rice market.

'Mutual Benefit'

But, out of pride and ideological orthodoxy, Vietnamese leaders almost always
refer to the country as ''reconstructing'' rather than ''developing.'' And they
insist that diplomatic relations with Washington would be ''of mutual benefit.''

Foreigners who live in Hanoi say that, while the Vietnamese people may be
secretive or uncommunicative, they are neither inherently militaristic nor
highly disciplined, as they have been portrayed in the West -except in the army.
The remarkable self-sacrifice that sustained a 30-year fight for independence,
diplomats and some Vietnamese civilians suggest, is not translating easily into
dying for Cambodians in a new war categorized here as ''implementing an
international obligation.''

On their side of the funhouse mirror, many Vietnamese cling to some
stereotypical pictures of Americans. ''Americans are stingy and selfish; they do
not pay attention to the sufferings of other people,'' Hong Ha, the editor of
the Communist party newspaper and a member of the party's central committee,
said last week. His remark, which he said reflected letters the newspaper
received from readers, referred to the well-publicized American failure to offer
aid to Vietnam last fall after tropical storms left crops ruined and hundreds of
thousands of people homeless.

The Vietnamese also resent Washington's insistence that their country account
for nearly 1,800 missing American servicemen, or M.I.A.'s, a small fraction of
the number of Vietnamese still unaccounted for in their own land.

War Reparations

Mr. Ha gave this illustration: ''One of our readers sent us a letter asking: The
Americans staged a war that caused a lot of difficulties for our country. Why
should we let them come to Vietnam to look for the wreckage of their planes when
they have not fulfilled their responsibilities to the Vietnamese people?''

The reader was referring to war reparations, a hope being raised again in
official circles as talks between Hanoi and Washington are making progress.

Sensing movement, Vietnamese leaders seem to be adding for immediate
consideration elements not previously on the agenda.

During two days of talks last week, the Vietnamese offered to start the clock on
a two-year deadline for resolving the issue of Americans missing in action and
to investigate reports that the remains of 50 Americans have been found in the
countryside. Technical discussions will be conducted in late February.

For itself, Vietnam now wants an office in Washington or another American city
such as Philadelphia, according to some reports. While the Vietnamese have
suggested an American technical office in Hanoi, which would coordinate searches
for the wreckage of American planes, United States officials have been reluctant
because such an office might be portrayed by Hanoi as a diplomatic presence.
Vietnam's new demand strikes some diplomats here as a something of a
justification for United States apprehension.

''One of the good things about Vietnam,'' a European said, ''is that you can
always be frank. So I asked my Vietnamese friends: How many M.I.A.'s do you have
in America that you should have an office there?''

TEN YEARS OF TALK ON MISSING AMERICANS

Vietnamese and American officials have met sporadically over the last 10 years,
with a long hiatus after Vietnam's incursion into Cambodia, to discuss the fate
of missing Americans and other obstacles to establishing normal relations. Here
are some of the major meetings:

November 1976 United States and Vietnamese diplomats meet in Paris in the first
formal talks since the war; no progress is reported, and three days later the
United States vetoes Vietnam's United Nations membership application.

March 1977

President Carter sends a delegation to Hanoi; Vietnam turns over the remains of
12 American pilots and proposes a new round of talks.

May-June 1977

A United States delegation holds more talks with the Vietnamese in Paris about
normalization of relations.

August 1978

A delegation led by Senator Edward M. Kennedy discusses humanitarian issues with
officials in Hanoi, then leaves with 29 Vietnamese, the first to be reunited
with American husbands and fathers.

July 1985

A United States-sponsored research group spends three days in Hanoi; Vietnam
promises to return remains of 26 American servicemen.

August 1985

At a meeting in Hanoi, Vietnam proposes a two-year timetable for resolving the
fate of missing Americans.

November 1985

A United States military delegation spends 13 days with a Vietnamese team
excavating a site where a B-52 crashed in 1972.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo war wreckage in Da Nang (Woodfin Camp/Wally McNamee)

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RETHINKING SOCIALISM

BYLINE: By Bernard Williams; Bernard Williams is the provost of King's College,
Cambridge University, England.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1939 words


TAKING SIDES The Education of a Militant Mind. By Michael Harrington. 278 pp.
New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. $16.95.

MICHAEL HARRINGTON started in literature. As he says in the introduction to this
collection of his essays, his mentor was T. S. Eliot, ''a self-proclaimed
monarchist and classicist.'' But he came to be a liberal journalist, a theorist
of democratic Socialism, and, above all, a political activist, and this book,
collected from the writings of more than 30 years, consists for the most part of
reports from the front, bearing the occasional reactions, self-accusations and
justifications of someone who has constantly sought to explain himself, his
changing commitments and alliances, to himself and to the world.

There are not only reports, but reflections. The book, divided by subject as
well as by time, sets out his thoughts on a range of things from the politics of
the Peace Movement to the political novel and the lessons that Disney World has
for Socialists (a splendid piece). Some of the material comes from a long way
away, or will now seem so to those younger or from a different place. Just
occasionally the controversies of the day before yesterday become inaudible
under coverings of discretion: ''For Mr. F., C. H., and others, there is a
counterposition between political freedom and economic and social freedom. As
Mr. F. writes . . .''

Sometimes Mr. Harrington writes in his own defense, but self-justification is by
no means the prevailing tone. He has written a new introduction to each section,
which gives his sometimes rueful assessment of his essays and of the situations
to which they responded. He writes with more realism than some old campaigners
ever achieve, and with a commendable honesty: ''I was, after all, a young and
enthusiastic man under the spell of a soaring theory and that often leads to
overarching generalizations that do not exactly hold up. So even though I find
much of what I said valuable and true, my prediction was simply wrong.''

He honestly brings out his conflicts of the 1960's, when an admiration and
sympathy for student radicals was at the same time checked by a sharp dislike of
what he calls ''youthful middle-class petulance and self-indulgence.'' There are
a few false notes in all this, some hollow heroics and also moments of
self-abasement; but from these fraught documents, crumpled papers from a time of
deep conflict and a personal breakdown that occurred in 1965, he comes out as
having sturdily declined to join those of the older left who immolated
themselves in guilt and envy at the greening of America. He reminded impatient
middle-class radical grandees of the interests of working people; insisted that
the aim of protesting the Vietnam War was to stop it; and at the same time held
the corner for democratic legalism and the First Amendment, partly for the very
sound reason that the suppression of speech is agreeable to the right, and there
are more of them.

Mr. Harrington calls himself a ''social democrat.'' His democracy - in the sense
of protected rights, not of mere populism - is impeccable. Dissociating himself
from the illiberal enthusiasms of some young radicals, as he also does when
attacking the Stalinists, he was concerned not to let himself become a
professional anti-Communist. Giving the American Committee for Cultural Freedom
a working-over in 1955, he shrewdly remarks: ''The kind of anti-Stalinism which
follows from supporting the Smith Act [to outlaw the Communist Party], or even
from supporting it with numerous qualifications as Sidney Hook does, is
fundamentally different from that which follows from condemning the Smith Act.''

WHAT about the social, or Socialist, part of his social democracy? The
organization with which he has been associated is called ''Dee-Sock,'' the
Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee. He engagingly describes it as being
on the ''Left wing of the possible.'' Its aim is to take Socialism from the
margin of American society, to help Socialist ideas contribute in the next move
to the left in American society, which he predicts will occur some time between
1986 and 1992.

In Britain, we have a political party called the Social Democratic Party. It
split off originally from the Labor Party and now runs in an electoral alliance
with the Liberal Party (which is not exclusively liberal in an American sense).
A few of Britain's Social Democrats might call themselves Socialists; most,
though they entertain some radical aspirations, would probably now not do so.
That title would still find its natural home in the Labor Party. Although Mr.
Harrington, so far as I can see, never mentions the Labor Party, he de-scribes
his relations with various other European parties of similar outlook in a way
suggesting that his sympathies would be with the central, non-Marxist traditions
of the Labor Party.

But the Labor Party, both electorally and ideologically, is a declining force.
It may possibly revive enough to benefit from the rejection of Margaret
Thatcher's Conservative Government, which even the most pessimistic suppose must
come about one day. But it has few new ideas, and those that it does have fit
together badly with its old ones. At one point Mr. Harrington identifies the
aims of his Socialism, very much in the Labor Party's terms, as the
redistribution of wealth, government intervention on behalf of disadvantaged
people and the extension of public ownership. In another piece, he is more
cautious about the last; like his friends in European politics, he has also
become more cautious about the power of public ownership in itself to increase
either justice or efficiency.

In some respects he has moved away from the traditional European Socialist
conceptions of centralized economic management to ideas of participation (which,
in British politics, are put forward with particular enthusiasm by the Social
Democrats' allies the Liberals). He stresses the importance of workers' control
and, more generally, decentralized decision making. He even suggests that
critical minorities should be provided with resources by the management to help
them in criticizing management. These proposals are not very practical, and they
are certainly not very economical; although Mr. Harrington, as the structure of
his book shows, is good at moving on from outdated ideas, he seems to find it
hard to abandon altogether the 60's notion that the task for radicalism is to
plan a society with limitless resources.

A PART from questions of cost, a prime question about the proposals for
participation and workers' control is how they are supposed to hang together
with the old Socialist objectives of the redistribution of wealth and the use of
government power to benefit the disadvantaged. The aim of the left is to make
economic power more responsive to popular needs, more just in its distribution
and effects and less subject to the vagaries of private greed. What the European
left is facing is that, far from reinforcing one another, these objectives in
many ways conflict. It used to be thought that public ownership was the means to
all these objectives, but few except the most conservative (strongly represented
in the British Labor Party) now believe that.

Many have come to see that there is no reason to expect that if power is
decentralized among local or factory groups, this will generate decisions in
favor of social justice on a national scale. What about regional policy, for
instance, or the related problems of declining industries? Why should those few
holding on to jobs in the rust belt - in the northern part of Britain, for
instance, now an industrial desert - vote for anything except support of them?

Why should those in more hopeful spots want the limited resources to go in that
direction? What can possibly resolve those deep conflicts of interest except
very powerful central governments, which at the end of the line must be
resistant to many local demands?

These are the problems of the Socialist inheritance now, and Mr. Harrington has
not fully faced them. The same problems are even more obvious on the
international level. There is no reason to expect that decisions democratically
made on a national scale will help justice between countries or regions of the
world, and when Mr. Harrington says that Socialism will provide the solution to
the energy crisis and famine, his attitude must seem a monument to the triumph
of hope over experience.

In 1981 a Socialist Government was elected in France. It has not been a great
success, and it has been forced to abandon many of its distinctively Socialist
initiatives. Mr. Harrington honestly chronicles this, and says, bravely, that he
is not discouraged by it. But perhaps he should be, and by the many other
circumstances that are now causing those in Europe who have their heart on the
same side as Mr. Harrington to rethink anxiously their political objectives and
to wonder how far in the present world they are compatible with one another.

Socialist ideas are still a significant source for a critique of social justice
- perhaps more so in America than elsewhere, just because in America Socialist
ideas have been so much at a discount. Mr. Harrington has certainly been a
tireless champion of that critique. But he, like the rest of us, must face the
fact that the picture of what it would be like for those ideas to succeed is
less distinct and vivid than it once seemed. Still Other Americas At twenty,
most of us have painfully learned that stereotypes are way of lying. By thirty,
we discover the other side of the coin: that the stereotype is a way of saying a
half-truth, of experssing the sprawl of reality, the contradictions of
experience. To be sure, people and things are forzen, plucked out of time and
history in the process, but there is always a wisdom at the center of the
distortion.

When it comes to stereotypes of America, there is even more complexity, for all
of them are partially true, even though many of them express polar opposites...
More recently, the fashionable stereotype has been almost completely negative.
''America'' stands for gadgetry, rootlessness, in the tyranny of mass-produced
kitsch. ''Ameri-canization'' is the terrible fate that is befalling Europe as it
produces an efficient industrial civilization. The symbol of Coca-Cola shall
stand over all... But another America remained. It is, to be sure, under the
attack of mass culture and it may be destroyed by the incredible incompetence of
political leaders. As of now, it survives.

The most obvious, even defining fact about the other America is its variety...
In Seattle, Washington, the people live in the presence of Mount Rainier. The
Indians, it is said, once thought that this solemn peak was God. Their mistake
is understandable. Driving in the city, one never knows when the turning of a
corner will reveal the aspect of beauty. On a clear day, each hour, each period,
is given a special definition by the mountain. And this geography enters into a
culture. It is, of course, intermingled with the history of the region: logging,
the IWW [International Workers of the World], the Seattle General Strike of 1919
(in this American city, they spoke of ''Soviets'' at that time), the
weatherbeaten and brawling tradition of a port...

The other America is culturally heterogeneous: its coffee cups are different, so
are its politics. Its vitality may well be a matter of cultural lag, of a
historic impetus acquired in experiences which predate the era of mass culture.
But other America is real. [Commonweal, 1960] - From ''Taking Sides.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER JOURNAL

BYLINE: By Betsy Brown

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 3, Column 3; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 432 words


The New York Medical College received two grants totaling $570,000 last month
from the Eastern Paralyzed Veterans Association, which had raised the money by
selling Christmas cards by mail.

One grant consisted of $500,000 for research in the treatment of people with
spinal-cord injuries. It will be invested and the proceeds used to support the
research program. The other $70,000 will provide fellowships in plastic surgery
for the same injuries for two fifth-year medical students.

James J. Peters, executive director of the association, said the research would
be aimed at finding ways of treating skin damaged as the result of the person
being immobilized. The plastic-surgery techniques used for treating paralyzed
veterans will also be helpful in treating elderly people in nursing homes, he
said.

Mr. Peters, who is paralyzed as a result of injuries sustained in Vietnam, said
the organization had 2,000 members in the New York City area and New York State,
all of them confined to wheelchairs. It is a chapter of the nationwide Paralyed
Veterans of America, which has 15,000 members who served in conflicts from World
War II to Vietnam.

He said research had already increased the life span of veterans with ''these
catastrophic disabilities.''

''After World War II, when antibiotics had just been discovered, the life
expectancy was between one week and one year,'' he said, referring to
spinal-injury cases. ''Now it is just short of the normal life span.''

He said the association was ''following the Administration's directive in
picking up the public sector's burden,'' after Federal cutbacks in medical care
for veterans.

The research and treatment program had been under discussion for four or five
years, he said, and the medical college was chosen because of the interest of
the surgeons there in this subject. He said recruitment for the research work
was going on now, and the two residents were being chosen for training that
could begin as early as next month.

Dr. John J. Connolly, president of the college, said that until recently, the
problems resulting from spinal-cord injuries were ''pretty much an accepted
fact.'' As an area of study, the subject had not been ''of high interest to
medical schools,'' he said.

He said the grant would make it possible to provide medical care to patients as
well as to develop new techniques.

The $570,000 was the third largest sum received by the college last year, after
a $1.5 million grant for clinical research from the estate of Dr. Harry Barovsky
and $1.25 million from the Westchester Artificial Kidney Center.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of James J. Peters

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AND HANOI HOPEFUL AFTER TALKS ON THE MISSING

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 12


While American and Vietnamese officials expressed satisfaction last week with
the atmosphere of good will surrounding two days of high-level talks in Hanoi on
Americans missing in action since the Vietnam War, both sides agreed that they
had reached a time when building confidence and increasing cooperation would be
critical.

Material progress will have to be made, they said, if the issue of the missing
is no longer to prevent better relations between the two countries.

There are potential problems on both sides, officials said, and the wide
attention paid to the negotiations, which produced no breakthroughs, could
sharpen divisions.

Wants U.S. to 'Leave Us Alone'

Not all Vietnamese leaders favor cooperation with the United States.

Asked by reporters last Monday what he most wanted from Washington, Vo Dong
Giang, the second-highest ranking official in the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry,
said, ''We would like the U.S. to leave us alone and stop assisting China in the
latter's efforts to undermine us.''

During the talks last week, it became clear, officials said, that the Vietnamese
had rejected American proposals made last summer for a joint plan of action on
the missing.

The Vietnamese, apparently unwilling to share too much information related to
their own national security, did pledge, however, to begin this month their own
two-year program to account for as many Americans as possible. Anti-American
language has been absent from public pronouncements.

The leader of the Vietnamese delegation, Deputy Foreign Minister Hoang Bich Son,
said in a meeting with reporters at the end of the discussions that Hanoi had
already begun an ''educational campaign'' in the countryside that had produced
50 new reports of possible American war dead. He said the reports would be
presented to an American-Vietnamese technical meeting in Hanoi at the end of
February.

U.S. Show of Good Will

Hanoi has said publicly that the Vietnamese people could not be persuaded to
help look for missing Americans until the United States showed more good will
toward Vietnam.

The United States Defense Department, which lists 1,797 American soldiers and
civilians unaccounted for in Vietnam or off its coasts, promised in return to
assist Hanoi with information or equipment needed for searches.

On their side, the Americans have to contend with what they call the ''Rambo
factor'' in the United States. United States officials said private crusades,
often couched in what they termed a crude anti-Communism that diplomats and
American military officers dealing with the issue of the war-dead say they
abhor, threatened to undermine years of low-key efforts that seem ready to
produce results.

Diplomats in Hanoi said repeated private assertions by Americans that Hanoi is
still holding, possibly under conditions of extreme deprivation or even torture,
scores of Americans on the missing list were particularly rankling to the
Vietnamese.

Possibility Not Ruled Out

United States officials said they were not ruling out the possibility that some
of the missing Americans might still be alive in Vietnam. But American officials
said they were seeking ways to allow the Vietnamese to save face in acounting
for any such Americans.

European diplomats in Hanoi who regularly check reports of sightings of
Americans are virtually unanimous in doubting that there are many, if any,
prisoners held by Vietnam. But they said the chances were good that there were
some deserters living in Vietnamese villages.

Diplomatic ways are also being sought to recover war dead that most Americans
close to the issue say they believe are already in the possession of the
Vietnamese.

Asian diplomats said it would be extremely embarrassing for Hanoi to be seen in
the eyes of the world as having hoarded American bodies more than a decade after
the war for future trade-offs.

''We are Asians, too, and we know how they think,'' an Indonesian said. ''The
Vietnamese now understand that they have dissipated the good will they had in
the developing world with their occupation of Cambodia. They can't get away with
using these bodies as poker chips.''

A Humanitarian Issue

Both sides have been working hard to live up to their assertions that the issue
of the missing is a strictly humanitarian one and that it will not be used in
the negotiations as a bargaining ploy or a means of scoring political points.

It has long been assumed by regional diplomats and officials that Hanoi would
benefit most from a resolution of the issue, as Vietnam needs Western technical
assistance and help in resolving the seven-year-old war in Cambodia.

Lately, however, diplomats in Hanoi have been questioning whether the seemingly
deteriorating security situation in the Philippines might not be causing the
United States to look more closely again at mainland Southeast Asia.

Although diplomats say Vietnam is not likely to be persuaded to eject a large
Soviet military presence, as Egypt once did, Hanoi is thought to want more
balanced international relationships.

''They don't want to be another tropical fruit farm for Moscow - like Cuba,'' a
European with experience in assisting the Vietnamese said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

KOCH INTENDS TO NAME A LAWYER TO VACANCY ON EDUCATION BOARD

BYLINE: By JOYCE PURNICK

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 378 words


In his continuing effort to revamp the Board of Education, Mayor Koch is to name
Richard I. Beattie, a corporate lawyer and former Federal official, to be a
board member. The appointment is expected today.

Mr. Beattie, 46 years old, said yesterday that after talking to the Mayor
recently, he had decided to take the part-time position. He will begin in April,
mayoral advisers said.

Mr. Beattie is to take over for Miguel O. Martinez, one of two mayoral
appointments to the board. Mr. Koch has said he will not reappoint Mr. Martinez,
whose four-year term expires in June. Mayoral aides said Mr. Martinez had agreed
to leave early to make way for Mr. Beattie.

Mayor's Second Change

The appointment will be the second the Mayor has made recently to the board.
Last month he named one of his former deputy mayors, Robert F. Wagner Jr., to
fill a vacancy created by the death of Amelia Ashe.

Mr. Koch has said he would like the next president of the board, who is selected
by the rest of the board, to be Mr. Wagner.

The board is made up of two mayoral appointees and five members named by each of
the borough presidents.

During his campaign for re-election last year, the Mayor said the board was made
up of appointees - including his own - chosen for political and ethnic reasons.
He said he would try to change that.

Appointee an Ex-Marine

Mr. Beattie, a partner in the Manhattan law firm of Simpson Thacher & Bartlett,
is a former Marine captain who was a jet pilot in Vietnam. He is a graduate of
Dartmouth College and the University of Pennsylvania Law School.

In 1979 he was general counsel in the Federal Department of Health, Education
and Welfare, now the Department of Health and Human Services.

The Mayor has called upon Mr. Beattie in the past. He asked him to prepare two
major studies in 1984, one of the Human Resources Administration and the other
on the status of special education for the handicapped in the city's school
system.

Mr. Beattie lives in Manhattan with his wife, Diana Lewis. They have two
college-age children, Lisa and Nina, who attended private schools when they were
younger.

He will, like the rest of the board, serve part time and earn up to $33,600 a
year, depending upon the number of days he works.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEWS;
A PBS DOCUMENTARY ON GUATEMALA

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 894 words


IT'S not that ''Guatemala: When the Mountains Tremble'' is controversial; it's
more that it's so badly done. The original 83-minute documentary, sanitized, so
to speak, with the addition of panel discussion and explanation, now runs two
hours. Public television ought to have cut its losses and forgotten the whole
thing.

The documentary, on Channel 13 at 9 o'clock tonight, was shown by some other
public television stations last month. News stories then said that the Public
Broadcasting Service, unhappy because the original 83 minutes was ''heavy
handed,'' had delayed its release. The supplementary material, produced by WETA
in Washington, was added to give it balance.

Supplementary material or not, the documentary is still a clinker. Actually,
documentary is a courtesy title. ''Guatemala: When the Mountains Tremble'' is a
vanity film, pressing a point of view: The United States and the Guatemalan Army
act in concert to murder innocent people; armed revolution is the only way to
obtain justice.

Never mind the obvious here: that Guatemala held an election last month, and
democratically elected a president. The original documentary, produced by
Skylight Pictures, was made in 1983. On the other hand, it never bothers to
mention that the United States suspended military aid to Guatemala in 1977. It
is too busy making its case.

Thus in the opening minutes it gives us two ''historical dramatizations.'' In
the first, it is 1954 and Ambassador John E. Peurifoy and the Guatemalan
President, Jacobo Arbenz Guzman, are having dinner at the American Embassy with
their wives. The Peurifoy character, who looks like one of Frank Nitti's boys in
''The Untouchables,'' warns Arbenz not to mess with United Fruit.

A moment later, we are at ''C.I.A. Command Central'' in Opa-locka, Fla.
Obviously, Arbenz Guzman did not heed the warning; men in khaki are planning a
coup. As high drama, however, this isn't much, and the documentary ought to have
tried reporting. In 1954, the Central Intelligence Agency did sponsor a coup in
Guatemala, although it's probable that it did more for John Foster Dulles than
for United Fruit.

Subsequently, the documentary gives us old newsreel and television film,
interviews and a lot of footage of soldiers, guerrillas and other Guatemalans.
We hear them in translation. The soldiers, politicians and an archbishop speak
in voices full of hypocrisy and general meanness; guerrillas and other leftists
sound like gentle saints.

Meanwhile, an Indian woman, supposedly a guerrilla, wanders in and out, talking
about oppression. She also alludes to the nonexistent United States aid. The
documentary does not supply her with a translator; we read the words in
subtitles. It's typical of the muddled production that the Indian woman says her
family does not speak Spanish, even though, staring into the Teleprompter, she's
speaking in Spanish herself.

In a work like this, however, journalism doesn't matter; it's political posture
that counts. When the documentary - the producer is Peter Kinoy; the
co-directors are Tom Siegel and Pamela Yates - finally catches up with the
guerrillas, we see that whole detachments are nicely equipped: new uniforms and
automatic weapons. Where do they come from? The documentary never asks.
Automatic weapons and uniforms presumably grow on trees.

In fact, we are watching agitprop, although it's not very skillfully done. High
moral purpose and sanctimony aren't enough; ''Guatemala: When the Mountains
Tremble'' is boring. In the discussion period after the documentary, however,
Miss Yates, the co-director, defends her work. The documentary, she says, was
meant to be an ''emotional understanding,'' and not ''a textbook account.''

The other discussants are terribly polite. No one says the documentary is junk.
Harry Moses, a CBS News producer, says the ''credibility factor was starting to
get to me'' and suggests that perhaps Miss Yates and her colleagues ought to
have tried some conventional reporting.

In her reply, Miss Yates has the audacity to say that part of the problem was
the documentary's ''low budget.'' In fact, the principal source of financing was
the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, which operates with taxpayers' dollars.
Forget the political content of the documentary now; America won't crumble
because of agitprop. A better question is, why should a vanity production be
subsidized? It's like indulging children with toys.

Still, public broadcasting is supposed to offer many points of view, which is
possibly why we're getting this production. Certainly, PBS is acting responsibly
when it insists on adding a panel discussion. That's also what it did when it
presented ''Television's Vietnam: The Real Story'' last June. That was produced
by the conservative Accuracy in Media.

There is a difference, however, in the way the two productions have been
received. Moral indignation flourished over ''Television's Vietnam.'' Public
broadcasters were outraged; their integrity was threatened. Liberal columnists,
meanwhile, had tantrums. Right-wingers were fouling the airwaves.

There is no comparable outcry over ''Guatemala: When the Mountains Tremble,''
even though it seems to be a good deal more to the left than ''Television's
Vietnam'' was to the right. Hooray for free speech and many points of view, but
something is out of balance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Indian girls

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 14, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam to Investigate 95 Reports on P.O.W.'s

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 121 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 13


Vietnam has agreed to investigate 95 United States reports that some Americans
are still being held prisoner in Indochina, senior Administration officials said
today.

The officials, Assistant Defense Secretary Richard L. Armitage and Assistant
Secretary of State Paul D. Wolfowitz, who led an American delegation in talks in
Hanoi last week, said progress report on their investigation at a meeting in
Hanoi next month.

''We have been unable thus far to prove that any Americans are being held
against their will,'' Mr. Armitage said at a news conference. ''But on the
information that is in our possession,'' he said, ''we act under the assumption
that at least some Americans are held against their will in Indochina.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 15, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Treasury Department;
They Who Dig the Trenches for Economic War

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 894 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 14


Dennis M. O'Connell is a lawyer and civil servant who toils in one of the
Government's sorriest quarters, just two blocks along G Street from the
colonnaded palace of the Treasury's main building. Plywood covers one of the two
entrances to the narrow and grime-covered onetime bank building, and dust clouds
the windows.

Now and then, though, the dust flies at Mr. O'Connell's office, and the last 10
days has been one of those times. The Treasury Department's Office of Foreign
Assets Control, of which Mr. O'Connell is director, is the agent of retribution
that President Reagan deployed against Libya last week.

The office, known as OFAC in this city of acronyms, is the Government's
principal tool of economic warfare. It prepares, monitors and enforces economic
sanctions of various kinds, such as the ones that Mr. Reagan previously ordered
against Nicaragua and South Africa and that other Presidents brought against
Iran, Cuba, North Vietnam, Cambodia, North Korea and several Eastern European
countries.

'It's Exciting Stuff'

The sanctions against Libya - the halting of trade with that country and the
freezing of its assets within the United States - have required a long stretch
of 15-hour days for Mr. O'Connell, his staff of only 22, including clerks and
assorted other workers Mr. O'Connell appropriated from the Treasury. ''It's
exciting stuff,'' he said. ''To see what you do on the front pages of
newspapers, you know your work has meaning.''

Scholars of international diplomacy say sanctions can have public relations
value in calling attention to American opposition to the target country's
behavior. But sanctions usually fall short, they say, in their principal object
of forcing major changes in the policies of the target countries, and sometimes
they boomerang on the American economy because the target country simply takes
its business elsewhere.

Theories of diplomacy, however, are matters for the Administration's higher-ups.
Mr. O'Connell simply sees to it that American banks and businesses do their part
to fulfill the President's instructions.

Mr. O'Connell sensed that his office would be called upon again when Libyan
involvement was suspected in the suicide bombings of the Rome and Vienna
airports. By Friday, Jan. 3, the President had rejected military action and had
decided, instead, to retaliate with trade sanctions.

Throughout the Jan. 4-5 weekend, the Office of Foreign Assets Control went to
work in State Department offices with lawyers and Libyan experts there to
prepare what became the President's Executive Order 12543. ''A bunch of lawyers
got in a room and drafted the order,'' said Mr. O'Connell, who is 44 years old
and has been a Federal employee since leaving Cornell Law School.

Then the lawyers went back and forth with the White House lawyers and others in
the Administration, getting the order refined and cleared. By Sunday, Jan. 5,
with the outlines of the order apparent, Mr. O'Connell's staff began preparing
regulations to guide businesses affected by the order, defining what economic
activity had to be halted.

On Tuesday, Jan. 7, the President issued the order, thereby ending almost all
trade with Lybia.

At that point, however, he did not drop the other economic shoe: the freeze of
the Libyan Government's assets in the United States, including everything from
almost $1 billion in the domestic and foreign branches of American banks to such
little things as the Libyan-owned two-bedroon, two-bath condominium in the
Washington suburb of McLean, Va., where a few Libyan students sleep.

The Treasury, particularly, is queasy about such actions. Freezing one country's
assets tells other countries that their assets might be blocked one day, too, so
they become wary of doing business through American banks.

Withdrawals by Libya

But on Wednesday, Libya, either expecting a freeze or retaliating against the
trade sanctions, began withdrawing huge amounts from American banks, ultimately
taking out around $200 million by one Treasury report. And so the Administration
quickly decided to go for a freeze.

Another executive order had to be prepared and vetted throughout the
Administration, and then the banks had to be alerted. By midafternoon Wednesday
the order was signed, and the ''official alert system'' at Mr. O'Connell's
office came into play. ''I called four of the key New York banks,'' Mr.
O'Connell said. ''I can't say which. I'd say, 'The President has just frozen the
assets of the Government of Libya.' '' Then, he said, he read the essential
paragraphs indicating that all lending to the Libyan Government, all payments of
interest, royalties and the like, all deposits and withdrawals, all sales and
purchases of property - everything had to stop.

Then the entire banking system got the word through the Federal Reserve System,
which regulates the banks. The Treasury called the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, which alerted banks in its area, and Mr. O'Connell's office called the
nation's 11 other Federal Reserve banks. One day later, the office sent out
telexes confirming the phone calls.

''To: All Federal Reserve Banks,'' the message began. ''Following confirms our
oral instructions to you of January 7, 1986.''

''Oh-oh,'' Mr. O'Connell said. ''That's a mistake. It was January 8.'' He and
his staff, he said, needed a little sleep.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 15, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CHRISTMAS FILM SALES SET RECORD

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1306 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Jan. 14


The movie industry - which thought during most of 1985 that Christmas would
never come - wound up with a splendid present.

After 11 months of depressed ticket sales - which at one point dipped to the
lowest level in 17 years - people started going to the movies again in December.
The week between Christmas and New Year, when $130 million worth of tickets were
sold, was the biggest in history.

For many in the industry, the success of ''Rocky IV,'' ''Spies Like Us,''
''Jewel of the Nile,'' ''White Nights,'' ''Out of Africa,'' ''The Color Purple''
and Disney's reissue of ''101 Dalmations'' at Christmas answered the question of
whether the skyrocketing sales of video-cassette recorders had caused the
box-office slump. Some studio executives had begun to cast blame on the video
cassettes, although most insisted that research showed cassettes provided
additional rather than replacement income for their studios.

''The summer business was lousy; the Christmas business was terrific,'' said
Marvin Antonowsky, president of marketing at Universal. ''And more people owned
video-cassette recorders at Christmas than owned them in July.'' Like almost
every other executive, Mr. Antonowsky insisted that the box-office slump
reflected ''dreadful movies.''

''I am emphatic that the cassette business is add-on,'' said Art Murphy, an
industry analyst who attributes Hollywood's cyclical depressions to
''overproduction that leads to an excessive number of bad films.'' The people
who wait to see movies on cassette, he said, are the people who waited to see
them on television a decade ago.

Admissions Down 12 Percent

According to figures Mr. Murphy prepared for the industry trade paper Variety,
$3.75 billion worth of tickets were sold in 1985, a drop of 7 percent from
1984's record-breaking $4.03 billion. Movie admissions were down 12 percent, to
1.06 billion. Earlier projections by analysts had been considerably more
pessimistic. In September, Mr. Murphy had projected a box office of $3.62
billion and a drop of 16 percent in ticket sales.

The year's big winners at the box office were ''Back to the Future,'' a comedy
about a time-traveler who must persuade his mother to marry his father; ''Rambo:
First Blood Part II,'' with Sylvester Stallone making sure America wins the
Vietnam War; and Stallone again in ''Rocky IV.'' None of the movies broke the
$100 million mark in film rentals - the 45 percent to 50 percent of box-office
revenues that theaters return to a movie's distributor. ''Back to the Future''
earned $94 million in film rentals for Universal. ''Rambo'' brought Tri-Star $80
million. ''Rocky IV'' has earned $65 million so far and is still climbing.

None of those movies will challenge the total revenues of the movie in fourth
place, ''Beverly Hills Cop,'' which earned $50 million in film rentals in 1985
after earning $58 million in 1984, to bring Paramount a total of $108 million.

The rest of the top 10 were ''Cocoon'' ($40 million), ''The Goonies'' ($29.9
million), ''Witness'' ($28 million), ''Police Academy 2'' ($27.2 million),
''National Lampoon's European Vacation'' ($25.6 million) and ''A View to a
Kill'' ($25.2 million). When the Christmas movies have finished their runs in
February, several of them are likely to pass the last three movies on the list.

Escapism and Patriotism

The Top 10 list is the usual escapist mixture of comedies and adventure films.
Among the leaders were films with a patriotic theme. In the defiantly
anti-Communist ''Rocky IV,'' Sylvester Stallone defends democracy against a
not-quite-human Russian gladiator. In ''Rambo'' he single-handedly rescues
Vietnam prisoners of war from vicious North Vietnamese who are controlled by
Russians. ''I didn't realize the country had changed so much,'' said Mr.
Antonowsky. ''It would have been very difficult to rewrite the history of the
Vietnam War five years ago.'' Another successful 1985 movie, ''Commando,''
starred Arnold Schwarzenegger as the head of a top-secret military unit
defending democracy against global chaos.

The movie success that most surprised Hollywood was ''Cocoon,'' a
science-fiction fable about eternal youth that starred such elderly actors as
Don Ameche, Hume Cronyn and Jessica Tandy.

Hollywood's excessive preoccupation with movies for and about teen-agers was
symbolized last summer by the almost simultaneous release of ''Explorers,''
''Weird Science,'' ''Real Genius'' and ''My Science Project,'' four movies about
teen-agers and their computers. The box-office performance of the four films
ranged from poor to fair.

Many Hollywood executives grumble privately about ''kiddie flicks.'' However, as
long as a movie like ''The Goonies'' - young teen-agers searching for pirate
gold at the pace of an amusement-park ride - makes money, the genre will not
disappear. ''But I think people will be more particular about what gets made,''
said Tom Sherak, president of distribution at 20th Century-Fox. ''A movie is
less likely to get made just because 'It will appeal to kids and kids buy
tickets,' ''he said.

Based on the box office, at least, the year's two biggest stars were Sylvester
Stallone and Steven Spielberg.

For years, audiences eagerly accepted Mr. Stallone as Rocky but rejected him as
anyone else. With ''Rambo,'' he has become a bankable movie star in
action-adventure movies. (The failure of ''Rhinestone,'' in which he co-starred
with Dolly Parton a year ago, shows that audiences will still not throng to see
him in a comedy or musical.) 'E.T.' Still Holds Record Mr. Spielberg was
executive producer of ''Back to the Future,'' ''The Goonies'' and ''Young
Sherlock Holmes,'' a Christmas box-office disappointment. In addition, the
re-release of his 1982 movie ''E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial,'' the most successful
movie of all time, brought in another $18 million in film rentals, making
''E.T.'' the 18th most successful movie of 1985.

The clear winner among movie distributors was Warner Brothers, with 18 percent
of all United States and Canadian movie rentals. Warner's success was due to a
broad base of films, including ''The Goonies,'' ''Police Academy 2,'' ''European
Vacation,'' ''Spies Like Us,'' ''Pale Rider,'' ''Pee-Wee's Big Adventure'' and
''Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome.'' Universal, in second place with 16 percent of
the film rentals, succeeded mostly with ''Back to the Future,'' ''Fletch,''
''Mask'' and ''Brewster's Millions.''

And then there were the losers. Paramount tumbled from first place with 21
percent of the film rentals in 1984 to a 10 percent tie for fourth place, and
its Christmas movies, ''Clue'' and ''Young Sherlock Holmes,'' were near the
bottom of the pack.

Among the big-budget failures were ''Enemy Mine,'' Fox's $33 million
science-fiction movie about an alien and an earthling who must become allies to
survive, Paramount's $24 million ''Explorers,'' Cannon's $23 million
space-vampire film ''Lifeforce,'' Disney's $29 million ''Return to Oz,''
Universal's $22 million ''Stick'' and Embassy's $25 million version of the
Broadway play ''A Chorus Line.'' None of them have earned more than $6 million
in film rentals, although ''A Chorus Line'' probably will edge over that line.

No exact reasons for the failures can be given. None of the movies did well with
reviewers, but neither did ''European Vacation'' or ''Spies Like Us.'' However,
major science-fiction movies without the name of George Lucas or Steven
Spielberg have tended to do poorly recently. ''Return to Oz'' was grim and did
not fulfill the expectations of people who expected a sunnier sequel to ''The
Wizard of Oz.'' ''Stick,'' a detective movie starring Burt Reynolds, follows a
series of commercial failures for Mr. Reynolds. And ''A Chorus Line'' is seen as
stale and overly familiar, a victim of the years it took to reach the screen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of scenes from 'Rambo' and 'Back to the Future'

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 16, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

COURT THROWS OUT LIBEL SUIT FILED AGAINST CBS BY COLONEL

BYLINE: By ARNOLD H. LUBASCH

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1220 words


A $44 million libel suit that a retired Army lieutenant colonel filed about a
CBS News broadcast of ''60 Minutes'' was thrown out yesterday by a Federal
appeals court in Manhattan.

The celebrated case involved Lieut. Col. Anthony B. Herbert, who said the Army
relieved him of his command during the Vietnam War because of his efforts to
expose atrocities. He contended that the 1973 television program about his
dispute with the Army had maliciously portrayed him as a liar.

After legal disputes delayed the libel case for a decade, it was dismissed in
yesterday's unanimous decision by a three-judge panel of the United States Court
of Appeals for the Second Circuit.

News organizations have complained that judges have been reluctant to grant
summary dismissals in libel cases, particularly in suits by public figures.
Yesterday's decision, dismissing the suit before trial, could encourage judges
to dismiss more libel cases without long, costly trials.

Judge Irving R. Kaufman wrote the 43-page decision for the appeals court, with
the concurrence of Judge Jon O. Newman and Judge William H. Timbers. The panel
said CBS had presented sufficient evidence to defend its overall view of Colonel
Herbert, even though some statements remained in dispute.

Where there is sufficient evidence to justify the main point in a news story, a
libel action cannot be based on some minor subsidiary statements that merely
support the story's overall conclusion, the appeals court said, in a new
guideline for granting summary judgments to libel defendants.

Colonel Herbert argued that 11 statements in the CBS program and a related
article in Atlantic Monthly magazine had been made with reckless disregard for
the truth. The defendants in the suit included Mike Wallace, the correspondent,
and Barry Lando, the producer.

Presiding over the case in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Judge Charles S.
Haight Jr. rejected the argument on nine of the statements but ruled that the
two others required a trial.

The appeals court affirmed Judge Haight's rejection of the nine statements and
reversed his ruling that Colonel Herbert was entitled to a trial on the other
statements, which had cast some doubt on the highly decorated colonel's version
of his dispute with the Army.

''For Herbert to base his defamation action on subsidiary statements whose
ultimate defamatory implications are themselves not actionable, we believe,
would be a classic case of the tail wagging the dog,'' Judge Kaufman wrote.

David Boies, the lawyer for CBS, said the decision ''affirms important
principles protecting journalists from plaintiffs who try to take particular
statements in an article or broadcast out of context and base a libel action on
those statements.''

''I think,'' Mr. Boies said, ''the Court of Appeals decision demonstrates what
CBS has said and believed from the beginning, which is that the broadcast was
accurate, well-researched and an important addition to the public's knowledge
about the Vietnam War.''

''This decision makes clear,'' he added, ''that, where appropriate, trial judges
can and should dispose of these cases on summary judgment.''

Colonel Herbert's lawyer, Jonathan W. Lubell, said he and his client would
''seriously consider going to the Supreme Court once again.''

''The decision is frankly not surprising,'' Mr. Lubell said, ''in light of Judge
Kaufman's well-known predisposition in favor of the media and in light of his
earlier ruling in this case, which was later reversed by the Supreme Court.''

Mr. Lubell was referring to a 1979 decision by the Supreme Court, which said the
First Amendment did not protect journalists accused of libel by public figures
from being compelled to explain why they made specific news judgments in
preparing disputed news stories. In that decision, the Supreme Court reversed a
ruling that Judge Kaufman wrote for the appeals court concerning a prolonged
dispute in the early stages of the suit that Colonel Herbert had filed in 1974.

Editorial Process

The colonel's lawyers were questioning Mr. Lando, the producer of the disputed
''60 Minutes'' segment called ''The Selling of Colonel Herbert.'' But Mr. Lando
refused to answer some of the questions on the ground that they infringed on an
editorial process protected by the First Amendment.

Judge Haight ruled that the questions must be answered because the colonel was a
public figure whose libel case depended on showing that CBS had broadcast the
program with actual malice, defined as reckless disregard for the truth.

In 1977, in a 2-to-1 decision written by Judge Kaufman, the appeals court ruled
that journalists could not be compelled to disclose the thoughts and opinions
they held when they were preparing a news story. That was overruled by the
Supreme Court two years later.

The pretrial questioning then continued, producing thousands of pages of
testimony in depositions in the case, known as Herbert v. Lando.

After the long procedure was completed, both sides asked Judge Haight for a
summary judgment in their favor. His ruling, dismissing part of the suit and
requiring a trial for the rest, was appealed by both sides.

Judge Haight took a key step by certifying that his summary judgment ruling
could be appealed, allowing the legal issues to be considered by the appeals
court. Without his permission, the issues could not have been appealed until
after a trial.

Judge Kaufman observed that ''the most difficult question'' in the appeal was
whether Judge Haight should have dismissed the two statements that had been left
for trial.

One of the statements involved whether a sergeant major had a valid reason for
disputing that Colonel Herbert had reported a torture incident. The other
statement involved whether a helicopter pilot had agreed that Colonel Herbert
had spoken of being relieved of his command because of his reports about
unwarranted killings.

Even though the disputed statements might cast doubt on the colonel's veracity,
Judge Kaufman said, they did not warrant a libel trial.

''We do not mean to imply by our holding,'' the judge said, ''that appellees
could have published with impunity a vast collection of false statements so
extensive as to portray Herbert as a liar in every respect. Such a portrayal may
well be actionable.

''Rather, we hold that if the appellees's published view that Herbert lied about
reporting war crimes was not actionable, other statements - even those that
might be found to have been published with actual malice - should not be
actionable if they merely imply the same view and are simply an outgrowth of and
subsidiary to those claims upon which it has been held there can be no recovery.

''We do not intend by our holding to permit defamation defendants to freely
embellish their stories with falsehoods while remaining free from liability.''

But the judge said that in the current case there was sufficient evidence
supporting CBS's ''skepticism of Herbert's story'' to justify the finding of no
malice. He directed the Federal District Court to dismiss the libel suit.

''Thus,'' he added, ''this protracted litigation, which has been filled with
anger, charges and countercharges in an area of the law where emotions
frequently obfuscate the facts and law, has finally come to a close in this
court.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lieut. Herbert (page B10)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 16, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING REJECTS MOSCOW NONAGGRESSION PACT

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 685 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Jan. 15


China today rejected a Soviet proposal that the two nations sign a mutual
nonaggression treaty, saying Moscow had more concrete ways of improving
relations if it chose to exercise them.

The dismissal of a proposal that Moscow has been promoting since at least 1974
was not in itself surprising, since the Chinese have shied away from the idea
from the start. What was striking was that China revived the matter in public
and in peremptory terms that have been little used recently as relations have
steadily improved.

The issue was raised at a weekly Foreign Ministry news briefing that the
Government often uses to focus attention on topics that would otherwise attract
little notice. The official conducting the briefing, Li Zhaoxing, volunteered
the Chinese position after saying there had been queries about it from reporters
in Peking.

''The so-called mutual nonaggression treaty is a proposal that has been put
forward by the Soviet side for many years and that has been categorically
rejected by the Chinese,'' he said. ''We have time and again reiterated that the
removal of the three obstacles is the only way to normalize Chinese-Soviet
relations, because it not only has a bearing on China's security but also on the
upholding of international justice.''

For several years, Peking has been saying the only way to normalize relations
was for the Soviet Union to attend to China's grievances on three issues -the
Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan, Soviet support for Vietnam's
occupation of Cambodia, and Soviet military might along China's northern
frontiers.

When the Soviet Union first proposed a nonaggression treaty, China responded
with a draft pact of its own that included several conditions, including a
separation of forces in disputed areas along the 4,000-mile border. Partly
because the Chinese draft contained language that the Kremlin considered
prejudicial to its border claims, it was in turn rejected.

There the issue has rested for more than a decade, although it it has been
revived in the twice-yearly Foreign Ministry talks that resumed in 1982 after a
long break. Both sides have said that those talks have been snagged by China's
call for Soviet action on the ''three obstacles.'' The Chinese have demanded
that the Russians make concessions on at least one of the issues -they suggested
Cambodia - but Soviet officials have refused to even discuss the issues in
detail.

But Western diplomats here have been paying less attention to the formal talks
than to the rapid improvement in commercial, cultural and sport ties that has
taken place over the last two years. With high-level delegations shuttling
between the two capitals -Deputy Prime Minister Li Peng has seen Mikhail S.
Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, twice in Moscow in the last 10 months - the view
here has been that normalization is taking place without any formal
acknowledgement.

The virtue of this is that enmities that have built up at great cost to both
sides can be eased without upsetting other nations that have based their
policies on the estrangement. An example is Vietnam, a Soviet ally that has
periodic clashes with China. China, for its part, has its relations with the
United States to consider.

By raising the proposed nonaggression pact, Peking may have intended to remind
Moscow again that its objections to Soviet actions on the periphery of China
will have to be dealt with if a normal relationship is to be achieved. But some
diplomats here felt that the sharp tone of the Chinese statement indicated that
more was involved.

One view was that the Chinese are beginning to think that the Russians are
taking the improvement in ties for granted and need a jolt to remind them of
underlying realities.

A Chinese official said privately that there was considerable irritation here
last month at the attitude of a visiting Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Mikhail
S. Kapitsa. He radiated confidence about the Moscow-Peking relationship in his
public remarks but refused, according to the Chinese account, to ''talk
seriously'' about Afghanistan, Cambodia or border troops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 16, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DECISION FOLLOWS A DECADE OF LEGAL DISPUTES

BYLINE: By FRANK J. PRIAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 464 words


A Federal appeals court's decision to throw out a libel suit brought against CBS
by a retired Army lieutenant colonel comes after more than a decade of legal
disputes and delays.

The retired officer, Anthony B. Herbert, who now lives in Colorado, contended
that he had been defamed by a 1973 CBS News ''60 Minutes'' program that had cast
doubt on his charges that Army officers had covered up atrocities by American
troops in the Vietnam War.

Colonel Herbert, who had been one of the most decorated enlisted men in the
Korean War and rose through the ranks to become a lieutenant colonel, filed
formal military charges in 1971 against a general and a colonel he had accused
of ignoring reports of suspected atrocities in 1969. The charges eventually were
dismissed. Later in 1971, Colonel Herbert left the Army, asserting that he and
his family had been harassed because of his accusations.

In its early stages, the case reached the United States Supreme Court in a
prolonged dispute over pretrial questioning of the program's producer.

The Federal District Court in Manhattan had ruled that Barry Lando, the producer
of the ''60 Minutes'' segment, had to answer questions about his state of mind
in order to establish whether malice was involved inthe final report.

In November 1977, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
reversed the lower court, with the majority holding that journalists could not
be compelled to disclose the thoughts and opinions that they held while
preparing a a news story.

In a 6-to-3 decision in April 1979, the Supreme Court ruled that journalists did
not have First Amendment protection in libel suits against inquiries into their
thoughts and newsroom conversations with colleagues.

In a speech delivered shortly after that ruling, Judge Irving R. Kaufman of the
Court of Appeals noted that ''recently and with greater frequency, the courts
are wielding the cutting edge against the press.''

The Supreme Court ruling permitted Colonel Herbert to proceed with detailed
pretrial questioning of CBS News personnel involved in the 1973 program.
Yesterday's decision involved an appeal of the Federal District Court ruling to
go ahead with the trial.

Colonel Herbert's lawyer, Jonathan W. Lubell, said he had been unable to reach
his client yesterday, nor would he disclose his address in Colorado.

He said he did not know if yesterday's ruling would be appealed, but noted that
the ''continuously escalating cost'' of further litigation would be a
consideration in such a decision. Much of the legal work thus far has been on a
contingency basis, he said.

Mr. Lubell said Colonel Herbert holds a doctorate in psychology and was working
as a clinical psychologist and ''doing some writing, mostly about military
matters.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A SLICE OF HANOI NIGHT LIFE: HEAR A TALE OF SAIGON

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 985 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


In the cold of winter Hanoi is often silent after sundown, with little more than
the ring of bicycle bells or the clang of a streetcar to compete with the
muffled conversations or coughing of unseen people in dark courtyards.

At night the old street lamps are kind to the city, powdering its aging but
still beautiful face with a golden glow. Life moves indoors: to theaters, movie
houses, video or dance clubs, coffee bars and small restaurants hidden from view
at the tops of stairs off passageways between narrow houses.

While the Vietnamese are able to find all kinds of evening entertainment,
foreigners who live here sometimes complain that the secrecy of Vietnamese life
seems to extend to a reluctance to advertise its cultural joys.

The Talk of the Season

One recent night at Hanoi's new culture center, a Kennedy Center-style complex
built with Soviet help, people were being turned away from the season's most
talked-about production because it was sold out.

The musical play tells the story of an Amerasian boy abandoned by his rich South
Vietnamese mother because he is black - abandoned, that is, for 13 years, until
she finds that he, the son of an affair with ''Charles Smith,'' could be her
ticket to the United States.

The play, titled ''Doi Dong Sua Me,'' or, roughly translated, ''Two Streams of
Mother's Milk,'' is a tear-jerker; a foreigner who asked to see it was warned by
an interpreter that it would be ''very emotional.'' The sniffles of the audience
of 1,200 (plus five in armchairs in the aisle and some children on laps) proved
him right.

The Amerasian boy, played by a Vietnamese actor in minstrel blackface and curly
wig, was dropped into the cradle of a saintly village teacher and her
understanding husband, whose own baby, a girl, is taken away by the influential
Saigon colonel's wife. As the play gets under way, the boy is entering his teens
and does not want to leave his village ''mother.''

'Where Should I Go Now?'

''Who am I?'' he cries when told he is really the son of an American soldier and
a city lady in silk and jewels he does not recognize. ''Where should I go now?''

For a stranger to Vietnam's long process of building trust and understanding
between north and south, the play is fascinating. Its South Vietnamese setting
and style allow for lavish costumes, beautifully made up women and dapper men in
leisure suits, Panama hats and sunglasses.

''You must be from Saigon'' is a line that brings down the house. The audience
seems to enjoy not only the sights but also the southern Vietnamese songs that
punctuate the drama. There is a live band in the wings.  But the play is also
full of subtle messages. The southerners, if buffoons, are not entirely evil.
''After re-education, I feel better about the humanitarian policy of the new
regime,'' the former colonel says.

No Wallflowers

There are other interesting things to see and do in Hanoi - if the visitor can
find them. Only the Saturday ''Soiree de Danse'' at the Boho Hotel got the
benefit of a poster recently at the nearby Thong Nhat, where most foreigners
stay or live.

The gathering turned out to be a disco ''with the exuberance of a village hop,''
a British visitor said. There were plenty of beer bottles, and no wallflowers.
Some of the lively young women, Western guests reported, were offering more than
just a partner for a tango.

Where does everyone learn to dance so well? ''Our youth clubs are teaching it,''
a Government guide explained. ''Dancing is very popular now.''

Not far away, at the French-built opera house, the curtain had just come down on
a performance of ''Swan Lake'' by a new Russian-inspired Vietnamese ballet
corps.

A ticket for a four-seat box (with its velvet rail intact) went for less than 50
cents. There was no program; a woman in a snow white ao dai stepped forward to
read a synopsis of the plot - and the names of all the dancers and musicians -
from several pieces of paper that shook in her hands.

Enthusiasm and Grace

The orchestra may have attacked the Tchaikovsky overture as if it had been
written by Mahler, and the piano needed tuning. But the young dancers, faced
with a house more than half empty, performed their task with enthusiasm and
grace.

At a lull in the music the voice of a large man whom a visitor took to be an
Eastern European talent scout rose from a front-row mezzanine seat. ''I must
emphasize that if we do the cultural exchange,'' he said in English to his
Vietnamese hosts, ''they must absolutely stay for two full years.''

At intermission, there was a jarring note from the world outside. A couple of
visitors who tried to stroll on the plaza in front of the opera house found all
the doors of the building closed and padlocked.

''It's the Chinese,'' a guard said mysteriously. ''We are afraid of Chinese
mines. You know several years ago they put explosives in cinemas. We can't take
chances here.'' Crab Soup and Frog Legs Before or after an evening's
entertainment, the place to go for an exceptional meal in Hanoi, where hotel
food is unimaginative, is to one of the tiny backstreet private restaurants.
There, in a setting that often approaches medieval squalor, the most primitive
of kitchens can turn out crab soup, or frog legs, pepper steak or seafood rushed
in from Haiphong.

The cooking is European. Because of the high price of meals - the ingredients
are the best the private market has to offer - most of the diners are
foreigners.

Often half the fun is seeing who is dining out where. There might be Russians
who burst into robust singing after a few rounds of vodka. Or a visiting
television crew from Tokyo with its own chest of ice-cold beer.

One recent evening, a climb to a two-room boite with only two tables brought a
customer face to face with the French Ambassador, Ivan Bastouil, in elegant
brown velvet, presiding over a party of diplomatic guests.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of scene from 'Two Streams of Mother's Milk' (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 17, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BRITONS' BUYING SPREE: PRIME REAL ESTATE

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 968 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 16


The British have laid siege to the nation's capital. This time they have come
not to burn but to buy, and they have amassed real estate holdings approaching
$1 billion.

Although the British have invested in other cities, including New York and
Boston, the bulk of their American real estate is in Washington. One area real
estate specialist who is familiar with the British deals, Julian Josephs, says
that the cross-Atlantic surge in investment reflects the view that ''Washington,
with government as the pre-eminent tenant, is not going to go downhill.'' He
said the surge began 10 years ago and added, ''There's been a 50 percent
increase in the last two years.''

The British investors have concentrated on what they call the Golden Triangle,
an area in the heart of downtown that is bordered by Pennsylvania, Connecticut
and New Hampshire Avenues. Their buildings are modernistic and have a look of
solidity, with sweeping setbacks and marble-and-granite lobbies filled with
sculpture and greenery. The British also are partial to large, ornate bathrooms.


Comparison to London

As the leading foreign investors in Washington real estate, the British say they
see an architectural kinship between Washington and London. In both cities the
buildings are of a more manageable scale than those that pierce the skylines of
other major cities. Consequently, investments here also tend to be on a more
manageable scale, mostly within the range of $25 million to $40 million.

''Basically, I think we've improved the architecture of the city,'' said Mr.
Josephs, a Briton now based here, who has advised British pension funds and
other real estate investors. ''We've been renovating properties for 500 years.''

Mr. Josephs, a slightly built 35-year-old, has put together some of the biggest
British real estate deals here. He was born in Chicago to a British business
executive sent to open a Middle West office. At the age of 6 weeks he returned
with his family to London. He was educated in Britain and France and renounced
his United States citizenship in the Vietnam War upon learning that he had a
high draft number. Mr. Josephs and his British wife have been living in
Washington since 1977. They enjoy the status of permanent residents, and have
two children, both born here and thus American citizens.

Major British Holdings

Major British holdings in downtown Washington include the Army-Navy Club, at
17th and I (valued at $35 million); Demonet Building, 1155 Connecticut Avenue
($35 million); 1201 Connecticut Avenue ($40 million); 1200 19th Street ($40
million); 1100 20th Street ($30 million); Walker Building, 734 15th Street ($10
million); Board of Trade Building, 1129 20th Street, ($22 million); 1020 19th
Street ($35 million); 1146 19th Street ($18 million); 2000 L Street ($65
million); 2001 L Street ($35 million); 1015 18th Street ($18 million); 122 C
Street (18 million); 1225 Connecticut Avenue ($34 million), and 816 Connecticut
Avenue ($6 million).

In addition, the Watergate complex is half-owned by the British Coal Board
Pension Fund; Mazza Gallerie is half-owned by the British Petroleum Pension
Fund, and the Electricity Suppply Pension Fund is a major owner of L'Enfant
Plaza. The British also have holdings in the Georgetown neighborhood, as well as
the Maryland and Virginia suburbs.

Dutch and Belgians, Too

Other major foreign investors are the Dutch (1015 15th Street, 2555 M Street,
2021 L Street, Trans-Potomac Plaza and Canal Center, plus suburban properties)
and the Belgians (Chanin Building at 815 Connecticut Avenue, 1720 I Street).

The architecture and workmanship of the British-owned buildings has impressed
local developers. Vernon Knarr, a local real estate broker who has sold some
properties to the British, said: ''They build to hold for a long period of time.
The British look to long-term appreciation, not tax benefits. In Britain, it's
100 years, not a five- or seven-year tax write-off.''

The British also pay top dollar. ''I think they've driven the prices up,'' said
Oliver T. Carr, a local real estate developer. ''The British investors have
expected lower yields than American investors, so they've affected the market.
Local investors traditionally have paid less for real estate, and expected
higher yields.''

Good and Bad Points

''It's a good thing for real estate because it drives the prices up,'' said
Donald Brown, another local developer who teaches at the Harvard Business
School. ''But it's bad for local buyers. There's a real question, with the tax
rates coming down, why prices stay as high as they are. People attribute that to
the fact that foreign investors are anxious to own real estate in Washington.''

Mr. Josephs acknowledged the criticism. ''I'm sure that if we weren't here, it
would have been much easier for Americans to develop these properties,'' he
said.

Occasionally, the British have been the conduit for funds from the Middle East.
A telecommunication consultant who recently sought to sublease an office in what
he thought was a British-owned building was told by his London landlord that the
sublease would have to be cleared by Saudi Arabia.

''There is a lot of Middle East money coming through London,'' Mr. Josephs
acknowledged.

British pension funds have been major players in what they consider a cautious
investment. ''Why put all your money in Europe, when you can spread your risk
around the world?'' Mr. Josephs asked.  Promoting British Retailers Mr. Josephs
seeks to bring British retailers to occupy the British buildings here, and
brought Burberry to Washington as the street-floor tenant of the Demonet
Building.

Local developers, meanwhile, say they have accepted the British invasion.

''It's just like the mumps,'' Mr. Carr observed. ''You get used to everything.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Washington, D.C.

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SENATOR RETURNS WITH 2 VIETNAMESE CHILDREN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 276 words


Senator Frank H. Murkowski went to Vietnam to find out about Americans missing
in action in the Indochina war, but left today with two Vietnamese children who
were separated from their mother seven years ago.

Senator Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, led a Congressional delegation to Hanoi
to urge the Vietnamese to help resolve the cases of Americans who remain listed
as missing in action from the Vietnam War.

The delegation left today after Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach,
told them no that Americans were being held against their will.

But the lawmaker was accompanied by Nguyen Vu Chinh, 10 years old, and Tran
Thanh Quynh, 9. The two chidlren are to rejoin their mother in Alaska on
Tuesday.

Mother Lives in Fairbanks

Their mother, Xuan Thi Nguyen, fled to the United States seven years ago and now
lives in Fairbanks. She had asked the Senator's office to help get her children
out of Vietnam.

''I'm just very emotionally moved at the sight of those two kids here with us on
the way to a new life,'' said Senator Murkowski, chairman of the Senate Veterans
Affairs Committee.

''I'm so pleased and so humbled that we can bring them to their mother, that
they will have the opportunity that we enjoy living in America.''

The chidlren were accompanied from Ho Chi Minh city by their aunt, Nguyen Thi
Sau, 30, who raised them in their hometown of Tay Ninh after their mother left.

Senator Murkowski said last-minute red tape threatened to stall the exchange
when low-ranking officials questioned whether the children's paperwork was
complete.

He said that at that point, Mr. Thach leaned over to him and said, ''Just go.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 18 (AP) -

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMERA;
WHAT STILL PHOTOGRAPHERS BRING TO VIDEO

BYLINE: By JOHN DURNIAK

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 55, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 812 words


IN the United States there is a tendency to catalogue photographers as either
still photographers or motion-picture and video photographers. Underlying this
is the idea that a photographer can do one but not the other. In Europe,
however, still photographers like Raymond DePardon win more awards for
television and motion-picture work than for their outstanding still photography.

Here, there are only a handful of famous still photographers who have become
successful motion-picture directors. Stanley Kubrick, known for such films as
''Dr. Strangelove'' and ''2001: A Space Odyssey,'' was a Look magazine
photographer. Gordon Parks, a former Life magazine photographer, directed
''Shaft'' and ''The Learning Tree.''

On the other hand, cinematographers such as Chas Gerretsen, who was a cameraman
in Vietnam, went on to become fine still photographers.

With the onset of 8-millimeter video tape and smaller, highly versatile, quality
video cameras, it is possible that photographers will travel with two gadget
bags - a compact video camera in one and a 35-millimeter still camera in the
other. The day may even come when a single camera can be used for either still
or video with the touch of a button.

Much from the world of still photography is transferable into video and film.
Here are some of the strengths that the still photographer can adapt to
videotape photography.

* Organization. The still photographer writes things down, and organizes his
ideas about an anticipated session. These shooting notes have in them the seeds
of the video-film photographer's shooting script. Still photographers think in
terms of long, medium and close-up shots to describe visually what is going on.
Video people think in the same terms.

* Good visual reflexes. The still photographer, especially the photojournalist,
is conditioned to shoot quality on-the-spot pictures under pressure. This is
vital experience for video, where the cameraman is often thrown into situations
in which shots cannot be predicted.

* Knowledge of equipment. Photographers cannot use tools well unless they
understand them fully. The still photographer knows what all the camera controls
are for before inserting a roll of film. This discipline is essential with video
and film cameras.

* Respect for the tripod. Below a shutter speed of 1/200 second, body motion can
contribute to unsharp pictures. The still photographer has proved to himself
that a tripod is a first step to quality. Most still photographers own them, use
them and respect them. To avoid one of the biggest problems in video and film -
the bouncing image - a tripod is essential.

* Knowledge of lighting. In video and film, all one has learned about lighting a
subject is immediately useful. In fact, there was a period of time in the making
of television commercials when still photographers were hired as directors
because of their special knowledge of lighting. The basic three-light setup in
stills is the essential setup for video and film -main light to the right of the
camera, fill-in light to the left of it, and a backlight.

* Steadiness. At low shutter speeds, the still photographer without a tripod
uses a wall, a fence, a tree to steady himself - and therefore his camera -
during exposure. He has been tested in how his hands fit the camera, and his
elbow helps augment his hands in keeping the camera still. Video cameras have to
be thought of as cameras with slow shutter speeds and must be kept very steady
during shooting. Photographers of both still and moving pictures have to use
their heads, shoulders, arms and legs in achieving a shooting stance. All that
one has learned from steady still photography is applicable here.

Film and video makers contend that the goal of still photographers is to tell a
story in a picture and that this inhibits them from getting a visual rhythm into
their motion pictures. However, still photographers have the tradition of the
picture story - W. Eugene Smith, Life and Look magazines - that are really
bare-bone video-film scenarios.

The still photographer with crossover dreams should also remember that every
mistake ever made in exposure is useful experience for video and film. Anyone
who has ever made a color print knows that the important thinking has to be done
at the scene if there is to be a good finished picture.

To be sure, there are areas that can present problems for the still
photographer, such as the ability to edit while shooting. In video, all footage
has to be shot so that it will come together as a finished film. The
photographer cannot stop and make a picture that stands on its own. In video and
film everything works together.

The new generation of great video picture makers may well spring from the
current generation of still photographers - once they get some experience with
the new 8-millimeter video cameras.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ECHOES OF LENNY BRUCE, VIA BOGOSIAN AND REDDIN

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1905 words


When auditions began for ''Rum and Coke,''

Keith Reddin's black comedy about the Bay of Pigs invasion, the playwright
invited Eric Bogosian to read for the part of Fidel Castro. Mr. Reddin quite
liked Mr. Bogosian's fix on the Cuban leader, but he could not cast him. Mr.
Bogosian was going into rehearsal with ''Drinking in America,'' the latest in
his series of acclaimed, one-man shows.

But it was a fitting coincidence that the two men should have crossed paths -
and that their shows are playing simultaneously in New York - for they represent
a satiric wit and social conscience rare among their peers. In a generation
notable for its self-absorption and material pursuit, traits mainfested and
frequently celebrated in its art, Mr. Bogosian and Mr. Reddin recall the
politicized wits of other countries and older generations, from Lenny Bruce to
David Hare. Yet the themes of their current shows are nothing if not timely,
with Mr. Reddin examining American relations with Central America and Mr.
Bogosian looking at the yuppie fascination with power, position and various
substances.

What the 32-year-old Mr. Bogosian said about his motives in a recent interview
with the BBC could hold for both men: ''The whole 60's dialogue - what is war
about? what are race relations about? how can we live better in this new world?
- seems to be all forgotten. It tells me a lot of people didn't think as deeply
about these things as we all thought we did. People tell me, 'You keep bringing
up these issues all the time, aren't you preaching to the converted? We all know
about that stuff already.' But I see no indication we know about that stuff, and
I would like to shake people up a little bit.''

With Mr. Reddin, it is more a case of preaching to the amnesic. ''Americans have
the shortest memory for foreign affairs,'' said the 29-year-old playwright. ''I
tell people the play's about the Bay of Pigs and they say, 'Oh yeah, that's when
Kennedy really showed the Russians.' And I say, 'No, that was the Cuban missile
crisis.' Maybe I should supply a bibliography with the program: 'If you enjoyed
the play and would like to know more about the Bay of Pigs . . . .' ''

While Mr. Reddin and Mr. Bogosian share a sensibility, they should not simply be
lumped together. Mr. Reddin is a playwright who fuses real events with the
surrounding popular culture and cites the influence of such British writers as
Mr. Hare, Howard Brenton and Howard Barker and the American Richard Nelson. His
first play, ''Life and Limb,'' which played early in 1984 at Playwrights
Horizons, told the story of a disabled Korean War veteran to a background of Nat
King Cole, ''I Love Lucy'' and ''Bwana Devil.'' ''Rum and Coke,'' which is now
previewing at the Public Theater and officially opens Jan. 27, turns the
calendar back to 1961. It is safe to say, even this early in Mr. Reddin's
playwriting career, that only he would have a Cuban insurgent and a Central
Intelligence Agency operative pass their time in a Guatemala training camp by
quizzing each other on the casts of ''A Nun's Story'' and ''Up Periscope.''

Mr. Bogosian, whose ''Drinking in America'' opens tonight at the American Place,
is less a writer or actor than a mixture of stand-up comic and performance
artist. Along with precious few others who inhabit the same ambiguous turf -
Lily Tomlin, Richard Pryor, Whoopi Golberg, Spalding Gray - Mr. Bogosian has
inherited and furthered the caustic social commentary of Mr. Bruce. But while
Miss Goldberg turns her vignettes into little homilies and even Miss Tomlin ends
her current Broadway show with a feel-good salute to the audience, Mr. Bogosian
leaves his edges raw. He aims less at getting laughs than at outraging his
audiences, trying to shock them into a moral response.

In shows such as ''Men Inside,'' ''Voices of America'' and ''FunHouse,'' Mr.
Bogosian has portrayed a disturbing bunch of characters -bums, hucksters,
television preachers, necrophiliac disk jockeys. During one performance in
Edinburgh, Mr. Bogosian was playing a torture expert giving advice on the best
use of truncheons, electrodes and similar devices. Most of the crowd was
howling. Then a woman stood up and shouted, ''That's not funny.'' Mr. Bogosian
told her, ''I never said it was funny.'' It brings to mind Mr. Bruce's response
to charges he was a ''sick comic'': ''Society's sick and I'm a doctor with a
scalpel for false values.''

''Drinking in America,'' however, represents a change in direction for Mr.
Bogosian, one that reflects the changes in his life since ''FunHouse.'' When Mr.
Bogosian was developing that show in the early 1980's, he was part of a
struggling downtown art scene, supporting himself by doing television
voice-overs. But the show transferred from the Public Theater to a commercial
Off Broadway setting, and Mr. Bogosian picked up a celebrity following and a lot
of work. Suddenly the man who had decried television as America's lowest common
denominator was appearing in episodes of ''Twilight Zone'' and ''Miami Vice'' -
the show that typifies the 1980's with its emphasis on fashion, music videos and
cocaine.

'' 'FunHouse' was about fear,'' Mr. Bogosian said. ''I was in a fearful place
then. I was an artist who was in debt and freaked out by many things. I'm not
that artist now. I make more money now. I have things available. I think this
show is, to a degree, a way of exorcising a lot of demons, keeping myself in
line. I am a pretty conservative guy morally, but we don't live in a moral
world, so there's a tension.

''My inner desires were inflamed when I was on television. When I saw my name in
the credits for 'Twilight Zone,' it was a stronger rush than any cocaine. I was
suddenly sling-shotted into what I thought it was 'all about.' I was sitting
around, thinking how great I was, waiting for the phone to ring to tell me I'm
starring in the next Marty Scorsese film. Whatever deal I had, I wanted a better
deal. I realized I was getting very off-center personally and I wanted to get
back to center.''

Mr. Bogosian's self-examination yielded an array of upwardly mobile characters
who almost could have stepped out of a Michelob (''Who says you can't have it
a-l-l-l'') commercial. A star ceramic tile salesman spends a night with a hotel
prostitute. A cocaine-sniffing casting agent describes what talent he can
deliver in salary increments of $10,000. A young businessman, impotent in bed,
puts the blame on his girlfriend. In a more allegorical routine, a drunk spins
out his delusions of women, cars and penthouses as he downs his pint.

'''Drinking in America' is a meditation on power in the American context,'' Mr.
Bogosian said, ''and it uses drinking as a catalyst, a striking stone, something
to play off. 'Drunk with power' is a phrase that comes to mind. The way booze
and drugs can be abused is the way power can be abused, too. Intoxication is
very central to our society now. There's no question we're in a decadent phase
in our country. I don't provide any answers to that, but I do know something's
missing and we're rushing to replace it with booze or drugs or power or money.''

If Mr. Bogosian's approach tends toward the social and the personal -almost all
of his characters spring from people he has known or observed - then Mr. Reddin
writes more of a classic play of ideas, based on large and actual events. His
joke about providing a bibliography for ''Rum and Coke'' is not far-fetched. In
researching the play, Mr. Reddin read Richard Nixon's ''Six Crises,'' David
Halberstam's ''Best and the Brightest'' and Stephen Kinzer and Stephen
Schlesinger's ''Bitter Fruit,'' the story of C.I.A. involvement in the 1954
Guatemalan coup. He watched footage of President Kennedy's press conferences -
''They'd say 'Is there a Cuban invasion force?' and he'd say, 'Hey, guys, I
don't know a thing,' and then they'd all laugh because they all knew'' - and
pored over testimony before Senator Frank Church's Select Committee on
Intelligence about the C.I.A.'s various schemes to assassinate or discredit Mr.
Castro. But the book Mr. Reddin feels most closely parallels his own point of
view in ''Rum and Coke'' is one he read after completing the play - ''The March
of Folly'' by Barbara Tuchman.

''What she considers folly,'' Mr. Reddin said, ''is an action against your own
best interests, an action taken at a time when enough people are saying to the
decision-makers it's the wrong decision to make. And if you look at Vietnam and
if you look at the Bay of Pigs, you'd have to say they were follies. With the
Bay of Pigs, there was no anti-Castro underground in Cuba waiting for an
invasion; Castro already had locked them up. The Americans weren't going to give
the invaders the back-up support they promised. Soldiers weren't going to desert
Castro's army. So when you think about foreign policy mishaps and the loss of
idealism, you have to point to the Bay of Pigs as the beginning. It showed we
could make a big mistake and fall on our face. It was the first example of
Groupthink. You keep pouring people into what your own intelligence tells you
won't work.''

But ''Rum and Coke,'' like two other plays this season at the Public Theater,
Wallace Shawn's ''Aunt Dan and Lemon'' and David Hare's ''A Map of the World,''
does not offer conventional left-wing wisdom. Although ''Rum and Coke'' by
inference attacks the Reagan Administration's proxy war against Nicaragua, Mr.
Reddin directly lampoons one of liberalism's heroes, John F. Kennedy. His
protagonist, Jake Seward, is a C.I.A. agent of sincerity, as are some of the
Cuban insurgents. What is misguided, to Mr. Reddin, is the way the Kennedy
Administration used such aspirations to its own ends.

''When Kennedy said, 'This is the new frontier, we can change the world,' there
was nothing hokey about it,'' Mr. Reddin said. ''Jake is an example of that.
Jake is one of the brave New Frontiersmen, those bright guys coming out of Yale
and Harvard. He's one of those 'Best and Brightest' who used their zeal and
intelligence to make a big mistake. And what's Greek tragedy about? The hubris
of people who think they can change the world. The play is not saying we should
become isolationists, but it is saying we should look at who we use. It's easy
for us to say 'Well, we made a mistake' and back away, but there were 1,000
people in that invasion who got killed or tortured or imprisoned.''

Mr. Reddin's refusal to take a doctrinaire position is mirrored by his deadpan
sense of humor, two traits Mr. Bogosian also illustrates. His characters simply
relate the facts surrounding the invasion - C.I.A. plots to give Mr. Castro LSD;
the airlifting of counterfeit Cuban money, in the wrong color, to the invaders;
Mr. Castro's development of the Bay of Pigs as a resort. The effect reminds one
of ''The Atomic Cafe,'' a documentary that satirized the campaign to ''sell''
the bomb to the American public by using unadorned newsreels and Defense
Department films.

''When you read these things,'' Mr. Reddin said, ''at first you think it's kind
of horrifying. Then you say, 'This is funnier than watching a Preston Sturges
movie.' I mean, these C.I.A. guys slay me. You don't have to write funny, you
just write what they said. I don't have to comment on it. I just have to present
it. The play is successful if we don't know the line between reality and
absurdity - that 'Dr. Strangelove' point.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Eric Bogosian (NYT/Sara Krulwich); Photo of Deith Reddin
(Martha Swope Associates/Susan Cook)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;
COLONEL LOSES A BATTLE AGAINST CBS

BYLINE: By Katherine Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 321 words


The long legal battle between a retired Vietnam War officer and CBS produced a
potentially important distinction in libel law last week.

A Federal appeals court in Manhattan ruled that where there is sufficient
evidence to justify the main point in a news story, a libel action cannot be
based on minor subsidiary statements that merely support the story's overall
conclusion.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit made that point in
throwing out the suit that Lieut. Col. Anthony B. Herbert filed against CBS a
decade ago. Mr. Herbert, who has said the Army relieved him of his command
because he tried to expose American atrocities in the war, contended he had been
defamed by a 1973 segment of ''60 Minutes'' that cast doubt on his version of
his dispute with the Pentagon.

''For Herbert to base his defamation action on subsidiary statements whose
ultimate defamatory implications are themselves not actionable, we believe,
would be a classic case of the tail wagging the dog,'' wrote Judge Irving R.
Kaufman. Colonel Herbert's lawyer, Jonathan W. Lubell, said he was not surprised
by the ruling ''in light of Judge Kaufman's well-known predisposition in favor
of the media.'' He said he and Mr. Herbert would ''seriously consider going to
the Supreme Court once again.''

Mr. Lubell was referring to a 1979 decision by the Court that journalists did
not have First Amendment protection in libel suits against inquiries into their
thoughts and conversations. The decision reversed a ruling by Judge Kaufman in a
dispute over pretrial questioning of the program's producer, Barry Lando. Mr.
Lando and Mike Wallace, the correspondent, were the defendants in the suit.

Although the case involved years of litigation, news organizations were pleased
by the outcome, theorizing that the decision to dismiss the suit before trial
might encourage judges to grant more summary dismissals in libel cases.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lieut. Colonel Anthony S. Herbert

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SAINTS AND SINNERS IN SOUTHEAST ASIA

BYLINE: By David M. Oshinsky; David M. Oshinsky, a professor of history at
Rutgers University, is the author of ''A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe
McCarthy.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1682 words


ANATOMY OF A WAR Vietnam, the United States, and the Modern Historical
Experience. By Gabriel Kolko. 628 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $25.

UNTIL now, almost nothing of real importance has been written by Americans about
the war in Vietnam. That is the opinion of Gabriel Kolko, who modestly describes
himself as a ''critical, independent'' thinker. The reason, we are told, is that
''those in America who were opposed to the war have still written precious
little about it, while those who were in favor of it or pretend neutrality . . .
have yet to offer new insights, despite their privileged access to sources and
funding.'' It is a measure of this book's objectivity that Mr. Kolko spends much
of the preface thanking various research councils for their generous ''material
support.''

Like many others, Mr. Kolko, a professor of history at York University in
Canada, is determined to explain why the Communists won in Vietnam and why the
Americans failed. Despite his wooden prose, the answers come easily. Mr. Kolko
contends that the Vietnamese struggle against French colonialism produced
revolutionary leaders who were tough, patient, selfless, responsive and shrewd.
They could not have been anything less. ''The enthusiasm and power of the masses
had brought to power a party which saw itself as both an agent of history and a
creator of historical change.''

These leaders rarely relied on force. They were servants of the people, ''which
meant that during crucial periods the Party followed [the masses] in order to be
in the vanguard.'' A prime example is land reform, or the road to
collectivization, which Mr. Kolko describes as a voluntary process. There were
some early problems, like the mass slaughter of ''rich'' peasants by people's
tribunals in 1955, but Ho Chi Minh graciously apologized for these land reform
''errors,'' and there is no reason to hold him personally accountable. In the
end, collectivization worked because it created a ''social unity and consensus''
among the peasants, who wisely turned away from ''inefficient, parcelized
agriculture.''

The United States, meanwhile, was ''the major inheritor of the mantle of
imperialism in modern history.'' Its goal was to maintain a working capitalist
order that permitted ''the political destinies of distant places to evolve in a
manner beneficial to American . . . interests.'' This required a foreign policy
based on the containment of revolution, free access to raw materials and markets
and the credibility of American power.

As things turned out, Vietnam was the wrong place to make a stand. The
Communists were united, popular and strong. They had no illusions about the
human and economic costs of a protracted war. Our own allies were corrupt,
cowardly and weak. They would cease to exist without a massive (and
ever-expanding) commitment of American money and lives. ''After Tet 1968,'' Mr.
Kolko writes, ''the very economic and political health of the United States was
involved, starkly revealing the ultimate institutional parameters of the system
as it approached its economic and social limits.'' America's finite resources
could not sustain its infinite desires.

This thesis is not exactly new. Nor, for that matter, are Mr. Kolko's
observations about American diplomacy, the growth of the antiwar movement or the
political crises of the 1960's and beyond. The most interesting and original
parts of this book concern the impact of total war upon the social order of
South Vietnam. Mr. Kolko is keenly aware of the population displacement caused
by the American attempts to deprive the Vietcong of their sanctuaries in the
countryside. The amount of American firepower, the defoliation programs and the
forced removal of peasants to strategic hamlets and refugee camps had a
devastating effect upon ''the structure, character, and values'' of an
overwhelmingly rural society. So, too, did the peasant migration to
Government-held cities, where life was disorienting and families split apart. In
1960, only 20 percent of South Vietnam's population resided in urban areas; by
1971, that figure had jumped to 43 percent - a growth rate five times greater
than ''that of all less developed nations during the same decade.'' These
changes not only paralyzed the rural economy, they also transformed the culture
of South Vietnam.

Mr. Kolko notes that the Vietnam War encompassed ''the shame of corruption and
cowardice, the glory of heroism, the consolation of men and women secure in
their readiness to make sacrifices.'' But it doesn't take long to discover that
corruption and cowardice are for imperialists and their ''compradors,'' while
heroism and sacrifice are limited to the Communist side. According to Mr. Kolko,
South Vietnamese soldiers were impoverished mercenaries - or ''marginalized,
lumpen elements'' - who raped and looted by reflex, while American soldiers were
sullen drug users who sabotaged equipment, engaged in mutinies and blew up their
officers with hand grenades. There is a sad truth in these descriptions, but
they tell only part of the story. It is revealing, perhaps, that a large survey
conducted by the Veterans Administration in 1980 among American combat veterans
who had been in Vietnam revealed that a substantial majority of them were
disgusted by America's ''no-win'' policy, and quite willing to fight there
again.

In stark contrast were the ''revolutionary'' soldiers, North and South
Vietnamese, whose training was based on ''personal integrity,'' ''gentle
contacts'' between soldiers and cadres and ''democratic principles.'' These
soldiers not only fought well, they also wrote poetry, discussed political
theory and cooked ''delicious meals'' in their tunnels and bunkers. The
revolutionary soldier treated civilians with compassion and respect. ''Food,''
we learn, ''was never taken or bought if the peasant refused to give it, and
soldiers were often to work in exchange for it.'' MR. KOLKO'S analysis of terror
and coercion is equally one-sided. He does a fine job documenting American and
South Vietnamese atrocities against civilian populations. One cannot read these
sections without feeling a sense of shame and revulsion. But he undermines his
credibility by ignoring - or justifying - the atrocities committed by his
revolutionary heroes. The well-documented Communist massacres in Hue during the
Tet offensive are never mentioned. We read only that ''one thousand [North
Vietnamese] regulars captured the Citadel . . . and held it until . . . American
firepower reduced 80 percent of the city to rubble.'' Furthermore, Mr. Kolko's
assertion that ''the Communists' use of surgical violence'' was ''very popular''
with the masses and ''never indiscriminate'' is disputed by almost every expert
in the field.

This is not an easy book to read. The writing is reminiscent of the war itself -
bleak, redundant, interminable. The repetition is extreme - ideas, sentences and
quotations are endlessly repeated. There is little color because Mr. Kolko chose
to omit ''extraneous but fascinating details'' that might divert one's attention
from the larger issues. (These omissions include the vital history of Vietnam
before 1940 and the development of its culture.) Above all, the book is loaded
with eye-glazing rhetoric about imperialism, class protest and revolutionary
values. One can turn to almost any page and find a sentence like ''However
strict Party control, the very existence of the Party is an affirmation of the
role of will and choice in history, and its cohesion became the precondition of
eventual freedom from the constraints of a historical process which makes the
need for unity and morality essential in the first instance.''

Mr. Kolko ends his book with the hope that the lessons of Vietnam will permit
the people of the world to determine their own future. One can hardly disagree
with this, although, as usual, it is directed only at American imperialism.
''All that the United States has the ability to accomplish today,'' he writes,
''is to impose immeasurable suffering on people whose fates its arms and money
cannot control.'' It is probably futile to remind Mr. Kolko that Communist
Vietnam today has 200,000 Soviet-equipped troops fighting outside its borders -
or that it is widely regarded as one of the most repressive nations on earth.
After all, Mr. Kolko believes that there is no conflict between his political
beliefs ''and a commitment to as objective and as informed an assessment of
reality as possible.'' One can only imagine what this book would have been like
had he consciously attempted to choose sides.

WAR IN ITS CONTEXT

War is not simply a conflict between armies; more and more it is a struggle
between competing social systems, incorporating the political, economic, and
cultural institutions of all rivals. The longer the war, the more likely that it
will be determined outside the arena of arms and battles. The Vietnam War was no
exception to the rule that all wars in this century have increasingly become
ideological in both their origins and their consequences. . . . To comprehend
the mechanisms of war as a social process and ideological conflict is essential
to an understanding of the events in Vietnam over four decades. . . . Ideas
became critical in determining the outcome of the struggle, both as cause and as
effect. In essence, what could each adversary afford, and what did it believe?
And how compatible with the tasks before each army was its code of personal
conduct and behavior for those in its ranks or for whom it had responsibility?
While war has a known material dimension, involving costs and the ability of
sides to meet their needs, its inherently more nebulous human dimension is no
less vital. Ideology and consciousness subsumed many things during the long war,
ranging from the competing concepts of personal behavior and relationship toward
community and society to a vision of the importance of technology in the
resolution of the war and social crisis. It was both implicit and explicit,
articulate and inchoate. - From ''Anatomy of a War.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of President Johnson with Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara
(Courtesy The White House)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JIM AND CHONG FIND INNER PEACE

BYLINE: By Michael Gorra; Michael Gorra teaches English at Smith College.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 973 words


THE PROGRESS OF A FIRE By Robert Abel. 509 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster.
$18.95.

''YOU know the story,'' Joe Turner says halfway through Robert Abel's second
novel, ''The Progress of a Fire.'' ''Anything forty miles outside of Boston is
on its own, except for paying taxes.'' Sawmills and sugarhouses, pickup trucks
and pig farms: the western Massachusetts hill towns, where this novel is set,
seem so far away in spirit from the city that calls itself the Hub that Turner
isn't even sure the state fire marshal will bother to investigate the town of
Lake Ecstasy's latest bit of arson. This time a barn belonging to the painter
Chong Hu Lan has gone up. Everybody knows that ''The Club,'' a gang of swamp
Yankee hoodlums, did it - but nobody will sign a complaint in a town where The
Club outnumbers the police force.

''The Progress of a Fire'' tells of life in Lake Ecstasy through an account of
two newcomers to the region. One is Chong, born in China but long resident in
Manhattan, who has bought a farm, hoping the solitude will salve the sting of
his divorce. The other is Jim Williams, a former photographer for The Boston
Globe, a Vietnam veteran and an alcoholic, who can neither articulate nor
contain the burning rage he still feels, 15 years after leaving the Army. His
wife too has filed for divorce, and he's fled to stay with an old buddy.

One night Chong finds a runaway teen-ager, Ginny Cahill, hiding on his land.
She's hungry, so he takes her in, feeds her, gives her work to do in his garden.
But her mother lives with The Club's leader, Billy Parker, and Ginny is willing
to talk about both Parker's attempts to molest her and the full range of the
gang's other hobbies - arson, vandalism, heroin. And so The Club begins to harry
Chong, to burn his property, to threaten him, in order to get Ginny away from
him. But Chong resists, and is joined in that resistance by Jim, who finds in
fighting The Club a way to release his rage at last.

Mr. Abel has in this material the basis for an engaging thriller on the Elmore
Leonard model - decent but troubled men find salvation by standing up for the
innocent against the forces of unmitigated evil - and one that ought to be all
the more engaging because he has adapted the formula to suit rural material. But
''The Progress of a Fire'' never lives up to the promise of its basic situation,
never becomes quite as exciting as it ought to be. It seems too long by half -
so long and so easily trimmed, in fact, that I wondered what had happened to the
editorial process. Mr. Abel too often, for example, begins a scene with a snatch
of dramatically functionless and pedestrian dialogue (''Take it easy. . . .
That's the only door I got, you know''), as if realism demanded he record
everything his characters might conceivably say to one another. And surely the
hundred-odd pages in which he describes the slow decline of Jim's career and
marriage before his arrival in Lake Ecstasy would have been more effective as a
single chapter.

But perhaps my dissatisfaction with that sequence grows not from its length so
much as from Mr. Abel's fuzzy presentation of his characters' motivations. His
characters have absorbed the attitudes of post-1960's psychobabble, and tend to
say things like ''Viet Nam is a reality warp. You step into that place, and you
really are somewhere else. . . . What you've got to do is leave it there.'' Mr.
Abel has, I think, tried with the character of Jim to write a serious novel
about the emotional legacy of Vietnam. But his own perspective seems limited by
his characters' understanding; so marked by the same inarticulate macho
sensitivity that when he writes of Jim, ''The ocean satisfied him in a way that
he did not understand,'' one suspects Mr. Abel doesn't either.

It's no surprise, then, that when The Club's last fire is finally put out, both
Jim and Chong find something like inner peace - and seem headed for equally
predictable reunions with their wives. What Mr. Abel does do well is describe
action. I enjoyed his writing in the novel's climactic scene, in which Jim flees
from Parker across Lake Ecstasy's maple-covered hillsides, ''stumbles . . . and
sees the bark of a tree . . . open in a white wedge, like an eye opening, then
hears the report of the rifle.'' Or his early description of Turner and Chong's
scrabbling after a loose pig, which ''squeals and flops as if it has been shot
through the hip.'' But such scenes, such sentences come too infrequently in
''The Progress of a Fire'' to give this long, diffuse novel the furious pace of
the flames its title evokes. A BUS BLOOMING ORANGE The man re-enters the bus,
hunched over, pouring gasoline on the floor, and Chong's gorge rises now in
terror, for he sees two things at once, as in a nightmare, and stands shrieking
uncontrollably as Jim comes running across the dam in strange huge boots,
splashing the shallow water into silver crowns, and Parker wrenches closed the
bus doors, holds some sparkling thing in hand that he now lobs through the
broken window into the horrified hoarse ''no!'' of the man inside. Parker dives
for the truck, not seeing Jim but eyeing Chong now with startled sneer as the
bus blooms orange inside and the man shrieks, dances wildly in his clothes of
flame, and is consumed then in unholy deafening percussion that spews fire and
glass, metal and gore. Parker is laughing, pointing at Chong from the other side
now of a wall of flame, and Chong goes down to his knees, dizzy, a rock in his
throat as Parker pulls a weapon from the cab and raises it toward Chong - and
crashes down under Jim, gun firing skyward. And Chong thrashes into a tangle of
shrubbery, trying to raise himself from the nightmare, to wake himself, to see
through the thick hot blanket of smoke that covers him. - From ''The Progress of
a Fire.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Robert Abel

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SURF AND SAND IN CHINA

BYLINE: By John F. Burns; JOHN F. BURNS is chief of the Peking bureau of The New
York Times.

SECTION: Section 10; Page 21, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2409 words


Not since the 1930's have foreigners been able to think of China as a place for
a beach holiday, and even then there were more comfortable and less risky places
to go. Yet on Hainan Island, at the southernmost point of the old Chinese
empire, there is something for seekers of sand and sea to ponder.

Sanya is a tumbledown town that looks out across the South China Sea on a line
about 250 miles south of Hong Kong. It lacks the charm of Bali and the luxury of
Thailand's Phuket, and nobody is about to give the island's tourist officials a
gold medal for organization. But if you've already seen the major cities and
feel like venturing elsewhere, a few days on Hainan can be rewarding.

Among Chinese, few of whom can contemplate a vacation beyond their own shores,
the strongest recommendation for the island is the list of eminent visitors who
have dallied there over the years. Chu Teh, commander of the Red Army in its
victorious battles against Chiang Kaishek, used to come to Sanya most every
winter, and Deng Xiaoping, the country's current leader, has been there more
than once. But the most talked about patron was Madame Mao Zedong, or Jiang Qing
as she is known to the Chinese.

For nearly six years Madame Mao has been imprisoned near the Ming Tombs, 25
miles north of Peking, serving a life sentence imposed by a tribunal convened by
Mr. Deng. But in the days when her writ was law across much of the land, when
her name struck fear among tens of millions of her fellow Chinese, she liked to
slip away from the capital by special plane to fly 1,900 miles south to Haikou,
the administrative capital on the island's northern coast, and thence by
chauffeured limousine across the mountains to Sanya.

We ran across her trail almost as soon as we arrived in Haikou on a 50-minute
flight from Canton, a daily service that offers a late-afternoon connection. At
the Haikou Guesthouse, in a palm-shaded compound near the center of town, we
were offered a range of rooms running all the way up to a suite at $64 a night,
an unheard-of tariff for a hotel catering as much to Chinese as to foreigners.
Intrigued, we chose the suite and were ushered into an ornate boudoir of a kind
that my wife thought might have been lifted from the more pretentious sections
of Beverly Hills.

Here, we were told, was where Madame Mao slept - in a four-poster with silken
canopy trimmed with pink tassels, with piped music and dimmer lights at finger's
reach and an ersatz Louis XIV writing table. Off the bedroom was the most exotic
bathroom I have seen in China, with gilded taps and a sunken bath. Never mind
that the mosquitoes had found their way in through an open window, or that the
soap and towels were of a type one associates with Army barracks. We went to bed
early, feeling like royalty, and had to be badgered into leaving the next day
for Sanya.

Before heading out of town we took our bearings in the city, and caught
something of the flavor. Along People's Street, center of life in the town for
centuries, is architecture much like Canton's - two- and three-story buildings
open to the street at ground level, with vine-encrusted verandas and balconies
above. Sinewy old men pulling heavy-laden carts with ropes slung from their
shoulders provided a measure of the island's poverty.

The most famous family to hail from Hainan in recent times was that of Charlie
Soong, the freebooting millionaire whose footprints can be found across much of
the country's 20th-century history. A daughter, Qing-Ling, married the founder
of the republic, Sun Yat-sen, and became acting president under the Communists,
and another daughter, Mei-Ling, married Chiang Kaishek. There was also a son, T.
V. Soong, who was a wily prime minister who amassed a fortune under Chiang.

In Haikou harbor, riding at anchor in the forenoon of almost any day, a visitor
can see examples of the traditional broad-waisted, high-fantailed Hainan junk
that was the foundation of the Soong family fortunes in the days when Charlie's
forebears carried Chinese wares westward to Thailand, the Malay states and Java
or bridged slack times by engaging in occasional piracy.

These days, when the great canvas sails have been patched and the freeboard
planking safely caulked, the junks stay closer to home, running across the
straits to the mainland harbor at Zhanjiang, center of the burgeoning oil
exploration in the South China Sea, or running inshore to collect harvests of
coconut, papaya or coffee from the island's smaller ports. Doubtless, too, in an
ocean still only sporadically patroled by the Chinese coast guard, the junks
maintain at least something of their old tradition of smuggling. Though
backward, the island has developed the same hunger as the rest of China for
Japanese television sets and motorcycles, heavily dutiable when legally
imported.

As much as for its pirates, Hainan is associated in the Chinese mind with its
exiles. The island dates its inclusion in the empire to the beginning of the Han
dynasty, a century before Christ, and by the time of the Tang dynasty, in the
seventh century, it had become a Chinese Siberia, a place of banishment for
poets, officials and others who displeased the emperor. The most famous exile
was Hai Rui, a Ming dynasty mandarin who hailed, like Charlie Soong, from
Qiongshan county, east of Haikou.

According to legend, Hai Rui was loved by the people for his efforts to curb
poverty and injustice under the reign of the Jia Jing emperor, who had him
arrested and sentenced to death. After the emperor's death in 1567, the official
was rehabilitated, purged once more and this time exiled to Hainan. For
centuries his tomb on the outskirts of Haikou was a place of pilgrimage, but in
1966 his memory became embroiled in court intrigues once more, this time as a
victim of an emperor called Mao.

As often with Mao, the sequence was obscure, but the essence was that a play
written about the mandarin, ''Hai Rui Dismissed From Office,'' was identified by
some of Mao's backers as an allegorical attack on Mao for his purge in 1959 of
the defense minister, Peng Dehuai. The attack on the play was the signal for the
start of the Cultural Revolution, and Red Guards in Haikou vandalized the tomb.

Under Mr. Deng, with his own experience of banishment, Hai Rui's reputation and
tomb have been restored. It sits in a scrubland to the west of town, hard by a
stretch of brackish water and a dusty road busy with peasants wheel-barrowing
pigs to market. In the museum, a eulogy to the mandarin reads like what one
imagines Mr. Deng's followers would like to see bestowed on him: ''He was a good
and just official. He redressed many wrong and unjust cases and was a savior of
the oppressed and downtrodden. He always kept his word.''

There is nothing of the magnificence associated with the greatest of the
mainland tombs about this walled enclosure, but restorers have done a creditable
job of replacing what the Red Guards destroyed. Up a central pathway visitors
reach a marble tortoise surmounted by a stele, or marble plaque, blackened by
fire and inscribed with a tribute to the mandarin's virtues. Beyond the stele
lies the tomb, a domed structure in gray granite, which was smashed by Mao's
young vandals. The sarcophagus disappeared at the time of the assault, but the
dome has the weathered look of the original.

Although second only to Taiwan in size among China's offshore islands, Hainan
has sections that are still closed to foreigners, including most of the west
coast, which faces Vietnam. The reason is that there is a concentration of naval
and other military installations, dating back to the Japanese occupation in
World War II. More recently, the bases were used to monitor United States forces
during the Vietnam War and to mount the amphibious assault in 1974 by which
China seized the Paracel Islands in the South China Sea from South Vietnam.

Most visitors drive from Haikou to Sanya on a cross-island road that winds into
the hills between rubber estates, the island's biggest source of revenue. On
either side of a pass that looks eastward to the 6,100-foot peak of Five Finger
Mountain, travelers catch glimpses of the life of the Li and Miao people, who
predominate in the uplands. Roadside stalls sell mangoes, passion fruit and
watermelons, and in the villages dancing can often be seen. Arrangements to
watch the dancers are best made through the local offices of the China
International Travel Service, notably in the mid-island town of Tong Za,
situated in an upland area with heavy concentrations of minority people.

The trip across the island normally takes five hours by car, a little longer by
bus, but ours became an odyssey when a typhoon that swept through the southern
half of the island washed away part of the road. Taking a western diversion that
added several hours to the trip in our rented car, we drove down unpaved roads
into some of the lushest and most primitive parts of the island, where buffalo
carts with solid wooden wheels do most of the transporting. In many villages the
only brick buildings were those of the former land-lords, some converted to
schools, others lying in ruins.

Running eastward again along the coast, we finally reached Sanya. The town
traces its origins back at least 1,000 years, but there is little evidence of
development under the Communists. As in Haikou, the main street, Liberation
Road, has a faded charm in its turn-of-the-century buildings, two- and
three-story structures that are open to the street at ground level, with
balconies on the upper floors and whitewashed facades streaked black by the
typhoons that sweep through the area each fall. The heart of town lies on a
sandbar set back from the sea.

In makeshift stalls that crowd for space along the lanes, peasant entrepreneurs
compete with one another to sell fish, fruit, wickerwork and souvenirs fashioned
from coral. Li women in black cotton outfits and conical hats sit on their
haunches puffing away at massive bamboo water pipes, while others sit chewing
plugs of betel nut, their teeth and lips stained red by its juice. Wandering
among the stalls, we spotted a man with a shoulder-length growth of matted hair,
naked save for a loincloth. Nobody but us paid him any mind. My wife bargained
for a Li costume that cost about $5, while my eye fell on a piece of butcher
block three inches thick and three feet across cut from one of the upland
hardwoods that were once the emperor's preserve. It took a motorized rickshaw to
lug it back to our car, but at $3 it was irresistible. Carried as hand luggage
aboard the aircraft back to Peking, it caused ceaseless mirth. ''Are you a
butcher?'' one sober-faced man in a Mao suit asked me. The principal delight of
Sanya for the visitor lies beyond the town, in the Luhuitou Guesthouse and
nearby Daidonghai Beach. At the insistence of another visitor, the late Prime
Minister Zhou Enlai, the guesthouse was built in the 1950's beneath a rocky
headland that defines the eastern limits of the town. Recently modernized, it
consists of a cluster of single-story villas set amid towering palms. For $27 a
night, we slept in an air-conditioned room as good as many that we have found in
the Mediterranean and the Caribbean.

The restaurants leave much to be desired so far as service and hygiene are
concerned. But the platters of food were an invitation to gluttony. For less
than $7 each for three daily meals, we could eat as much grilled crab and prawn
as our appetites allowed. The ginger-based sauce that came to the table with
lunch and supper made the shellfish as succulent as any we had ever tasted.

We made breakfast in our room with biscuits and a jar of instant coffee that we
always travel with in China. The Luhuitou's attempt at a Western-style breakfast
ran to watery fried eggs, rice porridge and execrable coffee.

The beach, five minutes' drive farther east, has a reputation as the best in
China. Nearly two miles long, on a gently curving bay, it has fine white sand
and, when no typhoon is blowing, a benign sea. Unlike their compatriots in the
north, who have begun flocking to the beaches on the Bohai Gulf and the East
China Sea, the people of Hainan have yet to be converted to daylong tanning and
sea bathing, so even on a weekend we found the beach nearly deserted. From time
to time, groups of soldiers or Young Pioneers would appear, splash about in
shallow water for 10 minutes, then disappear as quickly as they came.

We spent hours strolling along the foreshore, collecting delicately colored
shells and pieces of coral and watching fishermen mending their nets. Once in
the sea, it was tempting to loll there all day. Heavily saline, it is warm
throughout the year. The Chinese, a land-loving folk forever suspicious of the
sea, have posted notices above the beach in English recommending the virtues of
''a seawater bath'' but cautioning against excess. ''Please be well organized in
your swimming,'' the notice read. ''No company swimming strictly prohibited.''

Residents told us that the water stays warm enough to swim in throughout the
year, with a year-round average temperature of 70 degrees. The favorite period
for Chinese holidaymakers is December through March, a time when it is bitterly
cold across much of the mainland. Our visit, in October, was fortuitously
sandwiched between two typhoons. Our guides said that the typhoons arrive in
September and blow away by the end of the year, a reason to visit in the early
months of the year.

One morning, we drove back through Sanya to the west, to a spot called the Edge
of the Sea and the Rim of the Sky. Celebrated among the Chinese for towering
rock formations that run down to the beach, we found it, as we often have with
so-called beauty spots in China, tacky in the extreme. But $5 paid to a
fisherman bought us a ride out to sea to watch the fleet of flat-bottomed boats
at work and to stroll along the shore of Xidao, a largely uninhabited island
about two miles offshore.

Here, once more, we found ourselves following in the footsteps of Madame Mao,
who liked to make day trips to the island to indulge her passion for
photography. In the tropical heat, with no sound but the chattering of birds in
the thickets behind the beach, we sat for a while and looked out to sea. At the
edge of China, all but ignored by generations of rulers, we found tranquillity,
one of the rarest pleasures this land can give.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of fishermen and their families aboard junks in the harbor at
Sanya (John F. Burns); Photo of a trishaw taxi in Sanya; Photo of a merchant in
Sanya marketplace; Map of China; Map of Hainan

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MARTIN LUTHER KING HELD A CONVICTION

BYLINE: By JOHN J. ANSBRO; Dr. John J. Ansbro of Yonkers is a professor of
philosophy at Manhattan College and the author of ''Martin Luther King Jr.: The
Making of a Mind'' (Orbis Books, Maryknoll, N.Y.).

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 26, Column 5; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words


ONE of the inspirational forces in the life of Martin Luther King Jr. was his
enduring conviction that humanity would progress toward the Beloved Community.
This conviction was extraordinary when one considers some of the many challenges
to his natural optimism; namely, the physical violence he and his nonviolent
demonstrators suffered, the numerous death threats against him and his family,
the apathy among so many whites and blacks who should have been at the forefront
of the struggle, the scope and depth of racial discrimination, and the
criticisms he received from some other civil-rights leaders, especially for his
opposition to the Vietnam War.

What was his understanding of this ideal of the Beloved Community, which he
selected as the goal of the Nonviolent Movement? He maintained that members of
the Beloved Community would achieve ''the complete life'' by developing ''three
dimensions of length, breadth, and height.'' The length of life would be the
person's concern for his or her own welfare. Each person in such a community
would insure that this concern develop as a rational and healthy self-interest.

Members of this community would also develop a second dimension of breadth by
which they would involve themselves in the universal concerns of humanity. The
New Testament contains the command ''Love your neighbor as you love yourself.''
Members of this community would habitually manifest a creative altruism in the
form of agape; i.e., a redemptive love for all people that would involve a
willingness to sacrifice for the common good. Guided by their realization of the
solidarity of the human family, the members would understand that what directly
affects one person affects all people indirectly.

In their desire for the complete life, members of such a community would develop
a third dimension of height by cultivating a faith and love that reaches to God,
Who is the source of all reality. There is the greater commandment, ''Love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul, and with thy mind.'' Dr.
King often contended that without God in one's life even illustrious
achievements on the other two dimensions soon prove to be empty and
disillusioning.

Emphasizing the second and third dimensions of the complete life, Dr. King
stated that the members of this community would regard each person as a creature
formed in the image of God and therefore, as an heir to a legacy of dignity and
worth with rights that are derived not from the state but from God. By their
laws, actions and attitudes, members would not reduce another person to the
level of a mere means but would always regard people as ends-in-themselves with
the right of rational self-determination. They would judge individuals not on
the basis of the color of their skin but on the content of their character.
Moved by their commitment to brotherhood and not by the pressure of laws, they
would not only reject all forms of discrimination in education, employment,
housing and public accommodations, but also would exemplify full integration;
that is, ''genuine intergroup and interpersonal living.''

The industries, governments and churches in the Beloved Community would
consistently serve as models of this commitment to brotherhood. Industries would
value people, including consumers, even more than profits. They would so improve
job opportunities, working conditions, human relations and the sharing of
profits that workers would not be victimized by a debilitating feeling of
alienation from their work, managers, co-workers and themselves.

Governments within this community would focus not on increasing military might
but on developing moral power, welcome the participation of all their citizens
in the political process, and comprehend that their resources were intended to
be used compassionately to promote the good of each of their citizens and the
rest of humanity. These governments would work to preserve international
harmony. They would secure domestic justice by establishing equality under law
for all citizens and by generating the necessary educational, social, and
economic opportunities and assistance so that all people could preserve their
dignity and channel their creativity.

Churches in such a community would joyfully open their doors to all races and be
actively engaged in ecumenical movements. They would provide their share of the
leadership required for programs to enhance the spiritual and temporal
well-being of all. When a prophetic voice would be needed, these churches would
be willing to speak as the conscience of the state.

Given the principal elements of the Beloved Community, one may well ask whether
Dr. King believed that this ideal in its fullness, as he visualized it, could
ever become a historical reality. The evidence indicates that he could not
believe that this ideal would be completely realized. A persistent theme in his
sermons was the Biblical doctrine of the prevalence of sin. He rejected the
illusion of a superficial optimism concerning human nature, and he warned of the
dangers of a false idealism. He praised the existentialists for contributing to
our understanding of the implications of self-estrangement and to our perception
of the anxiety that permeates individual and social existence. Such conditions
of the human predicament, even when modified by religion, reduce one's freedom
and ability to contribute to the formation of the Beloved Community. He also
stressed that the laws of nature, with their elements of ''natural necessity,''
interfere with the higher life of the individual.

It is significant that although Dr. King was so sensitive to the limitations of
human nature, he still proclaimed the ideal of the Beloved Community. He
believed that this ideal, though unattainable in its perfect form, could
continue to serve as a goal for his Nonviolent Movement. There could be progress
toward this goal by means of religion, education, litigation, voter-registration
drives, nonviolent demonstrations, and other direct actions against racism,
economic exploitation and militarism. The variety of methods allows for a
multiplicity of creative approaches for individual involvement. Dr. King readily
identified with Gandhi's insight, ''Man will ever remain imperfect and it will
always be his part to try to be perfect.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MEMORIES OF DR. KING LINGER ON L.I.

BYLINE: By MATTHEW J. DOHERTY

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 1, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1497 words


MILLIONS of Americans will join tomorrow in the first national observance of the
birthday of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. But for a small number of people
on Long Island, the remembrance of Dr. King's life as what he called a ''drum
major'' for racial equality and nonviolence will always be linked to June 13,
1965, when he delivered a moving commencement address at Hofstra University.

The occasion was the school's 36th commencement. A photograph of Dr. King in the
school's administration building and a tape recording of his speech, found in
the school's archives, remain as evidence of his visit.

It was a clear, sun-drenched day in a place far removed from the racial strife
in the South and the rioting that was to come in many Northern cities. Dr. King
urged the predominantly white audience of 5,000 Hofstra graduates, faculty
members, parents and guests to help rid the world of the ''evils'' of racial
injustice, poverty and war.

''We've learned,'' Dr. King said, ''to fly the air like birds and swim the sea
like fish, but we have not learned the simple art of living together as
brothers.''

Speaking only days after James McDivitt and Edward White returned from their
1.6-million-mile, 62-orbit journey around the Earth aboard the Gemini 4
spacecraft, Dr. King warned of moral and spiritual decay in the midst of rapid
advances in science and technology.

''In spite of these spectacular strides in science and technology,'' he said,
''something basic is missing, that is sort of a poverty of spirit which stands
in glaring contrast to our scientific and technological abundance.''

Dr. King also lamented the ''terrible, ugly conflict in Vietnam'' on a day when
American troops were preparing to engage in direct combat against the Vietcong
for the first time.

Edward Chalfant, a professor of English at Hofstra who attended the
commencement, said: ''I can't say I've ever been moved by a speaker as much as
or more than I was by him that day. It certainly was clear to me that he was a
great man.'' He described Dr. King's remarks as ''terrifically powerful.''

''I think there were certainly people in the audience who, when hearing him,
would realize freshly and for the first time that they were dealing with someone
phenomenal,'' Dr. Chalfant said.

He recalled that the audience was receptive to Dr. King's speech but strangely
subdued: ''He did not bring people cheering to their feet, you understand, but
what he had to say was powerful in part because it had tragic tendencies. And
Americans don't necessarily like to listen to tragic speeches.''

John Van Buren, an associate professor of education at Hofstra and one of a
small number of black faculty and staff members at Dr. King's oration, said:
''Basically it was a kind of celebration. There were several groups trying to
prod the university on civil rights.''

Mr. Van Buren started as an instructor at the school in 1963. He arrived on
campus after joining the march on Washington that culminated in Dr. King's ''I
have a dream'' speech.

Dr. King's appearance at Hofstra, he said, was a ''very positive experience - it
meant a lot to black people who were there at the time.'' He recalled being
''very, very proud'' that the university had invited Dr. King.

That day, Dr. King received an honorary doctor of divinity degree from the
university for his ''courageous leadership and unflagging devotion to the
principles of love and reconciliation.''

But angry pickets, including one group called the Long Island Committee to
Preserve Our American Freedom, lined the perimeter of the area used for the
commencement ceremony to protest and try to disrupt Dr. King's appearance.

James Drayton of Bethpage was a member of the class of 1965. His memories of
that day are still stirred by the power of Dr. King's message and the hostile
pickets. ''I was kind of awed by the whole thing,'' Mr. Drayton said. ''He was a
very dynamic man.''

He recalled that the demonstrators marred a day normally reserved for optimism
about the human condition. ''I can recall as we were parading into our seats,
all of these people and pickets saying don't go to your graduation,'' Mr.
Drayton said.

He recalled that some of his fellow students were puzzled by the selection of a
black Baptist minister from Atlanta, who had been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize
the year before, as the commencement speaker. But looking back, he said, he now
believes that many people on Long Island were unaware of the magnitude of the
man and his message. ''I don't think I realized personally the impact that Dr.
King had,'' he said. ''I don't think a lot of us did.''

Meyer Barash, a professor emeritus of sociology at Hofstra, remembers being
''startled and surprised'' by the fact that Dr. King was shorter than Hofstra's
president, Clifford Lord, as the two men passed him during the processional. ''I
finally figured out why it surprised me,'' Mr. Barash said. ''Because you expect
a person of that stature to be 10 feet tall.''

John Rawlinson, a professor of history at Hofstra and director of the
university's archives, recalled that ''it was an inspirational speech.''

''We have inherited a big house,'' Dr. King said, ''a great world house, in
which we have to live together, black and white, Easterners and Westerners,
gentiles and Jews, Protestants and Catholics.''

Charles Ludlam, a member of the class of 1965, said Dr. King's speech was
''overwhelmingly'' moving. ''I couldn't tell what his future place in history
would be, but it was a very emotional experience for me.''

Mr. Ludlam, now director of the Ridiculous Theatrical Company in Manhattan, said
Dr. King's style was hypnotic, ''and yet there was an intellectual thesis
developed in his speech.''

''Before the Pilgrim fathers landed at Pilgrim Rock,'' Dr. King said, ''we were
here. Before Thomas Jefferson etched across the pages of history the majestic
words of the Declaration of Independence, we were here. Before the beautiful
words of 'The Star Spangled Banner' were written, we were here.''

The speech at Hofstra was a clarion cry for mankind to live together in racial
harmony. Some might say that it was little different than the hundreds of others
Dr. King made before being assassinated on April 4, 1968, in Memphis.

But for those who heard him speak that day, few other speeches will be
remembered as well.

''And so,'' Dr. King said, ''I close by quoting the words of an old Negro slave
preacher, who didn't quite have his grammar right, but uttered words of great
symbolic profundity. They are worded in the form of a prayer:

'' 'Lord, we ain't what we ought to be, we ain't what we want to be, we ain't
what we gonna be, but thank God, we ain't what we was.' ''

EVENTS HONOR KING

WITH the birthday of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. now a national holiday,
local activities marking the event take on an increased luster this year.

Nassau County is coordinating a lavish ''Birthday Celebration'' tomorrow at the
C. W. Post Center's Tilles Center in Brookville. Besides speeches by public
officials and educators, there will be entertainment provided by such performers
as the pop singers Richie Havens and Lana Cantrell, and the Metropolitan Opera
mezzo-soprano Barbara Conrad backed by the Long Island Singers Society and
Repartorio Espanol.

There will also be a multimedia King biography narrated by Bernadette Castro,
and a keynote address by Dr. Samuel Proctor, minister of the Abyssinian Baptist
Church in Manhattan and a King scholar. In addition, scholarships will be
awarded to local arts students. The program begins at 3 P.M. and tickets are
$10. For reservations call 535-4978.

Other institutions are marking the occasion with films and talks. To supplement
its exhibition on the civil rights leader, the African-American Museum, at 110
North Franklin Street in Hempstead, will screen the film ''From Montgomery to
Memphis'' periodically from 1 to 4:45 P.M. today and from 9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M.
tomorrow. It has also scheduled ''The Days of Martin Luther King'' from noon to
3 P.M. tomorrow, featuring a slide presentation by Jim Peppler, a
photo-journalist, performances by folklorists and students, and a talk by Les
Payne, a Newsday columnist and editor. There is no admission charge.

''Ambassadors of Love and Good Will,'' a puppet show tomorrow saluting Dr. King,
is also free. Aimed at children 3 to 8 years old, the performance by the Winnie
Wilson Puppets is at 2 P.M. at the Copiague Memorial Public Library, 314 Great
Neck Road. The library is also showing ''Doctor Martin Luther King Jr. . . . and
Amazing Grace,'' a film biography, at 8 P.M. tomorrow.

Today, the Suffolk County Black History Association is sponsoring a program that
will include Gil Noble, a reporter for WABC-TV; Dr. John H. Clark, Hunter
College historian; a 26-minute film and a photo exhibit on Dr. King. The
program, which is free, is from 3 to 6 P.M. at East Islip High School, on Redman
Street in Islip Terrace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. at Hofstra in 1965; Photo
of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. with Clifford Lord, President of Hofstra
University

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS TEAM SAYS LAOS REJECTS U.S. SEARCH FOR THE MISSING

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 563 words

DATELINE: VIENTIANE, Laos, Jan. 19


A United States Congressional delegation said today that Laotian officials had
rejected an appeal to allow Americans to enter Laos to help investigate possible
sightings of American soldiers.

The four-member delegation reported that although the parting toasts were
cordial, the talks had produced little new information on the fate of 556
Americans still listed as missing in action in Laos during the Vietnam War.

The four lawmakers, representing the Veterans Affairs Committees of the Senate
and House of Representatives, met for two hours with Soubanh Sritthirath, the
Deputy Foreign Minister, and then for less than an hour with Foreign Minister
Phoun Sipaseut.

The delegation was concluding a trip to the Philippines, Vietnam, Thailand and
Laos. It was led by Senator Frank H. Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, who is
chairman of the Senate committee, and included Senator Dennis DeConcini,
Democrat of Arizona; Representative Bob McEwen, Republican of Ohio, and
Representative Michael Bilirakis, Republican of Florida. #95 Sightings Still
Stand Since the war ended in 1975, 806 ''live sightings'' of Americans in
Indochina have been reported, mostly by refugees, according to United States
Government records. Investigations have ruled out the possibility of living
Americans in all but 95 reports, including 13 in Laos, United States officials
say.

A total of 2,441 Americans are still listed as missing in action in the
Indochina conflict - 556 of them in Laos, 88 in Cambodia and 1,797 in Vietnam.

Senator Murkowski said he and his colleagues had pressed the Laotians to allow
independent verification of their position that no missing Americans are alive
in Laos.

Senator DeConcini said he had asked that the United States be allowed to send
observers with Laotian teams to the area of the sightings in Laos. Foreign
Minister Phoun Sipaseut refused.

Mr. McEwen proposed that an international team from the Red Cross or the United
Nations accompany Laotian searchers, but he said the Foreign Minister had
bristled at the idea.

Laos Reports Wide Census

Senator Murkowski said he had suggested to the Foreign Minister that some
Americans might be living in Laos but ''not in your control.''

He quoted Mr. Phoun Sipaseut as saying that his Government had conducted an
extensive national census last year that found no Americans, and that notices
had been distributed throughout Laos asking people for information on Americans.

''The minister told us three times, 'There are absolutely none,' '' Senator
Murkowski said.

On Saturday, Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam pledged that any of the
lawmakers could personally investigate any reported live sighting in Vietnam,
but he said Vietnam was not holding any Americans.

Senator DeConcini said he planned to follow up on the offer. Bringing Two
Children to U.S. The Congressional delegation returned today to Bangkok,
Thailand, and plans to head back to Washington on Tuesday by way of Anchorage.

Two Vietnamese children will be aboard their Air Force C-135 jetliner. Acting on
Senator Murkowski's appeal, Vietnam released Nguyen Van Chinh, a 10-year-old
boy, and Tran Thanh Quynh, a 9-year-old girl, so they could be reunited with
their mother, whom they have not seen in seven years.

Their mother, Xuan Thi Nguyen, 35, is now married to an American aircraft
mechanic in Fairbanks, Alaska.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

...BUT MONTAGNARDS STILL WAIT IN A THAI CAMP

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 701 words

DATELINE: TA PHRAYA, Thailand, Jan. 15


Y-Tlur Eban remembers them all. ''Captain Daniel, Major Findlay, Captain Wood,
Captain Penney, Lieutenant Parker,'' he muses, looking into the distance as he
searches his mind for more names. More than 20 years ago, they were his Green
Beret officers and he was one of ''our Yards.''

The Montagnards, the mountain people of Vietnam's Central Highlands, had fought
the French and the Vietnamese before casting their lot in the early 1960's with
the Americans and against Communism in Indochina. When the Americans left, they
went on fighting. But it was a hopeless cause.

''The war is over,'' said Mr. Y-Tlur Eban, who is also known as Thoraban, a name
he says Americans found easier to pronounce. ''We would like a peaceful life.''
Mr. Y-Tlur Eban is one of 191 Montagnards from Vietnam who recently arrived on
the Thai-Cambodian border. Some of them had been wandering for years inside
Cambodia, living off the jungle and trying without success to gain Khmer Rouge
support for a guerrilla war inside Vietnam. #191 at Refugee Camp Now exhausted
and without hope of continuing their struggle, they are asking the United States
to extend a hand to old comrades and give them homes.

These 191 - who are housed in the Site 2 displaced persons camp, where more than
130,000 Cambodians and nearly 5,000 ethnic Vietnamese are also living - are the
first group of Montagnards to ask for resettlement in the United States,
according to refugee officials. Next week, a team of Americans will begin
interviewing them to determine who is eligibile for American residence.

The Montagnards at the camp, about 10 miles northeast of this Thai town, do not
want to suffer the humiliation of personal rejection, however. They are asking
that all of them, or none, go to new homes.

Montagnards, who call themselves Dega people, are thought to be of Mon-Khmer or
Malayan-Polynesian descent and are divided into 30 or 40 ethnic subgroups. They
settled in the Vietnamese highlands many centuries ago and lived in isolation
from the Vietnamese until this century. They were recruited by the United States
Special Forces in the early 1960's, before Washington committed combat troops to
the Vietnam War.

Cast Lot With South Vietnam

With American military intervention, the Montagnards, who had always wanted
autonomy, were eventually brought into an accommodation with the South
Vietnamese. When South Vietnam lost the war, the Montagnards knew they would
have to fight Hanoi's troops, Y-Bhuat Eban, another Montagnard leader, said
today.

By 1979, he said, their cause was clearly lost, and Montagnard leaders, some of
whom had escaped from Vietnamese prisons, began to cast around for help from
abroad. That led many of them into Cambodia, which Vietnam had invaded late in
1978.

The Montagnards are mostly Christian and anti-Communist but nevertheless thought
they would find natural allies in the Khmer Rouge, the Cambodian Communists whom
the Vietnamese had ousted from power.

''But instead the Khmer Rouge held many of us almost as prisoners,'' Mr. Y-Bhuat
Eban said. ''They planted mines all around our camp so we could not move. They
hated us because we were not Communists.''

The Montagnards said they were able to escape Cambodia only last year, when
Vietnamese troops overran Khmer Rouge guerrilla camps near the Thai border. Many
fled into Thailand's northeast.

The Thai authorities moved them to the Site 2 camp late last year and has now
given United States officials permission to interview them. Refugee officials
will also interview the nearly 5,000 Vietnamese at the camp.

Refugee officials believe that many of the Montagnards at Site 2, plus about 20
others in detention elsewhere in Thailand, may not automatically qualify for
American refugee status in their own right because they are too young to have
fought with Americans.

The Montagnards estimate that about 30 of their number at the camp have the
strongest cases. Mr. Y-Tlur Eban, for example, served as an interpreter for the
Special Forces, mostly in the Pleiku area, from 1962 to 1967.

''It has been a long time,'' Mr. Y-Tlur Eban said. ''We have no news of whether
the Americans would welcome us. But we wish, and we hope.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Y-Buat Eban, Y-Tlur Eban and Cil Be (NYT/Barbara Crossette)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. GIVES 100,000 VIETNAMESE A SAFE EXIT...

BYLINE: By THOMAS W. NETTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 867 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Jan. 19


Vo Thi Hau was reunited with her husband in Amsterdam recently, shortly after
becoming the 100,000th person to safely and legally leave Vietnam under one of
the most successful programs ever run by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.

Her uneventful passage from the village of Nghia Binh to the West, and a new
life with her husband, Hoang Ngoc Minh, also symbolized how the Commisioner's
Orderly Departures Program has dramatically changed the way in which Vietnamese
refugees may leave their country. During the last decade nearly one million
people are believed to have fled Vietnam.

Mr. Hoang, who works at a Dutch supermarket chain store, left Vietnam illegally
in 1981 as one of the so-called boat people. He is among the 700,000 people the
United Nations estimates have left Vietnam illegally since the end of the war in
1975, often aboard rickety, unseaworthy craft and exposed to the elements and
pirate attacks that have claimed untold thousands of lives.

Now, with legal departures at 25,000 a year, higher than the estimated boat
people departures for the second straight year, United Nations officials call
Mrs. Vo's arrival a quiet milestone in a six-year effort to safeguard emigrants
who once took enourmous risks in fleeing.

Safer Than Boat Refugees

''This is the 100,000th person who did not have to risk life and limb by going
out on a frail boat, ready to be attacked by pirates or drowned in rough seas,''
said Leon Davico, a United Nations refugee commission spokesman. ''It is proof
that things can be done in an orderly manner and it is our hope that it will
continue to be done so.''

Mr. Davico said the Geneva-based refugee agency had made a lot of progress with
its program since it began in 1979. That year, the Vietnamese authorities
permitted 2,000 people to leave, while more than 200,000 boat people left
illegally.

Since then, 42,048 people who left through the Orderly Departures Program have
settled in the United States; 20,312 in Canada, 11,884 in France, 7,027 in West
Germany, 5,984 in Australia, 895 in the Netherlands and many in other countries.
In addition to boat people and Government-approved departures, more than 100,000
people have fled overland from Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam to Thailand.

Mr. Davico underscored the benefit of the program by noting that Mrs. Vo left
legally shortly after pirates attacked a boat carrying 80 illegal refugees in
the South China Sea on Dec. 16. Fifty of theVietnamese aboard were killed.

'Grave Dangers' at Sea

''It was the worst attack in 1985,'' said Michel Barton, an official of United
Nations refugee agency. ''And it shows that despite efforts of many years to
combat piracy and that despite some easing of the situation, Vietnamese asylum
seekers fleeing on boat still face very grave dangers at the hands of pirates.''

Mrs. Vo left Nghia Binh in southern Vietnam with her daughter, Hoang Thi Anh
Hung, 8, and son, Hoang Ngoc Man, 6, early this month, United Nations officials
said, and became something of a celebrity when she arrived at Schiphol Airport
in Amsterdam. In addition to her husband, whom she had not seen in four years,
she was greeted by Dutch Government officials and journalists.

''The husband went on the plane for a moment, and when he and his wife came out
he was quiet, but kept touching his children,'' said the United Nation's agency
Dutch representative, Robert Van Leeuwen. ''All Mrs. Vo said was that she had
been waiting for this day every day since her husband left Vietnam.

''This shows what can be done to protect lives and keep families together,'' Mr.
Van Leeuwen said. He added that the orderly departures program now involved only
cases of family reunification.

Protection for Refugees

The United Nations refugee commission, through the Vietnamese program, has
sought to protect the refugees from physical and political dangers by arranging
with the Government for flights to Bangkok and then transfer to resettlement
countries by Western nations taking part in the program.

But limiting the program to people with relatives outside the country has
created problems. Since those who do not qualify cannot get visas and residency
permits, that leaves many Vietnamese with little choice but the boats.

United Nations officials refuse to discuss possible political problems in the
program, but there is some concern that United States efforts to include people
termed political prisoners might create friction with the Vietnamese Government.

United Nations officials remain concerned that the program not become a
justification for mass emigration.

''This program doesn't solve the problem of people leaving their country of
origin and thus one shouldn't gloat about one of the great human problems of our
time,'' Mr. Barton said. He said 35,000 boat people were still awaiting transfer
from Southeast Asian refugee camps, where some of the children have grown up
knowing no other home.

''It is not for us to serve as judges why they leave, and no one should speak of
triumphs,'' he said. ''So far, this has just been an intelligent and pragmatic
method of coming to terms with some of the worst aspects of a human tragedy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of vietnamese family (Agence-France/Presse)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SAVING A DISSENTER FROM HIS LEGEND

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 940 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 19


A flock of pre-schoolers was brought to one of the many events held here last
week to honor the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. As they waited, a little
hungry and a little squirmy, they were asked by a visitor what they knew about
the civil rights leader who died 14 years before most of them were born.

The first answer came from Cordell, who is 4 years old. ''He died for us,'' the
child said.

The language flowing from official Washington was more ornate, but the spirit
was the same as the capital anticipated the first national holiday in honor of
Dr. King, to be observed Monday. This is a city that knows how to venerate
heroes, once certified as such by national acceptance. And Dr. King has clearly
achieved that, from pre-school to the White House.

Observances Are Everywhere

So in recent days, at agencies and embassies and the halls of Congress, the
preacher from Georgia has been remembered with receptions and programs, speeches
and song. President Reagan, who initially opposed a Federal holiday honoring Dr.
King, took pains to memorialize him. In the Capitol, a bust of the man was
installed as a brooding presence amidst the Founding Fathers, a tableau of
astonishing power.

To those who knew and worked with Dr. King, such official recognition comes as a
welcome vindication. Walter E. Fauntroy, the District of Columbia's Delegate to
Congress, who helped organize the 1963 March on Washington, said he watched the
bust unveiling last week and thought, ''I've seen another dream made a living
reality.''

But some long-time supporters of the civil rights movement also worry that in
the flurry of plaques and proclamations, in the transformation of leader into
legend, the figure of Dr. King will be neutralized into something he never was
in life - politically safe.

''It seems to focus almost entirely on Martin Luther King the dreamer, and not
on Martin King the antiwar activist, not on Martin King the challenger of the
economic order, not on Martin King the opponent of apartheid, not on the
complete Martin Luther King,'' said Julian Bond, a Georgia State Senator and
longtime civil rights activist.

One Still Politically Charged

Indeed, two Kings have emerged as Washington looks back. One is transcendent and
consigned to history, the King sketched in the speeches of officialdom. The
other is still politically charged, the persistent reformer and social critic
recalled by those who marched beside him.

There is the King of President Reagan, ''the prophetic voice'' that ''touched
the conscience of America,'' and there is the King of the Rev. Jesse Jackson,
the nonviolent warrior whose achievements were built on civil disobedience of an
epic scale and whose legacy demands continued activism.

At a ceremony last week for Federal employees, such divergent sketches came from
Samuel R. Pierce Jr., Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and the Rev.
Wyatt Tee Walker, a tactition who helped Dr. King plan the 1963 demonstrations
in Birmingham.

Mr. Pierce, the only black member of the Cabinet, was pressed by reporters
whether Dr. King would be a critic of the Reagan Administration. He said he did
not know. ''When you look at what Martin was doing, it was really another world,
another time,'' Mr. Pierce said.

'Romantic' Trend Assailed

Then he rose to address the audience, praising Dr. King's commitment to equality
and freedom, evoking his 1963 speech at the Lincoln Memorial.

When Mr. Walker rose to speak, he cautioned against becoming ''over-sentimental
and romantic.'' Then he began to preach, with rising passion, on the man's
opposition to the Vietnam War, on his willingness to tackle unpopular causes.
Mr. Walker told his audience that celebrations of the King holiday were empty
without activism against racism, poverty and war.

Those two visions were sharply drawn last Wednesday, when President Reagan went
to a Washington elementary school to eulogize the civil rights leader as ''a
great man who wrested justice from the heart of a great country.'' Meanwhile,
Mr. Jackson was leading a memorial protest march on the Justice Department. He
accused Mr. Reagan of hypocrisy, saying he honored the man but failed to put
into force his philosophy.

Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia later countered, ''It's a little unwise
of Jesse Jackson to try to become the referee of who can and cannot share in
that dream.'' Mr. Gingrich, a conservative Republican, added: ''No one can claim
Dr. King. He transcends all of us.'' Comparison to Lincoln Stephen B. Oates, a
University of Massachusetts historian and author of a biography of Dr. King,
compares what is happening to the civil rights leader to what happened to
Lincoln in the years after his assassination.

Mr. Oates said he felt some sadness that the real man was often obscured, but
found the phenomenon a healthy one for the country as finally integrated its
pantheon of national heroes.

Mayor Andrew Young of Atlanta, one of Dr. King's top lieutenants, was in
Washington last week for some of the ceremonies. He said he was also unperturbed
by the trend of popular history. ''I don't think you complain about that,'' he
said.

When Congress and the President established the national King holiday, Mr. Young
said: ''They voted for Martin's 'I Have a Dream' speech. They didn't vote for
his anti-Vietnam speech, or his challenge to Lyndon Johnson about ending
poverty.''

But even that part affirmation is reason for celebration, Mr. Young said. As for
the homage Mr. Reagan paid the the holiday, Mr. Young, a Democrat, said: ''It
thrills me. It never bothers me to see somebody come around.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of civil rights advocates; photo of Martin Luther King Jr.

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESSENTIAL, THEY SAY, BUT 'REPUGNANT'

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 19


Anyone who has ever attended a convention of real estate agents or funeral
directors would have detected a familiar undertone, the camaraderie of the
misunderstood, at Fort McNair here last week. As Gen. Paul F. Gorman told his
assembled colleagues, the business they were gathered to discuss was
''inherently repugnant to most Americans.''

The business of the conference, organized by the Defense Department, was the
conduct of little wars or, in the professional vernacular, ''low-intensity
conflict.''

Repugnant or not, the calling of the conference and the prominence of its
speakers, including Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and Secretary of
State George P. Shultz, was a sign of new interest in unconventional warfare. Of
late, figures like Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi and Abu Nidal have made military
responses to terrorism a matter of front-page debate and, as a result, the
notion of military forays into the third world has begun to regain some of the
popular appeal it lost during the grinding experience of Vietnam.

In fact, low-intensity conflict covers not just counterterrorism, but a wide
range of insurgencies and counterinsurgencies short of general war. El Salvador
and Nicaragua, Afghanistan and 40 other places are considered low-intensity
battlegrounds.

Accuracy Is Uncertain

The phrase is of uncertain, possibly British, coinage, and questionable
accuracy. As the Salvadoran Army's chief of staff, Gen. Adolfo O. Blandon, told
the conferees at one point last week, it is ''very high intensity warfare as far
as we are concerned.'' The Navy, more poetically, calls it ''violent peace.''

Even before the recent round of terrorism, a low-intensity warfare boom was
under way. The Reagan Administration has pumped money into special operations
groups such as the Delta Force and the Green Berets, and has embraced the causes
of anti-Communist ''freedom fighters'' in several countries. The Army is
building up new, light divisions for quick deployment to conflicts where tanks
and battleships would be out of place.

But it was not so much to strut their stuff that the usually secretive and
cliquish crowd of colonels and generals and intelligence operatives put on name
tags and mingled with the reporters they usually shun. It was as much an airing
of grievances.

Although they are the object of revived respect and financing, the
unconventional warriors still feel largely orphans in a system that is geared to
big wars, and they consider the United States, despite a costly military
buildup, ill-equipped for unconventional conflict.

Foremost among their complaints is that they often feel unwelcome in their own
military services.

'Armed Forces Abhor Elites'

''Our armed forces abhor elites,'' General Gorman, the former chief of American
forces in Latin America, said in a paper prepared for the conference. The money
and attention, he said, goes to preparing for the big wars that everyone hopes
will never happen, while the little wars that are already happening get short
shrift.

Inside the regular military, an Air Force colonel explained recently, special
operations forces are regarded as a bit wild, ''good killers, but bad officer
candidates.'' The Army's light divisions are the butt of jokes from both the
smaller commando squads who consider them too too bulky to move very fast and
from traditional artillerymen who consider the light divisions too vulnerable.

The public appears to find low-intensity wars distasteful.

Noel C. Koch, the senior Pentagon civilian in charge of special operation
forces, said the apparent public sentiment for a quick, neat military response
to terrorism was one thing, but ''I think we'd be kidding ourselves'' to believe
that that translates into support for a protracted war against insurgents.

Charles Wolf Jr., dean of the Rand Corporation Graduate Institute, said at the
conference that America's allies had not been much help either. The Soviet
Union, he said, held ''a significant advantage'' in low-intensity warfare
because of its client states.

He Suggests a New Force

He proposed that the United States set out to build its own third world mobile
fighting force, drawing soldiers from Egypt, Morocco, Taiwan, Turkey, Brazil and
Argentina to intervene on behalf of anti-Communist causes.

The State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency also came in for abuse.
The specialists in little wars complained that civilian intelligence agencies
hoarded and swapped their information for geopolitical leverage, rather than
circulating it to the military for immediate use. The complaint about the State
Departmentand foreign relations committees in Congress was that they took
military aid money and lavished it on Israel and Egypt, Greece and Turkey,
keeping one ally ''from cutting the throat of another,'' as General Gorman put
it, while neglecting Latin America and other hot spots.

Another encumbrance, the conferees said, is the military-industrial complex.

''To put it bluntly,'' said General Gorman, ''the U.S. can no longer be of much
material help to a third world country wrestling with insurgency because we do
not have the sort of inexpensive, simple, rugged military equipment they
require.'' The system churns out complex and expensive fighter planes, but balks
at producing the cheap machine guns, boot soles and field rations that could
transform many guerrilla wars, he said.

Private Army Training

Perhaps the most radical proposal offered to meet these shortcomings came from
William J. Taylor Jr., a former Army colonel now at Georgetown University's
Center for Strategic and International Studies. He suggested hiring private
contractors to take over the business of training, arming and supporting
friendly forces in the third world.

''I don't believe that you can fix the problems within the military
establishment,'' he said.

The military men present generally scoffed at the idea of sending contractors
into crossfires. Instead, they proposed nothing terribly unconventional: more
military control of intelligence and foreign aid, more money, more public
education, and more conferences.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

IN MEMORY OF DR. KING;
IF HE WERE ALIVE

BYLINE: By Roy Reed; Roy Reed covered civil rights for The New York Times in the
1960's and 1970's. He now teaches journalism at the University of Arkansas, in
Fayetteville.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1041 words

DATELINE: HOGEYE, Ark.


All Americans past a certain age can still hear his voice in the nautilus of
their minds.

''We must not be bitter . . .''

''We must not lose faith in our white brothers.''

''. . . that unmerited suffering does not go unredeemed.'' ''. . . to make the
dream a reality.'' It is easy to see the face and hear the voice, but what if
the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. were still alive? If he were somehow brought
back from the grave, what would he face as a black leader - as the black leader
- of the 1980's?

He would find much improved, thanks partly to his own work and sacrifice. In the
South, for example, white governors and Senators are making speeches and issuing
proclamations this week in observance of his birthday as if they had been
yearning to honor him all their lives.

The lowest of his old enemies, the hard men who sneered from the single-bulb
platforms and called him ''Martin Luther Coon,'' and the honky-tonk heroes who
rented billboards to libel him as a Communist, have moved back into the shadows
and have been abandoned by the politicians and preachers.

Even the heirs of Leander Perez, the segregationist baron of Plaquemines Parish,
La., now make deals with black voters. Birmingham, which locked Dr. King in jail
in 1963 and gave him one of the most convenient pulpits of his career, is now
thriving under a black mayor. George Wallace has become the darling of the
Alabama N.A.A.C.P.

Not all of the change has been easy or straightforward. Take the question of
officially recognizing his birthday. Southern legislators wrestled with that for
10 years, and achieved some imaginative contortions.

Pulaski County, Ark., voted to close the courthouse for Dr. King's birthday, but
to assuage the Dixie purists county employees were allowed to take off work on
Robert E. Lee's birthday, as well, or on their own.

Louisiana found the most spectacular solution. The Legislature voted to
celebrate Dr. King's birthday every other year. In off-years, state employees
could take the day off to honor any one of the following: George Washington,
Robert E. Lee, Huey P. Long or the Confederate war dead.

The Government rescued the South, once again, by declaring a single national
holiday to honor the most famous Southerner of the 20th century.

Not everything has changed for the better, or even for the more ludicrous. The
problem that used to be plain racism, as raw and vicious as apartheid, is now
one of disintegrating families and national economic shiftings that take the
jobs away from the same Northern cities that the old Southern Negroes worked so
hard to get to.

What could the world's best Baptist preacher do about the drug addiction that
runs like a serpent through the urban black community? Or an illegitimacy rate
of 50 percent among black teen-age mothers? Or those black housing projects
where only one in 10 families is led by both parents?

What could even ''de Lawd,'' as the young and envious black militants used to
call him, do about the continuing slippage of blacks in the struggle for
economic equality?

In 1966, toward the end of his career, Dr. King went to Chicago looking for a
Yankee ''Bull'' Connor. What he found was more like Bre'r Rabbit's tar baby.

Uncertain how to approach this new enemy, he began with a gesture that was a
little too tentative to fit his style. He rented an apartment at the corner of
16th and Hamlin Streets in a rundown community called North Lawndale. The idea
was not just to call attention to one of the nation's most desperate slums but
also to etch a symbol of the far more complicated race problem that lay beyond
the Mason-Dixon line.

The effort largely failed, although the symbolism flared for a moment when he
was assassinated in 1968. The same fires that tried to burn all of urban America
that week left North Lawndale with vacant lots and charred streets.

The building where Dr. King rented his apartment has long since been bulldozed.
The vacant lot is littered Roy Reed covered civil rights for The New York Times
in the 1960's and 1970's. He now teaches journalism at the University of
Arkansas, in Fayetteville. with broken liquor bottles. The Chicago Tribune,
investigating the new ''permanent underclass'' not long ago, reported that young
men now sit across the street from the vacant lot and spend the day drinking,
''unaware that Reverend King ever lived here.''

If he had lived, he might have had a hard time getting traction against an enemy
that hides in the shadows and leaves no evidence except broken glass in a vacant
lot. He was at his best against the racism that killed outright. When an Alabama
state trooper shot to death a pulpwood cutter named Jimmie Lee Jackson during a
civil rights demonstration in 1965, Dr. King preached the funeral. Zion's Chapel
Methodist Church at Marion, built to seat 250, was packed with 400 people. The
mourners cried ''Amen'' as the preacher enumerated the causes of the young man's
death.

''He was murdered by the indifference of every white minister of the Gospel who
has remained silent behind the safe security of his stained glass windows.

''He was murdered by the timidity of a Federal Government that is willing to
spend millions of dollars a day to defend freedom in Vietnam but cannot protect
the rights of its citizens at home.

''He was murdered by the brutality of every sheriff who practices lawlessness in
the name of the law.

''And he was murdered by the cowardice [his voice rose and trembled on that
word] of every Negro who passively accepts the evils of segregation and stands
on the sidelines in the struggle for justice.''

One of his aides announced after the sermon that Jimmie Lee Jackson's friends
from around the United States would meet at Selma in a few days and march to the
capitol at Montgomery, demanding that blacks be guaranteed the right to vote in
Alabama and across the South.

The march was led by Dr. King. Days after it ended, to a national chorus of
''Amen,'' Congress passed the Voting Rights Act of 1965 and President Lyndon B.
Johnson signed it.

That was ''de Lawd's'' last great victory. It was built on the flaws and
failures of an unsubtle enemy. Dr. King, for all his own subtlety, was never
blessed with such an enemy again.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 21, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GHOST TOWN THAT WAS RESTORED TO LIFE IS NOW IN UPROAR OVER RAID FOR DRUGS

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1008 words

DATELINE: JEROME, Ariz., Jan. 15


This old mining town on a mountain called Cleopatra Hill has had an aura of
remoteness since its beginnings 110 years ago.

But last fall the outside world intruded on Jerome, and its 460 residents are
still in an uproar.

Almost 100 state and Federal narcotics agents raided Jerome in October and
arrested the chief of police, two members of the City Council and a former mayor
along with 20 other people and accused them of dealing in drugs, principally
marijuana.

To law-enforcement officials, Jerome had become a ''hippie'' redoubt in the
wilderness highlands, where dropouts and outcasts from the counterculture of the
1960's had taken over the local government, established their own rules and
officially tolerated the production of marijuana in the nearby hills.

'Would Like to Secede'

''Jerome is out of the Gold Rush,'' said Sgt. Allan Schmidt of the Arizona
Department of Public Safety in Phoenix, 120 miles south of here, where the raid
was coordinated. ''It's a town that would like to secede and carry on its own
life style. The people there strongly believe in an individual's freedom, above
all else.''

A police informer who lived in the community tape-recorded many drug
transactions with residents and officials in the city, investigators say.

The citizens of Jerome tell a different story.

''Hippies,'' they say, provided the energy that brought a ghost town back to
life and now have been singled out for unfair persecution because many have
values that differ from those of the police.

''To bring 100 policemen into a small town at 5 o'clock in the morning, dragging
women and children out of bed, scaring them half to death, to get 9 or 10 pounds
of marijuana, is asinine,'' asserted one resident, Katie Lee, a professional
folk singer in her 60's who counts the ''flower children'' of the 1960'sas her
friends. #50 Pounds Reported Seized In fact, the police say, about 50 pounds of
marijuana was seized in the raid.

''You can go to any block in Phoenix,'' Mrs. Lee said, ''and I bet you'd find a
lot more pot than you'll find in all of Jerome; people in a certain age group
smoke grass.''

Carol Wittner moved here from New York more than a decade ago and, with her
husband, opened a store on Main Street that sells jewelry, baskets, pottery and
souvenirs, said:

''If there were a lot of drugs here, there'd be a lot more money here. You'd see
big cars, big houses. Look around you. This is a poor town.''

''A lot of the people here chose an alternative life style,'' she went on. ''You
don't have people struggling to get to the top of the corporate ladder, but they
work hard just the same; you can't be laid back and lazy and get by here. You
have to work very hard at what you do to make a living.''

Home of 'Flower Children'

For those who wonder whatever happened to the ''flower children,'' part of the
answer can be found in Arizona.

With the end of the Vietnam War, a principal catalyst for much of the social
ferment of the 1960's, a diaspora occurred among those who had turned their
backs on society's norms and settled in the Haight-Ashbury District of San
Francisco, the East Village of New York City and other urban communities.

Many remained in California, settling in the Big Sur or amid the redwood groves
that blanket the northern coast of the state. A few emigrated to Oregon, New
Mexico and Colorado.

Hundreds settled in rural Arizona, where they have helped rebuild old frontier
towns such as Flagstaff, Bisbee and Jerome. Many who once spurned the values of
the free enterprise society now embrace them, but on their own terms, as
shopkeepers, artisans and entrepeneurs.

Jerome, now a boom town, had turned to a ghost town when the ''hippies''
discovered it in the 1960's.

Named for a New York investor, Eugene Jerome, a cousin of Jennie Jerome, the
American who was Winston Churchill's mother, it was built 2,000 feet above the
100-mile-wide Verde Valley. Reminiscent of a hill town in Italy, Jerome was born
at this unlikely spot because nature had planted huge deposits of copper, along
with smaller deposits of gold and silver nearby.

Once a Copper Town

For several decades after the first ore strikes in the 1870's, Jerome was one of
the most productive sources of copper in the world. By the turn of the century,
it was a classic Western frontier town, complete with gun battles and a Main
Street lined with saloons, hotels and bordellos.

By the 1920's, 15,000 residents were clinging to the slopes of what local
boosters by then were calling ''the city in the sky.''

By 1930, its luck had run out. The Depression triggered a precipitous drop in
copper prices, and a long spiral in the fortunes of Jerome began. In 1953, the
last copper mine was closed, leaving fewer than 100 residents.

''In the early to mid-1960's,'' said Dennis Mead, another merchant. ''we got
what you might call the hippie culture coming in, and they helped turn around
the town.''

Many thousands of tourists visit Jerome annually, providing economic sustenance
for the town's entrepeneurs and artists. But the town that the ''hippies''
brought back to life seems to have a long path ahead of it before a total
turnaround.

Strong Sense of Optimism

Many if not most of its buildings are still in disrepair, and there are few
visible signs of prosperity.

Still, there is a strong sense of optimism among its residents. While former
Police Chief Ronald Ballatore and other residents are awaiting trial, Mr.
Ballatore is once more working for the city, helping to repair roads.

A community group is raising money for the legal expenses of those arrested in
the raid. Meanwhile, a rumor is spreading in town that Jerome was selected for
the drug raid as part of a plot by developers and wealthy Arizonans to drive the
former ''flower children'' out and turn Jerome into a multimillion-dollar
resort.

''Well, I tell you,'' said Mrs. Lee, the folk singer, ''If they try to do that,
they're going to have a battle on their hands. We're very tenacious up here, and
we stick together.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Jerome, Ariz.; map of Jerome, Ariz.

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 21, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

The Lessons of the Richard Nixon Case

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 220 words


To the Editor:

I was shocked to see nearly half an Op-Ed page given over to Richard M. Nixon
further to vilify Alger Hiss, practically to deify Whittaker Chambers and to
identify himself as the model for patriotic, moral and ethical behavior. This
from a man who resigned from the highest office in the land one step ahead of
impeachment.

It seems very clear that Richard Nixon is again using Alger Hiss as his vehicle
to respectability and perhaps again to a position of power and prestige. He
calls Vietnam a ''syndrome.'' It was a national sickness, infecting every aspect
of American tradition. If he can make Vietnam a less noxious experience for this
country, then Watergate can also be a passing ''syndrome,'' and all of those
involved in those two shameful episodes can shift the responsibility to the foes
of Richard Nixon, past and present.

As he said in his article, ''the Hiss case affected my political career,'' and
then goes on to say that without the Hiss case he could not have been nominated,
let alone elected.

We know this tactic worked well for him before. I hope that we do not see in
this long and self-serving article the opening shots in the effort to diminish
the horrors of Vietnam, the crimes of Watergate and the disgrace of Richard
Nixon. FRED SILVERSTEIN New York, Jan. 11, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 21, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CANNON SEEKS RESPECTABILITY

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1323 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 20


Chuck Norris, the actor, felt he was getting the runaround from the major movie
studios. Some liked his script, ''Missing in Action,'' but he found himself
talking to executive after executive with no clear promises of support.

Then Mr. Norris went to the Cannon Group, an upstart company that cranks out
movies here faster than the big studios. The Norris film, an adventure movie
about prisoners of war in Vietnam, was in production a week later, and Mr.
Norris is now negotiating a six-year exclusive contract to appear in Cannon
films, for more than $20 million.

''Cannon's going to be a huge, huge company, and that's one reason I'm going in
with them,'' he said. ''They will be a major studio; they could be the
biggest.''

Not everyone agrees. Some predict major difficulties for the company, which was
taken over in 1979 by two struggling Israeli emigre film makers who have pumped
out cheap films about sex and violence and done it profitably. Along the way
they have alienated many in the industry with their brash manners.

Whatever the emotions - and they run strong - the company today is trying to
transcend its reputation as a master of schlock, the name that Hollywood gives
to films that feature more violence and flesh than plot.

Cannon is advertising heavily in the trade press for Academy Awards for some of
its recent films like ''Runaway Train,'' an adventure movie starring Jon Voight,
and ''Fool for Love,'' starring the writer Sam Shepard in his own screenplay.

Cannon has also been a box-office leader three times in recent months with three
adventure movies - ''Invasion U.S.A.,'' ''Death Wish III'' and ''King Solomon's
Mines'' - that featured known stars such as Mr. Norris and Charles Bronson.

In its search for respectability, Cannon has also signed Dustin Hoffman for a
film version of ''King Lear,'' written by Norman Mailer and directed by Jean-Luc
Godard, one of the best-known names in French cinema. Next year, it is hoping
for a box office smash with a film starring Sylvester Stallone.

''It's practically a face lift for Cannon,'' said Menahem Golan, the company's
56-year-old chairman, as he took a break from mixing the sound for ''The Delta
Force,'' a movie based on last year's hijacking of a T.W.A. airliner. Mr. Golan,
who pays himself a base salary of $350,000 a year, modest by Hollywood
standards, directed the picture himself.

Face lifts can be expensive, however. Some analysts, as well as people in the
industry, say that as Cannon matures it will lose its financial magic touch.
Already it is highly leveraged. And better-quality films, skeptics say, may be
less profitable.

Costs Seen as Rising

''As well as they're doing, they're getting a little cocky,'' said Dennis I.
Forst, an analyst at Seidler Amdec Securities in Los Angeles. ''The cost of
productions has gone up. The leveraging of the balance sheet has gone up. The
cost of overhead has gone up. So it is a different company than it used to be.''

Moreover, just when Cannon's films appear to be achieving some respectability,
the company's stock is caught in a fierce controversy over accounting practices.
Estimates of future revenues play a big role in accounting in the movie
business, and some critics charge that Cannon has been too optimistic.

The controversy has led to harsh exchanges questioning the motives of both those
who praise and those who denigrate the stock. Many of the critics are short
sellers of Cannon stock, who stand to benefit from alarm over the company's
prospects. Short sellers are investors who sell shares they do not have, in
expectation of a fall in the stock price. If that occurs, they can then buy
shares to close out their positions at the lower price, making a profit. If the
stock rises, they generally close out at a loss.

However, most analysts remain enthusiastic about Cannon, and so far there has
been little money to be made by betting against the company. The stock, which is
traded over the counter, closed today at $25.875, down 75 cents. Three years ago
it traded for $7.25 a share.

Israeli Beginnings

Cannon's success had its roots in 1979, when Mr. Golan and a cousin, Yoram
Globus, purchased Cannon, an ailing production company. The two men had grown up
together in Tiberias, Israel, and had made many Israeli films, including several
that critics applauded. In the United States, they refined ''the Cannon
formula'' of movie making.

The key is keeping spending very low - the Cannon average is about $5 million a
film, compared with an industry average of $10 million to $15 million. As many
ancillary rights as possible - video, television and foreign distribution - are
sold in advance, to minimize the risks. In part because its budgets are so low,
Cannon has often been able to sell such rights in advance for more than the
total costs of producing films.

Mr. Golan and Mr. Globus, 42, run the company with just 200 employees, a
fraction of the number at other studios. Mr. Golan concentrates on the creative
side, while Mr. Globus, the company president, largely devotes himself to
finances.

''We are working 18 hours a day, seven days a week,'' Mr. Globus said. ''We have
no hobbies. If we have two hours free, we go to a movie. We don't play tennis.
We don't go to Hollywood parties.''

Nor do they go out of their way to be polite, by all accounts. ''I know enough
about them to know I don't want to deal with them,'' said one banker, citing
their reputation as hard-nosed negotiators. An executive of a major studio, who
like the banker asked not to be named, said: ''They're impossible to do business
with. They're very tough guys.''

Even their defenders acknowledge that Mr. Golan and Mr. Globus can be acerbic.
One of the defenders, Joseph Di Lillo, chairman of Drake Capital Securities, a
Los Angeles brokerage firm, explains their unpopularity this way: ''Hollywood
people will stab you in the back. These guys will stab you in front. They tell
it like it is. A lot of people feel insulted by that.''

Although much bitterness toward Cannon lingers in the industry, many say it is
lessening as the company proves its durability. ''There are many tales about
these fellows,'' the actor Jon Voight said. ''But whatever reputation Cannon had
in the past, they will grow out of.''

Cannon's films have often drawn harsh reviews, while also managing to draw a
large audience. A New York Times critic, Janet Maslin, said that Cannon's
''Treasure of the Four Crowns'' was ''as close to being unwatchable as a movie
can be.'' Yet the film, about a search for treasure, grossed $10 million
domestically, on a budget of about $2 million.

Expansion Into Television

Cannon has expanded its sights to include television and is negotiating with the
networks on several mini-series. It has also moved into the theater business
abroad, guaranteeing itself screenings. Cannon is the biggest theater owner in
the Netherlands, the second biggest in Britain and has a substantial presence in
Italy and West Germany.

But the expansion has strained the balance sheet. Long-term debt and obligations
soared from $13.9 million at the end of 1984 to $72.5 million at the end of
September 1985. The overall ratio of debt to equity jumped to 3.6 to 1, from 2.8
to 1.

The situation has apparently produced some concern at Cannon. Earlier this
month, the company offered inducements to convert debt into equity, which would
shore up its balance sheet.

However, Lee S. Isgur, an analyst at Paine Webber in New York, said that Cannon
would soon be generating enough cash to reduce its debt or to make further
acquisitions.

Mr. Isgur also said that Cannon's huge output - he estimates it will release 18
titles in 1986 - means there could be at least one big hit. ''They're going to
come to bat 18 times, and if they just hit one double or triple, wow,'' he said.
''With only 6.5 million shares, fully diluted, that would have a big impact.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Yoram Globus (NYT/Bart Bartholomew); photo of Menahem Golan
(NYT/Bart Bartholomew)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 22, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Reunited After Seven Years

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 81 words


Xuan Thi Nguyen with her children, Tran Thanh Quynh Chi, left, and Nguyen Vu
Chinh on the Air Force plane that carried the children from Vietnam to
Anchorage. They were accompanied by a Congressional delegation including Senator
Frank H. Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, who appealed for the children's
release in talks with Vietnamese leaders in Hanoi.

Miss Nguyen, who fled her country seven years ago, is married to an aviation
technician and lives in Fairbanks, Alaska. (AP)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 23, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. Delegation Faults Indochina on Missing

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 147 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 22


Three members of Congress criticized Vietnam and Laos today for rejecting a
suggestion that an international team be sent to investigate reports that
American servicemen have been seen alive in the two countries since the release
of prisoners in 1973.

The Congressmen - Senator Frank H. Murkowski, Republican of Alaska who is
chairman of the Senate Veterans Affairs Committee, Senator Dennis DeConcini,
Democrat of Arizona, and Representative Bob McEwen, Republican of Ohio -
recently returned from a trip to Indochina and appeared today at a news
conference. ''We made the point that if you have nothing to hide, open the
books,'' Mr. McEwen said.

Senator Murkowski said the delegation returned without any indication that
American prisoners remained there, but he endorsed the Reagan Administration's
refusal to rule out the possibility.

Vietnam denies it holds Americans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 23, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CONTADORA IS DEAD ONLY IF WASHINGTON KILLS IT

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 260 words


To the Editor:

''Why Play Chicken in Nicaragua With the Russians?'' (Op-Ed, Jan. 5) gave
excellent coverage to all points except one. Viron P. Vaky of the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace may have overlooked something pointed out by
Carlos Fuentes, Mexico's leading novelist and once Ambassador to France. In an
interview with Mother Jones magazine, he said, ''if Nicaragua were invaded by
the U.S., you'd see all of Latin America rising up in great anger.''

''It would offend the right and left throughout the hemisphere,'' he continued.
''Nationalism is the area where the right and left coincide in Latin America. If
Nicaragua were invaded, you would see young Argentines, Peruvians, Colombians
and Mexicans rushing to Central America to fight there. Against the marines!
Against the 'contras'! We would see international brigades like in the Spanish
Civil War.''

Carlos Andres Perez, former president of Venezuela, echoed this belief when he
said: ''an invasion would cause all of Latin America to blow up. The borders
would melt between these countries.''

If our President is such a ''great communicator,'' why is he so unsuccessful in
talking with a country the size of Florida? We know the Russians don't
communicate, and so they've spent seven years in a tiny country like
Afghanistan. Is this what we want? The ultimate price for such a dangerous game
is a collision that could set all of Latin America in flames. As in Vietnam, our
young men would be coming home in body bags. ELEANOR CARLSON-CASTRO Norwalk,
Conn., Jan. 7, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 24, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ADM. WILLIAM BEHRENS DIES; SUBMARINER AND SEA SCIENTIST

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 325 words


Vice Adm. William W. Behrens Jr., retired, died of a heart attack Tuesday at
Bayfront Medical Center, St. Petersburg, Fla. He was 63 years old and lived in
St. Petersburg.

In recent years he was the director of the Florida Institute of Oceanography,
which he joined in 1978 after two years as an adjunct professor of marine
science at the University of South Florida.

Admiral Behrens was one of the Navy's most-decorated officers of flag rank, with
47 medals and citations, including five Legions of Merit and the Silver Star. He
was promoted to Rear Admiral in 1967 at the age of 43.

Five years later he became the youngest vice admiral to be named named to the
submarine service.

Submarine and Advisory Roles

William Behrens was born to a Navy family in Newport, R.I., and graduated from
the United States Naval Academy in 1943. He served on six submarine patrols in
the Pacific in World War II.

From 1953 to 1963, he was in command of four submarines, two of them
nuclear-powered. He was the first director of the Navy's Nuclear Power School
and later became a special adviser to the Atomic Energy Commission.

From 1963 to 1965 he was assigned to the office of the Chief of Naval Operations
and was a Deputy Assistant Secretary of State from 1965 to 1967. In the Vietnam
War he commanded the amphibious force of the Seventh Fleet from 1967 to 1969.

In 1970 he was named Oceanographer of the Navy, a post he held for 17 months. He
then joined the Department of Commerce's newly organized National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration. He retired in 1974.

He is survived by his wife, the former Betty Ann Taylor; a sister, Patricia
Cameron of Camp Hill, Pa.; two sons, William, of Freedom, Me., and Charles, of
Salem, Mass.; two daughters, Elizabeth Garland, of Lexington, Mass., and Susan
Raker of Amhurst, Mass. and four grandchildren.

Funeral services will be held at 3 P.M. Monday, at Arlington National Cemetery,
Virginia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 24, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: JAGLOM'S 'ALWAYS'

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 918 words


''ALWAYS,'' Henry Jaglom's fifth and most amiable film to date, is set in the
Los Angeles of today, but its sensibilities are rooted in the 1960's, the decade
of the so-called film explosion, when anyone with access to a camera could call
himself a film maker. It brings back that era when movies, somewhat prematurely,
were being championed as the only true art of the 20th century, and when nothing
was thought to be so banal that it couldn't be made significant simply by being
recorded on film.

Mr. Jaglom's earlier features include a relentlessly whimsical, time-fractured
study of a suicidal young woman (''A Safe Place,'' 1971), a fairly tedious
meditation on Vietnam (''Tracks,'' made in 1975 but not released until 1979) and
a larkish comedy about a couple of amateur thieves (''Sitting Ducks,'' 1980),
whose cast featured Mr. Jaglom's wife, Patrice Townsend, and his brother,
Michael Emil. Now, with ''Always,'' it's evident that the closer Mr. Jaglom
sticks to home, the better his films turn out.

He couldn't get much closer than he does in his new movie, which explores the
breakup of Mr. Jaglom's marriage to Miss Townsend, who, in ''Always,'' plays the
soon-to-be ex-wife, Judy, to Mr. Jaglom's David. The entire film takes place in
and around the house the Jagloms once shared in Hollywood, in the shadow of the
Chateau Marmont, and in dialogue that, when it isn't being improvised, sounds as
if Mr. Jaglom had kept tape recorders going 24 hours a day in the house, on the
patio and by the pool.

The result is a completely self-absorbed, short-focused home-movie, performed by
Mr. Jaglom, his family and his friends with engagingly comic ease. The premise:
Judy stops by David's house to sign the divorce papers that will terminate their
marriage after the required two-year waiting period. David insists she stay for
dinner, which he cooks and which promptly induces in her an allergic reaction so
severe she has to remain for the rest of the Fourth of July weekend.

The others who share this weekend of southern California-style self-examination
are the long-married Lucy and Eddie, played by the Jagloms' best friends, Joanna
Frank and Alan Rachins, and Judy's sister Peggy (Melissa Leo), who dances on
stilts, and her current companion, Maxwell (Jonathan Kaufer), who drives an
ice-cream truck and cheerfully puts up with pain in his interpersonal
relationships.

In the course of the weekend, David pursues Judy while nearly everybody else
winds up temporarily with someone other than the person to whom he or she was
originally attached. ''Always'' is like a farce played in slow motion, partially
because the characters talk so much, so intensely, that nothing of desperate
importance ever has a chance to happen.

Mr. Jaglom, who has the manner of a tall-ish Wallace Shawn, and Miss Townsend, a
beauty with a sense of humor, have long, solemn discussions about what went
wrong in their marriage, about the possibility of happiness, about life. ''I
really think it's about coming out the other side,'' says David after a good
deal of heavy thought. Says Judy with the air of a pragmatist, ''But I don't
think I'm coming out the other side.'' Every now and then the talk - whether
written by Mr. Jaglom, recorded by him or improvised - reaches a level of
inspired muddle-headedness that I associate with Paul Mazursky at his best.

All of the performances, too, are very good. Yet I've no idea when people are
really acting or just recollecting. Miss Leo is especially affecting as Judy's
younger, determinedly bohemian sister. She also looks enough like Miss Townsend
- and acts with her so spontaneously - that she could well be her sister, though
she isn't.

Among the Jagloms' family members and circle of friends who appear in the movie
are Mr. Emil, as David's quarrelsome brother, and Bob Rafelson, the director
(''Five Easy Pieces''), who's very funny as a next-door neighbor for whom
self-doubt has never been even a remote problem.

Like most home movies, ''Always,'' which opens today at the 57th Street
Playhouse, has a number of patches that are probably of more interest to the
performers than to the rest of us. One is never unaware of the passage of time,
of the cuts from one scene to another, of slow camera movements from one side of
a room to the other, which are like pauses in a conversation as someone tries to
come up with the right word (and frequently fails).

''Always'' is clearly the work of the sort of obsessed writer-director-actor who
has come to consider every moment of his life as possible material for his next
film. Yet, for all the ''a clef'' reality, there are only oblique references to
what the David-Jaglom character does for a living, which, under the
circumstances, seems to be cheating. Mr. Jaglom opens and closes the film with
monologues spoken directly to the camera (another holdover from the 1960s). The
movie might be better without them, but ''Always'' is so otherwise friendly that
one puts up with its gaffes. All in the Family ALWAYS, written, directed, edited
and produced by Henry Jaglom; director of photography, Hanania Baer; music by
Miles Kreuger; a Jagtown Film from International Rainbow Pictures. At 57th
Street Playhouse, 110 West 57th Street.

Running time: 105 minutes. This film is rated R. DavidHenry Jaglom JudyPatrice
Townsend The NotaryAmnon Meskin Judy's fatherBud Townsend LucyJoanna Frank
EddieAlan Rachins PeggyMelissa Leo MaxwellJonathan Kaufer David's neighborBob
Rafelson David's brotherMichael Emil

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 24, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DIRECTOR OF VETERANS ADMINISTRATION STEPS DOWN

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 586 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 23


The director of the Veterans Administration, a man widely respected by veterans'
organizations, has resigned.

A Reagan Administration official said the director, Harry N. Walters, is to be
replaced by Thomas K. Turnage, director of the Selective Service System.

Mr. Walters, while saying it was inappropriate to comment before a White House
announcement was made, said it was ''no secret'' that he had planned to leave
the agency.

Spokesmen for Mr. Walters and Mr. Turnage would not formally confirm that there
would be a change of command at the Veterans Administration, but at the
Selective Service System office the report was not denied. The White House did
not inform major veterans' organizations of the change.

Differing Accounts by Leaders

And there was disagreement among spokesmen for veterans' groups about the degree
of openness by White House officials in consulting them.

One leader, Charles E. Joeckel, executive director of the Disabled American
Veterans, said in an interview that ''none of us in the major veterans' groups
was consulted'' on the selection of Mr. Turnage, 62 years old, who is a retired
Army major general. Mr. Joeckel said, ''Our assumption is that he is probably
going to pursue a course of budget cuts and follow the directives of the White
House and the Office of Management and Budget.''

''Being left out of the selection process is a disappointment,'' Mr. Joeckel
said. ''It is highly unusual. We had no input at all. We know that others on the
list for consideration would not have gone automatically with O.M.B. budget
cuts.''

Legion Official Tells of Talks

But Mylio Kraja, executive director of the Washington office of the American
Legion, while agreeing that Mr. Turnage was not his organization's first choice
and that ''we have had no official word of his selection,'' said the White House
had called a meeting in December of officials of the American Legion, the
Veterans of Foreign Wars and the D.A.V. to discuss the names on ''a V.A. search
list.'' He said that Mr. Joeckel had been present.

''We thought there were others on the list with a greater exposure to the
Veterans Administration who had a leg up'' over Mr. Turnage, Mr. Kraja said,
''but we had no great problem with any of them.''

Mr. Walters has resisted cuts for his agency, which is operating on a $27
billion annual budget for the fiscal year 1985, much of the money spent for
medical, nursing home and rehabilitation care. Mr. Walters was reported to have
considered resigning several months ago.

V.A. Chief Tells of 'Order'

He says he was ''ordered'' by the Office of Management and Budget last year to
avoid an appearance before a Congressional committee that was considering budget
issues. Mr. Walters, who is 49 years old and a graduate of the United States
Military Academy where he was a football star, went to the Veterans
Administration in 1982. He had just spent a year as Assistant Secretary of the
Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs.

Other people described by several veterans' organizations' leaders as being on
the final White House list to succeed Mr. Walters were James H. Webb Jr., the
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Reserve Affairs, who is a veteran of the
Vietnam War and the author of a book about it: Charles Hagel, a former Deputy
Administrator of the V.A. in the early Reagan Administration, and Thomas Harvey,
general counsel of the United States Information Agency and a former counsel to
the Senate Committee on Veterans Affairs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Harry Walters (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 25, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

The TV News Conference at 25

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 966 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 24


It will be a quarter of a century Saturday, but like almost everything else the
young President did, it seems a moment frozen in time.

John F. Kennedy was 43 years old and it was his first news conference as
President of the United States.

Perhaps more important from a historical perspective - Kennedy would be 68
today, just a few years younger than Ronald Reagan - it was also the very first
time a President had held a full-blown, formal news conference before live
television cameras.

The new President, a figure of special grace and a black belt in Irish wit,
emerged from the encounter, as Russell Baker of The New York Times put it the
next day, as ''a new star with a tremendous national appeal, the skill of a
consummate showman.''

For better or worse, Presidential news conferences have never been the same.

At the same time that the televised news conference exposes the President to the
people, it sometimes becomes a vehicle for self-promotion, a stage-managed
political commercial imparting not information but image.

True, reporters ask questions, but the President can call on whom he likes,
often with a fine sense of who might provide relief and who anguish. He can, and
does, ignore questions and give speeches instead.

Reporters, on the other hand, become players in the drama, argue at times and
sometimes posture rather than inquire. Are you running for something, Mr.
Rather? No, Mr. President, are you?

In truth it was an evolution rather than a quantum leap into the new technology.
President Eisenhower had allowed filming of his exchanges with the capital press
corps, but never before had it been live.

With Kennedy, for the first time, the mad rush to a telephone the moment the
pressroom doors flung open was superfluous. Everybody already knew what the
President had said -about U-2 spyplanes, a possible visit by Khrushchev and
reciprocal trade agreements.

James Hagerty, the press secretary who had persuaded Eisenhower to allow the
cameras for the first time, nonetheless balked at going live lest his boss, who
seemed occasionally to wander in a verbal thicket, should lose his way entirely
and ''misspeak himself.''

It was Eisenhower who, asked in his 190th news conference on Aug. 24, 1960, for
just one ''major idea'' instigated by his Vice President, Richard Nixon,
replied: ''If you give me a week, I might think of one. I don't remember.''

More recently, just this month, President Reagan managed to call the Vienna
airport the Vietnam airport, misidentifed one of the victims of a terrorist
attack, flubbed the numbers of two key United Nations resolutions on the Mideast
and incorrectly evaluated tax revenue in comparison with the gross national
product. But nobody paid much attention because he described the Libyan leader,
Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, as ''flaky.'' It was a piece of verbal footwork before
the lights worthy of Mr. Kennedy, whose style Mr. Reagan admires.

The Presidential news conference is fundamentally a phenomenon of the 20th
century, traceable, according to a Commission on Presidential Press Conferences,
to Theodore Roosevelt's habit of summoning reporters to the White House for
occasional briefings, often while he was being shaved in the morning.

Taft abandoned the practice, perhaps aware of John Adams's admonition about the
press that ''mankind cannot now be governed without it, nor at present with
it,'' but it was reinstituted and institutionalized under Woodrow Wilson in 1913
and has been a part of every administration ever since.

President Wilson held regular meetings with reporters with a fair amount of
verbal give and take, but successors Harding, Coolidge and Hoover required that
questions be put in writing in advance.

Franklin Roosevelt, at his first news session on March 8, 1933, told assembled
reporters he hoped ''these conferences are going to be merely enlarged editions
of the kind of very delightful family conferences I have been holding in Albany
for the last four years.''

The sessions were frequent, informal, largely off the record (reporters were
forbidden to discuss sensitive material even with their editors) and there was
no direct quotation of the President, who made the refreshing concession at the
outset that ''there will be a great many questions you will ask that I do not
know enough about to answer'' - a mere quibble to modern masters who simply
answer another question altogether.

Roosevelt's questioners simply clustered around his desk. The explosive growth
of the press corps after World War II meant a more formal arrangement with
Truman standing in front of a room full of reporters.

Taping and filming eliminated off-the-record answers and Kennedy's decision for
live cameras made immediate answers mandatory. No longer could a President
simply say, ''Hold on, I'll need a minute to call the Secretary of State on
that.''

Thus, say critics, the air of immediacy and give-and-take given by live
televised news conferences is largely illusory.

Too, said the private panel that studied news conferences in 1981, ''What many
in the press regarded as deceptions, as with Lyndon Johnson's reports about the
Vietnam War and Richard Nixon's duplicities about Watergate, raised a curtain of
distrust between the President and the press. If the role of the news media in
their relationship to the White House had hitherto been adversarial, it now
became downright antagonistic.''

Thus, while Presidents seem more visible, they are less accessible. President
Roosevelt averaged 6.9 news conferences a month, Truman 3.4, Eisenhower 2,
Kennedy 1.9, Johnson, 2.2, Nixon, 0.5, Ford 1.3, Carter, 1.2 and Reagan, 0.5.

When Jimmy Carter left office, he observed that two things he had no trouble
bequeathing to Ronald Reagan were Menachem Begin and Sam Donaldson.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John F. Kennedy answering a question at the first televised
Presidential news conference, in 1961 (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 25, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. PLANS ALTERNATIVES TO MANILA BASES

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 807 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 24


Detailed contingency plans have been drawn up to move Navy and Air Force units
from the Philippines to Guam, Okinawa and other Pacific locations if the United
States is forced to leave its Philippine bases, according to Reagan
Administration officials.

The officials said the plans, which were drafted by the United States Pacific
Command in Honolulu within the last year in response to the deteriorating
political situation in the Philippines, would take three to five years to carry
out. They would cost ''several billion'' dollars and would greatly complicate
deployment of United States ships and aircraft in the event of a crisis in the
Indian Ocean.

The officials said, however, that the Pentagon had decided not to earmark any
money in its new five-year budget plan to begin preparing facilities at
alternative sites. They said the decision was based on the expectation that,
regardless of the outcome of the Feb. 7 election in the Philippines, the United
States would remain at its Philippine bases at Clark Field and Subic Bay until
at least 1992 and probably thereafter.

Officials noted that the five-year plan, which has not been made public,
contains approximately $500 million for military construction and family housing
in the Philippines that could be diverted to other sites if necessary. But the
cost of relocating from the Philippines would be $3 billion to $8 billion,
according to various Pentagon estimates.

Insurgency a Threat

Although they are publicly confident of a long tenure at the Philippine bases,
Administration officials say the bases could eventually be threatened by the
growing Communist insurgency on the islands, or by popular disenchantment with
the United States for its longtime support of President Ferdinand E. Marcos.

The bases have been an issue in the presidential campaign, with the principal
opposition ticket, headed by Corazon C. Aquino, favoring a popular referendum on
the future of Clark and Subic. Mr. Marcos, who in the past had threatened to
terminate the lease on the bases, now favors its continuation.

Pentagon officials said that if the Philippine elections next month are widely
seen as corrupt, the American military can expect to come under intense
Congressional pressure to make its contingency plans public and begin
preliminary construction work at alternative locations.

''If there's flagrant fraud, I think the political effect is that we'll have to
start showing Congress a little more ankle on the contingency planning,
including our military construction plans at alternative sites,'' said a senior
Pentagon official.

Broad Dispersal Planned

Officials familiar with the plans said they call for dispersing United States
forces to existing American air and naval facilities on Guam, an air base on
Okinawa, unused World War II airstrips on the Marianas Island of Saipan, and
possibly to American bases in Japan and Korea.

The United States has also leased 18,000 acres on the Marianas island of Tinian,
and a senior Pentagon official said it might become the replacement for a
heavily used Philippine bombing range.

The Pentagon is also considering hiring shipyards in Singapore to perform ship
repairs now done at Subic Bay Naval Base. Officials said the facility that would
be most difficult to duplicate would be the Subic shipyards; staffed largely by
skilled Filipino workers, they do most of the repairs on the 90 ships of the
Seventh Fleet, at a cost about one-seventh that of domestic shipyards.

On Jan. 10 the Administration signed an agreement with the Micronesian state of
Palau that gives the United States armed forces access to a large airport and
harbor. But Pentagon and White House officials said that Palau is not included
in contingency plans because of strong local opposition to an American military
presence.

'No Good Alternatives'

Officials said there is a reluctance among military and civilian officials to
give the impression that the military expects to abandon its Philippine bases.

''The contingency plans are well enough along so that we could move fairly
quickly,'' said a senior White House official. ''But there is no reason to
expect that we will have to do anything in the years immediately following this
election. We don't see that scenario as realistic.''

In an interview in Singapore this week, Adm. James A. Lyons Jr., commander of
the Pacific Fleet, said the United States had ''no intention'' of leaving the
Philippines because it had ''no good alternatives.''

Admiral Lyons said no other location would provide an equivalent counter to
increasing Soviet naval power in the region. In addition to the widely reported
Soviet buildup at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam, Admiral Lyons said the Pentagon is
concerned about increasing Soviet use of the Cambodian port of Kompong Som,
formerly Sihanoukville.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Philippines

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MARCOS REPORTED TO LOSE SUPPORT IN ADMINISTRATION

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3371 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 25


A consensus has developed in the Reagan Administration that the departure of
President Ferdinand E. Marcos is critical to a non-Communist future for the
Philippines and American interests in that country.

This widely held view was made clear explicitly or indirectly in interviews this
week with key officials from the White House, State Department, Pentagon and
intelligence agencies.

But the Administration has decided not to push Mr. Marcos from power by covert
means, although that was considered by some officials, or by public attacks on
him, although some officials have also come close to this.

Distance and Waiting

Instead, the policy is to distance the United States from its old ally by
publicly questioning Mr. Marcos's statements that he is seeking to effect the
economic and military changes the United States has sought. Another element of
the strategy is waiting, the officials said. Very soon, they said, they expect
that Mr. Marcos's health will force him to withdraw from the scene.

By the accounts of all the officials interviewed, President Reagan, Secretary of
State George P. Shultz and Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger have approved
the policy of distancing expressed by their subordinates. The President and the
two Cabinet officers were not actively involved in the policy discussions, and
all three went out of their way not to announce the change.

Albert R. Brashear, a White House spokesman, denied today that there was any
such consensus, and went on to say: ''We want to see the process of reform
carried out across the board. We want to see free and fair elections. It's the
process that is important.''

Working With the Winner

The public position of the White House and other Administration officials is
that they will work with the winner of the presidential election Feb. 7, whoever
that may be. Privately, however, the key officials involved say they expect Mr.
Marcos to win, and they maintain that he must go if the necessary changes to get
the country back on its feet are to be put into effect.

All the officials interviewed said Mr. Reagan had been briefed regularly about
events in the Philippines and on the policy line to be followed. But several of
them noted that Mr. Reagan's role had been essentially passive in policy
formulation, which they thought might reflect his longstanding concerns about
undercutting allies. They also noted that he does not go out of his way to talk
about policy for the Philippines publicly.

Because Mr. Reagan acquiesced in the new policy without having taken a major
role in its formulation, some officials said, it is unclear how he would react
if events worsened in some way, such as a dramatic improvement in the fortunes
of the insurgents. Any such a full-blown crisis would put the President's views
about Mr. Marcos to the test.

Administration officials fear American identification with the Marcos Government
at a time of a growing anti-Marcos sentiment in the Philippines. Specifically,
they worry that Mr. Marcos is unwilling to introduce what the United States
considers needed changes, and that his moderate opponents might unite with
Communists in opposition to him.

Either eventuality could jeopardize American bases there, which are considered
vital to United States power in the Asian and Pacific areas.

United States officials have urged Mr. Marcos to stem an economic downturn by
acting to reduce corruption and break up monopolies, many of which are believed
to be controlled by figures close to the Marcos family. The Administration has
also asked for greater efficiency in the military, with promotions based on
merit.

Although Administration officials have decided that it would be in America's
best interests for Mr. Marcos to go, they do not appear to have any idea of who
would succeed him. Most of the officials said they were also wary of his
opponent in next month's election, Corazon C. Aquino. The American Bases: Vital
Issue for U.S.

Despite statements from the two candidates throughout the campaign, their
positions on the American bases are essentially the same. Both say they would
keep the bases through the life of the current agreement, which expires in 1991,
and would negotiate a new agreement in the light of their perceptions of the
domestic and international situations at that time.

Both, at different times, have talked about the possibility of putting any new
agreement to a nationwide referendum, and both have said they believe any new
agreement would have to be a formal treaty rather than the current executive
agreement between the Presidents of the Philippines and the United States.

The public articulation of the Administration policy is not to choose between
Mr. Marcos and Mrs. Aquino, but to stress free and fair processes and change.
This, in itself, represents a dramatic shift from Mr. Reagan's contention in the
Presidential debate of 1984 that the ''alternative'' to Mr. Marcos was ''a large
Communist movement to take over the Philippines.''

The Administration has decided, for the time being, neither to do whatever is
necessary to support a close ally whose hold on power seems increasingly
tenuous, nor to help oust him and thereby accept greater responsibility for
whatever might come.

Not choosing is, in effect, the Administration officials' solution to the
classic policy quandary of most of their post-World War II predecessors in
places like Iran, Nicaragua and Vietnam.

The prevailing judgment in the Administration is that the Philippines is very
different from those places in its democratic traditions and close historical
ties to the United States.

These institutions and attitudes are the basis of official hope. At the same
time, the rapid growth in the Communist insurgency and widespread political
disaffection makes officials feel they are running out of time.

Typical is the statement in December by Michael H. Armacost, Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs. He said that ''pessimism is unwarranted,'' yet he
called the situation a ''crisis.''

Little Optimism On Election Fairness The public focus is on the Filipino
presidential elections, now only two weeks away. But officials say they do not
have high hopes for honest results. They worry about a patently fraudulent
result that could radicalize Philippine politics, about moderates either being
made irrelevant or drawn toward alliance with the Communists.

For the most part, officials are already looking beyond the election. To be
sure, they say they still want the contest to be a ''free and fair'' one that
would to reinvigorate Filipino democracy and to re-establish the armed forces
there as a neutral force in democratic politics. But they anticipate that the
real tests will come this year, or next year at the latest, when they say they
expect Mr. Marcos to be gone because of his health.

For that test, they are already laying the groundwork by statements such as this
one from Mr. Armacost: ''We can confidently expect to work with any government
produced by an election which Filipinos consider to have been fair and honest.''
A White House spokesman repeated this statement as Mr. Reagan's position.

The burden of making and defending policy on an issue that many in the
Administration regard as the nation's prime foreign policy problem has fallen on
officials such as Mr. Armacost and five men ranking below him. They are Gaston
Sigur, the senior Asian specialist on the National Security Council staff;
Richard L. Armitage, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security
Affairs; Paul D. Wolfowitz, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs;
Morton I. Abramowitz, director of the bureau of intelligence and research, and
Stephen W. Bosworth, the American Ambassador in Manila.

In 1984, Adm. William Crowe, then commander of American forces in the Pacific
and now chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, played a critical role. He
briefed Mr. Reagan on the growth of the Communist guerrilla force from a few
thousand to over 15,000 or more, on the performance of the Marcos Government,
the politicization of the military, and the potentially disastrous consequences
of this instability for the American naval base at Subic Bay and the air base at
Clark Field.

The story of the Reagan Administration coming to grips with the situation in the
Philippines largely revolves around these sub-Cabinet-level officials. They were
the ones who eventually rang the alarm about Mr. Marcos and formulated the
policy.

The evolution of policy from a largely pro-Marcos one to one that is anti-Marcos
with some caveats developed in three phases, as recounted by officials.

From 1981 to the summer of 1983, the Administration focused almost entirely on
renegotiating an extending of the base agreement with Mr. Marcos, and wanted
nothing to get in the way of this goal. Some problems in the Philippines were
recognized, but a clear decision was reached to put aside long-term concerns in
favor of short-term needs.

In the second phase of policy evolution, which ran until the late fall of 1984,
a killing - the assassination of Benigno S. Aquino Jr., a chief Marcos political
opponent, who was killed as he stepped off a plane onto Philippine soil - set
off a downward spiral in the Philippine economy and security situation. It also
galvanized mid-level American policy makers, but their focus was a narrow one,
concerned mainly with insuring that Mr. Marcos made a serious effort get to the
bottom of the killing.

In the third phase, these mid-level officials formulated the policy of pressing
Mr. Marcos for economic and military changes, without having much confidence
that he would comply.

More important, American officials began telling the American people that the
situation in the Philippines was very serious and was deteriorating in its
entirety.

In all three phases, Mr. Marcos was seen as shrewdly maneuvering to deflect
American pressure, even to the point in phase three of proposing a ''snap''
presidential election and catching everyone off guard. Policy Makers Move Closer
to Critics By the second phase, the mid-level officials had moved closer to the
position of policy critics outside of Government and seemed to agree with them.
''The irony of the situation is that this broad consensus on the situation is
possible only because the conservatives are now in power,'' said Richard C.
Holbrooke, the Carter Administration's top Asian policy maker.

''Out of power,'' said Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn,
who is chairman of the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on Asian and Pacific
Affairs, ''Mr. Reagan would be the first to accuse any Administration following
his current policy as one of pulling the rug out from under our friends.''

In 1981, Vice President Bush visited Manila. In remarks at an official dinner,
he said: ''We love your adherence to democratic principles and democratic
processes. We will not leave you in isolation.''

By the account of several officials involved, it was a terrible mistake. Nothing
like that was in the bland toast that State Department officials had written out
in advance for Mr. Bush.

''He got carried away by the whole Marcos scene,'' a senior Administration
official said. ''In the Philippines, it's easy to get sucked into hyperbole.
Politics there is words, extravagant words.''

The toast came at a time when Administration policy was to play down human
rights violations around the world and to avoid public attacks on allies. These
policy elements were seen by the new team as efforts to correct features of what
they felt was the failed Carter Administration policy. The new watchwords were
''quiet diplomacy.'' But according to Administration officials, it was apparent
that the Philippines was sinking under the weight of 10 years of military
dictatorship. Ominous Telegrams From the Ambassador It was also a time when the
Administration was establishing the pattern of leaving Asian policy - with the
exception of China policy - to officials at the assistant secretary level. As
for the Philippines, the only policy-level person who appeared to be paying
attention was Mr. Armacost, who was then Ambassador in Manila, officials said in
recalling events at the time.

He was sending telegrams back arguing that political instability and insurgency
were largely tied to a downturn in the Philippine economy, attributed
principally to the decline in sugar and other prices, capital flight from the
country and monopolistic practices by individuals with close ties to the Marcos
family.

Once the economy picked up again, he said, the other problems would become more
manageable. For the time being, Mr. Armacost was said to have written,
everything should be secondary to the base agreement.

The assassination of Mr. Aquino in August 1983 as he returned from exile
concentrated the problems. By the testimony of Mr. Armacost, Mr. Wolfowitz and
others, the killing led to further political instability, which, in turn,
further depressed the economy -which, in turn, fed the insurgency.

The boldness of the killing also forced senior policy makers here to pay
attention to the Philippines for the first time. But Mr. Reagan and his key
advisers would only make one concrete decision at this point, according to
knowledgeable officials. That was to say publicly that there had to be a full
and fair investigation and that the killers must be punished.

United States policy makers said they strongly suspected that Gen. Fabian C.
Ver, armed forces Chief of Staff and friend of Mr. Marcos, was involved.
Recently, he and a number of other officers were cleared by a panel of judges in
a verdict that was controversial there and here. A Canceled Visit Seen as a
Rebuke In October, Mr. Reagan canceled his plans to visit Manila as part of a
general tour of Asia. The White House said at the time that this was not a
''rebuke'' to Mr. Marcos, but it was generally so regarded. Fearing just such an
interpretation, Mr. Shultz privately urged Mr. Reagan to go despite the cloud
over the killing.

The policy discussion resulted in November 1984 in a a National Security
Decision Directive, or formal decision memorandum, signed by Mr. Reagan. It
stated that ''the U.S. does not want to remove Marcos or to destabilize'' his
Government.

The directive continued: ''While President Marcos at this stage is part of the
problem, he is also necessarily part of the solution. We need to influence him
through a well-orchestrated policy of incentives and disincentives to set the
stage for peaceful and eventual transition to a successor government whenever
that takes place. Marcos, for his part, will try to use us to remain in power
indefinitely.''

At this point, as officials described events, they were faced with two practical
problems. One was whether it was possible to persuade Mr. Marcos to effect
changes that would undermine his power base. The second was how to convince Mr.
Marcos that it was Mr. Reagan and not just mid-level officials felt that these
changes were necessary.

A senior Defense Department official maintained that the problem of starting
serious change was virtually insuperable. Fundamental changes, like bringing in
new military leaders and eliminating Mr. Marcos's friends would ''cut at the
basis of his power,'' he said. Also, he added, ''We had to sing a dual-track
tune: economic, political and military reform, while also staving off the
Communist guerrillas, and Marcos could always argue that the former would
endanger the latter.''

This official, like most of those interviewed, said Washington did not have that
much leverage on Mr. Marcos. They said that American military and economic aid
totals only about $180 million annually and that this is tied to the bases as a
kind of rent. A Proposed Aid Cut And Its Consequences Mr. Solarz, noting this
amount and saying that the Administration had power over some other loans as
well, argued to the contrary. ''My proposal to reduce military aid and increase
economic aid by a comparable amount would have sent a very useful signal to the
Philippines, but the Administration fought against this,'' he said.

They did so, officials explained, because that would have jeopardized the battle
against the guerrillas. These officials said they saw the trap they were in, but
at that point could not see the way out.

A senior White House official put it a little differently. ''Mr. Reagan is aware
of the need for reforms,'' he said. ''But it is very difficult to expect Marcos
will carry out reforms we believe are essential, although I'm unwilling to say
it's hopeless. He can't disregard everything that has been going on, the
opposition in the Philippines and here.''

According to officials, the problem of getting Mr. Marcos to put changes into
effect was compounded by his often-stated conviction that the American pressure
for change was the work of subordinates and was not blessed by Mr. Reagan. In
particular, Mr. Marcos made no secret of his belief that it was all the work of
Mr. Armacost, once an avid Marcos supporter as Ambassador and later a severe
critic as the No. 3 man in the State Department.

Ambassador Bosworth began to argue strenuously that this feeling on Mr. Marcos's
part could be corrected only by dispatching a personal Presidential emissary to
Manila. In October 1985, it was finally agreed to send Senator Paul Laxalt,
Republican of Nevada, to carry that message.

A senior State Department official described the purposes of this mission as
follows: ''Laxalt told Marcos that it was the President speaking, not just a
bunch of bureaucratic mandarins. He said that reforms, particuarly military
reforms, were top priority. He said that Marcos had to prepare the way for
others to succeed him. In sum, he convinced Marcos that he had a real problem
with us.''

But neither then nor later did the Administration tell Mr. Marcos to change or
forfeit Administration support.

''We told him that if things continued going downhill, Congress would cut aid,''
said a senior Administration official. ''We told him that international banks
would not provide more loans if there was political instability. But we did not
threaten him outright with loss of Administration backing. Things aren't done
that way, but he got the point.'' Exploring the Chances For a Military Coup
Several key policy officials, however, felt that Mr. Marcos would never get the
point. They began to think of more serious approaches in recent months. There
was talk of exploring possibilities for a military coup, which never got very
far, officials said. There was also brief consideration given to providing
covert financial support for Mr. Marcos's political opponents, but nothing came
of that either.

By this time, Mr. Marcos had once again retaken the initiative by announcing he
would hold presidential elections in February rather than waiting until 1987.

Administration officials said they preferred keeping the focus on change and
getting Mr. Marcos to think about the succession.

Most Administration officials said they could live with a victory by Mrs.
Aquino. ''With all the uncertainties about their polemics, we still feel we can
protect our interests and deal with her,'' one said.

While almost all of those interviewed said there were limits to electoral
manipulation by Mr. Marcos, the general view is that he will win and that fraud
will be widespread.

If most of them had their way, Mr. Marcos would win a election that was not too
unfair and then quicky step aside in favor of his vice presidential candidate,
Arturo Tolentino. ''Tolentino is 75 years old, respected and reasonable and
perfectly designed to carry out a transition,'' said a senior State Department
official.

But the betting is not high that Mr. Marcos will step aside. So, in the
meantime, the Administration continues to ''depersonalize'' its policy, as a
Pentagon official put it, stressing the need for change in key institutions to
carry on after Mr. Marcos departs. Also, officials continue to convince one
another that they will never have to face the tough choices their predecessors
confronted in Vietnam, Nicaragua and Iran - that is, to fight or get out.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

15 FROM NEW YORK ARE AMONG FINALISTS FOR SCIENCE AWARDS

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 33, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 489 words


Fifteen high-school students from New York State, including three each from the
Bronx High School of Science and Benjamin N. Cardozo High School in Queens, were
among the 40 national winners named last week in the Westinghouse Science Talent
Search.

Thirteen of the New York State winners came from New York City public high
schools, more than from any other city or state. Fourteen other states,
including Connecticut, also provided finalists in the competition, sponsored
annually since 1942 by the Westinghouse Electric Corporation.

The 40 finalists, all seniors, were selected from a group of 300 semifinalists.

They are competing for $140,000 in scholarships and cash awards to be announced
in Washington on March 3.

Ten scholarships, ranging from $7,500 to $20,000, will be granted to the
students judged the most outstanding after interviews with eight scientists. The
30 other finalists will each get $1,000 in cash.

Continuing a trend that has become increasingly noticeable in recent years,
one-quarter of the winners this year were born in foreign countries, including
China, Japan, Vietnam and South Korea. In contrast with the usual pattern, in
which private schools have been heavily represented, all but one of the
finalists this year attend public high schools.

Winners were chosen largely on the basis of individual science projects, which
many of them had worked on for months. The finalists carried out original
research in such fields as biology, mathematics, chemistry, physics, medicine
and oceanography.

These are the New York State winners and their high schools: Jessica L. Boklan,
17, East Hills, L.I; Roslyn High School, Roslyn Heights, L.I. George Jer-Chi
Juang, 17, Bayside, Queens; Benjamin N. Cardozo High School, Bayside.

Chris John Katopis, 17, Hollis Hills, Queens; Bronx

High School of Science, Bedford Park.

Mark Huan-Fu Kuo, 17, Whitestone, Queens; Bronx

High School of Science.

Leonard J. Landesberg, 17, Rockville Centre, L.I.;

South Side High School, Rockville Centre. David M. Lazoff, 17, Bayside;
Hillcrest High School, Jamaica, Queens.

Jung-Pu Lin, 18, Elmhurst, Queens; Forest Hills

High School, Queens.

Eli Muraidekh, 17, Little Neck, Queens; Benjamin

N. Cardozo High School. Andrew Henry Oliff, 17, Kingsbridge Heights, Bronx;
Bronx High School of Science. Carl Hyun-Suk Park, 17, Woodside, Queens;
Stuyvesant High School, Manhattan. Serap Ayse Savari, 17, Bayside; Benjamin N.
Cardozo High School.

Manu Sanjay Saxena, 17, Rockaway Park, Queens;

Beach Channel High School, Rockaway Park.

Mariann Meier Wang, 17, Jackson Heights, Queens;

Stuyvesant High School. Mark A. Winograd, 17, Flatbush, Brooklyn; Midwood High
School, Flatbush.

Wei-Jing Zhu, 16, Bay Ridge, Brooklyn; Brooklyn

Technical High School, Fort Greene.

The Connecticut winner is Mary Elizabeth Meyerand, 17, of Glastonbury, a student
at Glastonbury High School.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BLACK FILM MAKERS RETRACE THE CIVIL-RIGHTS STRUGGLE

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1609 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


On the old film, Rosa Parks doesn't look very threatening, a prim woman with
glasses, hair tied neatly back, her Sunday-best gray suit carefully pressed. But
there she is in a police station in Montgomery, Ala., being fingerprinted.

It is 1955 and Mrs. Parks, a black, had just been arrested for refusing to give
up her seat on a bus to a white man. Her action sparked a yearlong boycott by
blacks of buses in Montgomery, the first sustained and successful attack by
blacks on the Jim Crow segregation system of the old South.

The incident is also the beginning of a major new television series now in
production that will be the first full-scale chronicle of the civil-rights
movement. Titled ''Eyes on the Prize,'' from the words of a civil-rights
movement song, the series is scheduled to be shown as six hourlong programs on
the Public Broadcasting Service early next year. It will cover the sit-ins,
freedom rides and voter registration drives from 1955 to the violent, climactic
clashes in Selma, Ala., in 1965 that led to President Johnson's successful push
for passage of the Voting Rights Act.

Barry Chase, vice president for news and public affairs at PBS, believes ''Eyes
on the Prize'' will be ''the natural domestic equivalent'' of public
broadcasting's highly acclaimed series ''Vietnam: A Television History.'' Like
the Vietnam program, ''Eyes on the Prize'' will intercut extensive archival
footage with interviews with scores of participants. The archival footage is
particularly exciting, Mr. Chase suggests, because the sit-ins, marches and
confrontations of the civil-rights movement ''were where television news cut its
teeth.''

The project, which has been in the making for two-and-a-half years on a modest
budget of $1.5 million, is being produced by Blackside Inc., a small,
minority-owned film company in Boston. This makes it the most ambitious
documentary undertaken by black film makers, and one of the largest television
series ever produced by a black-owned company.

''It is very unusual for a black film company to do something this big,'' said
Henry Hampton, the executive producer of the series and the president of
Blackside. ''The obvious way for me to have done it would have been to take it
to a major station, like WGBH or WNET,'' the PBS affiliates in Boston and New
York. ''They were very interested.

''But it was important for me to show it could be done by our kind of company,
and to maintain control over the infamous final cut,'' he added during a recent
interview in his office in Boston's South End, the one racially integrated
section of the city. A stocky, bearded 45-year-old man, Mr. Hampton has been
nurturing the idea for the series ever since he took part in a march in Selma in
1965 with Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Mr. Hampton formed Blackside in 1968 and
has produced more than 40 films. They range from a film to recruit black
officers for the Marine Corps to ''Kinfolks,'' a television documentary
examining the state of the black family in 1979.

His decision to produce ''Eyes on the Prize'' has created the opportunity for
him to get across his own interpretation of the controversial events covered in
the series. But it may also have contributed to the project's troubles: raising
funds and getting interviews with some former segregationist leaders.

The problem with earlier treatments of the civil-rights movement, Mr. Hampton
observed, ''is that they have always been done by whites who depicted black
folks as poor, downtrodden and brutalized primitives.'' On the contrary, Mr.
Hampton continued, ''it was the strength of blacks that made the civil-rights
movement happen, with support from some whites.''

He added that it was the discipline and the organization of groups like Dr.
King's Southern Christian Leadership Conference, the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee (SNCC) and the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), which
mobilized thousands of blacks across the South, that led to the movement's
triumph. In the Montgomery bus boycott, for example, ''Eyes on the Prize'' shows
that Mrs. Parks was actually the third black arrested for refusing to move to
the back of the bus.

''But one of them had a jail record and the other was an unmarried woman who was
pregnant,'' Mr. Hampton explained. ''The black leadership in Montgomery was
waiting for the right person, the strongest ammunition.''

Most of the previous television histories of the period, he feels, have also
shown little sympathy for Southern whites. But Mr. Hampton, a native of St.
Louis whose father was a surgeon, thinks that lapse is ''tragic.''

''Blacks never were more than 20 to 25 percent of the population. There had to
be a major shift in white perceptions,'' he said.

Not all Southern whites have been cooperative with the film makers. Some
politicians, like longtime Alabama Governor George Wallace, who boasted in 1963,
''I say segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever,'' have
turned down requests for interviews. Others, including former Arkansas Governor
Orval Faubus, who tried to block the admission of black students to a high
school in Little Rock, leading President Eisenhower to send in the 101st
Airborne Division, have been noncommittal.

''There is an enormous distrust of the media, especially on this subject in the
South,'' Mr. Hampton said. ''These people are the losing side, so they are not
as interested in speaking to us.''

The series has also been hampered by unexpected difficulty in raising the
neccessary funds. Mr. Hampton initially projected a budget of $1.7 million, a
relatively small sum in television, and he got $1.15 million of that from PBS,
its member stations and the Corporation for Public Broadcasting in Washington.
The rest was to be secured from foundations and corporations. The Ford
Foundation provided $150,000, but he said that most other potential backers he
approached turned him down, among them the Carnegie Foundation and the
Rockefeller Foundation and several companies that in the past have underwritten
important television productions: Xerox, IBM, General Electric and Hallmark.

''A lot of companies said, why do you want to dig all that stuff up,'' Mr.
Hampton said. ''Some of the foundations that were traditionally interested in
civil rights said they had moved on to disarmament.''

The shortage of funds means Mr. Hampton has had to reduce the number of
interviews he had envisioned. It also makes it uncertain whether he will be able
to proceed with a planned second stage of the series that would cover the
movement from 1965 to 1980 as it moved north and became more concerned with
black power.

Mr. Hampton has nevertheless been successful in putting together a carefully
selected mix of 26 people to work on the series, ''a fully desegregated'' team,
in his phrase. The second-in-command, as senior producer and producer of the
initial two programs, is Judith Vecchione, whose first two episodes of the
Vietnam series on PBS were singled out for praise. Miss Vecchione is white, and
joining her as associate producer on the first two parts of ''Eyes on the
Prize'' is Llewellyn Smith, a black.

The director of photography is Jon Else, a white, who has done a number of
prize-winning films for PBS, while the chief researcher is Judy Richardson, a
black woman who worked for SNCC in Alabama and Mississippi during the early
1960's.

The archivist in charge of sorting out the 300,000 feet of historical footage
assembled for the series, much of it from the three national commercial
networks, is Kenn Rabin, a white man who performed the same job for the Vietnam
programs.

Mr. Hampton is quick to concede that ''Vietnam: A Television History'' provided
him with useful lessons. ''I initially wanted to have some historians,
commentators, in the more traditional style of documentaries,'' he recalled.
''But Judith convinced me that the Vietnam series proved you can get an audience
back in time and into the emotion of the moment without someone telling you what
you should feel,'' he said. ''So, everyone who appears in our series is a
participant.''

Mr. Hampton also copied the Vietnam series' use of a seminar where the film
makers met with a group of historians and well-known figures from the
civil-rights movement before the cameras began rolling.

But the civil-rights series ''has one thing 'Vietnam' didn't have,'' said Miss
Vecchione - music. ''In making 'Vietnam,' it was decided early on to keep it low
key. So, no dramatic musical score. But in our case, the music is part of the
story - the freedom songs, the church spirituals,'' she explained.

As filming the interviews has progressed, Mr. Hampton said, there have been some
unexpected revelations. James Foreman, a former leader of SNCC, says on camera
he is convinced that the formation of the Black Panther Party and its turn to
black power ironically grew out of the killing of Viola Liuzzo, a white
housewife from Michigan. She was shot by a carload of Klansmen near Selma.

There have even been some moments of reconciliation. In a restaurant in Albany,
Ga., a crew from Boston was interviewing Laurie Pritchett, who in 1961 had been
the local sheriff, when Mr. Pritchett spotted Dr. William Anderson. Dr. Anderson
had been the leader of an ill-fated attempt to integrate the town's public
facilities at the time but has since moved to Detroit.

''I think I know that black man over there - I arrested him once,'' Mr.
Pritchett said, and he walked across the room and embraced Dr. Anderson.

''Martin Luther King said to me,'' Dr. Anderson recounted, '' 'In 20 years,
you'll be having a drink with that man.' '' And it was so.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a sound technician adjusting a microphone for the Rev. Ralph
D. Abernathy during filming of ''Eyes on the Prize'' (James A. DeVinney)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE KREMLIN WORRIES THAT TOO MANY KNOW TOO MUCH

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 962 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


Many foreigners who did business in the Soviet Union in the old days were
familiar with the Russian technician known as ''the hammer man.'' Whenever one
of their photocopying machines was ready for the scrap heap, the Soviet
Government summoned him to break it beyond repair.

Today the method of disposal is less blunt - old copiers must be shipped back to
the country from which they came - but the fear of unauthorized dissemination of
information is still firmly fixed in the minds of Soviet leaders. If anything,
Western diplomats and Russians say, that concern has intensified as new
technologies have made the propagation of information easier.

One of the toughest quandaries facing Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader,
and the managers he has placed in top jobs is how to harness the power of
advanced technology, particularly computers, without producing an information
and communications revolution. Secretary of State George P. Shultz calls it an
''excruciating problem'' for the Kremlin. ''Regimes that try to stifle the new
information technologies may find themselves falling behind economically; and if
they permit them, they risk losing their monopoly control over information and
ideas,'' Mr. Shultz told the International PEN Congress of writers in Manhattan
two weeks ago.

Mr. Gorbachev talks frequently about the benefits of computers. In a speech last
year outlining his plans to revitalize the Soviet economy, he said, ''the
development of microelectronics, computer equipment, instrument building and the
whole information industry is the catalyst of present-day scientific and
technical progress.''

But so far his words have not led to the mass production or marketing of
personal computers. Powerful main-frame computers, although lagging behind the
most advanced Western models by 5 to 10 years, are not uncommon in the military
and large industries, Western diplomats say. Smaller computers are slowly being
introduced in individual enterprises, but are being used primarily for mundane
jobs such as inventory control.

The first Soviet personal computer, the BK-0010, made its debut with great
fanfare in a few stores last fall, selling for 980 rubles - about $1,250. But
few of the machines were available. At Elektronika, the biggest electronics
store in Moscow, there has been no sign of the BK-0010 in the last few weeks.
The counter where they were displayed in October holds instead an assortment of
plastic toy cars, and a sales clerk said she did not know when the computers
would be available again.

When the computer was on the market, printers were not available and software
was limited, according to Russians who examined the machine. Scientific and
Technological Revolution, a periodical, concluded that the new computer was
designed for professional programmers rather than untrained users.

A Russian computer expert said the absence of printers, combined with the lack
of static-free telephone lines, which are used to send messages from one
computer to another, would prevent exchanges of information even if the machines
became more plentiful. To make sure that computers connected to printers do not
turn into printing presses, the authorities require that most computers be
isolated and carefully controlled. Computers have been introduced into the
educational system, for example, by establishing special schools rather than
distributing them in classrooms around the country.

Loren R. Graham, a specialist on Soviet science policy at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, has warned that the Soviet Union ''will pay a high
price'' for this approach ''by severely limiting the growth of the computer
culture, by hampering the spread of computer literacy among young people and by
losing the advantages of economies of scale that the mass production of
computers is bringing.''

The Government's initial response to video cassette players was similar. It
tried to limit their availability and enforce regulations against the
distribution of Western movies. When that succeeded only in forcing the video
culture underground, making foreign films all the more tantalizing, the
authorities reversed themselves and recently began mass-producing video players
- they hope to make 120,000 a year by the mid-1990's - and setting up stores to
rent ideologically acceptable films. Included in this category are Russian
classics such as Sergei Eisenstein's ''Ivan the Terrible,'' contemporary Russian
movies, some Indian films and cartoons.

'Rambo' Is Hot

The Government's efforts have not stopped the illicit circulation of Western
movies. Current favorites in Moscow include ''Amadeus,'' the Academy-Award
winning film about Mozart and Antonio Salieri, and ''Rambo,'' starring Sylvester
Stallone as a Vietnam War veteran who returns to Southeast Asia and kills more
than a dozen Russians in an attempt to rescue American prisoners of war.

Although the authorities have shown flexibility on the video players, the policy
on photocopiers has not changed since they were introduced. They are kept behind
locked doors, and only authorized workers can use them. Security agencies must
approve the purchase of such machines by Soviet or foreign organizations. The
result is that carbon paper remains a staple for most Russians.

As for the latest information and news, citizens must still rely on sources such
as foreign radio broadcasts, which are frequently jammed. Audio cassettes
circulate widely, offering access to Western music. And some information filters
in from phone conversations with friends and relatives in the West. Even this
channel was controlled when direct dialing from the United States was halted in
the early 1980's. The wait to place a call from New York to Moscow can be more
than 10 hours.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Russian students learning to use computer (NYT/Philip Taubman)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By Newgate Calendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1072 words


Andrew Taylor's ''Caroline Minuscule'' (1983) won the John Creasey Award for
best first novel by a British writer and was nominated for an American Edgar.
Mr. Taylor continues the good work in OUR FATHER'S LIES (Dodd, Mead, $16.95).

The book concerns a daughter suspicious about her father's death. He had been a
well-known historian who lived, as far as anybody knew, a quiet and inoffensive
life. The official verdict is suicide. She finds that impossible to believe, so
she and the son of one of her father's closest friends start investigating. They
soon discover that her father's death was somehow connected to a 1932 murder
case, and that in turn leads back to an episode during World War I that the
Ministry of Defense still classifies top secret.

Not only do the daughter and her friend investigate. The dead man's friend, a
retired army officer, does a little work on his own, using certain sources from
his mysterious past. (It turns out that he had been a secret service officer.)
He learns it would be terribly unwise, if not actually suicidal, to open those
old top-secret files.

So obviously Mr. Taylor is building up to something very big. This is a
complicated plot in which all the strands are coherently brought together at the
end. Not only coherently but also with a high degree of literary expertise. Mr.
Taylor is a sophisticated writer. He handles dialogue smoothly and naturally;
his characters are believable; and there even is a touch of pity at the end -
one can actually feel sorry for the warped mind that started the action that
results in several tragedies. You can't go wrong on this one.

Lightweight but pleasant is DEATH AND BLINTZES by Dorothy and Sidney Rosen
(Walker, $14.95). This is a first crime novel by a husband and wife in their
70's; he is a professor of physical science at the University of Illinois.

The scene is Boston during the Great Depression. The heroine is a Jewish widow
running a sewing machine in a pants factory. Her name is Belle Appleman, and she
is a spunky redhead who doesn't realize how attractive she is. She is also a
very nosy woman, and when there is a murder in the factory, she appoints herself
a detective. She eavesdrops unabashedly (''Listen, a sneak I'm not. But it's a
detective's job to listen, no?''). She has a friend on the police force with
whom she trades information. And she eventually breaks the case.

All this is told in an attractively easygoing style. There is no desperate
attempt to re-create the period of the 1930's. Yet the flavor comes through,
especially when the authors get wrapped up in the role of labor unions in the
Roosevelt years. No new ground is broken, but ''Death and Blintzes'' has a
curious charm.

In TAKE NO PRISONERS by John Crosby (Warner, paper, $3.95), there is no charm at
all. What we have is convulsive action and enough blood to float the Queen Mary.

A history professor in New York, a former agent for the C.I.A., finds a
mysterious man in his apartment. Before he can get to the bottom of things, the
man is assassinated. The next thing that happens is a miniwar on the streets of
New York in which trained troops from somewhere gun down about 20 policemen.
Toward the end there is another war, on a huge Virginia estate. In between there
is a South American connection, a huge sum of cash up for grabs, a torture
chamber and a rescue. Mr. Crosby writes better than most, but this is a silly
book, mostly comic-strip derring-do. Escape reading, some call it.

A dark and moody book, A SHROUD FOR AQUARIUS by Max Allan Collins (Walker,
$14.95) features Mallory (no first name), a Vietnam-veteran mystery writer who
lives in Iowa. A woman he grew up and went to school with is found dead. Suicide
or murder? The sheriff asks Mallory to help the investigation.

The title of the book looks back to ''the age of Aquarius.'' Mr. Collins writes
of the hippies of the 1960's, who have become the middle-aged citizens of the
1980's. The book is about lost hopes and ideals, and a steady drizzle of
disillusion dampens page after page. Most of the characters are tired, unhappy,
disgusted with their lot. Even Mallory, once a hippie himself, better adjusted
than most to the following decades, represents lost faith.

Which is not to say the book is a threnody. There is tight plotting, with a drug
connection and attempted murder. The writing is fast-moving, lean and competent.
Mr. Collins has an outwardly artless style that conceals a great deal of art.

Kay Nolte Smith's ELEGY FOR A SOPRANO (Villard, $14.95) contains, as might be
expected from its title, a great deal about music. More a standard novel than a
mystery (though the book starts with the murder of a Callaslike diva), it tells
the story of an internationally famous soprano. Miss Smith is at home in the
world of opera and the concert stage, and there are very few mistakes in
terminology or background.

The book operates on several levels. One concerns a woman's search for her
roots. The woman discovers she is the illegitimate daughter of the slain diva
and determines not only to find out all she can about her but also to find her
murderer. That is difficult, because four of the singer's friends have
confessed, leaving the baffled police no option but to release all four of them.
(A nice twist, that.) Another level, with many flashbacks, has to do with World
War II and the trials of four children trying to evade the Nazi concentration
camps. And then there is the murder itself. Finally, a basic question is posed
-is great talent its own excuse for being, even if it tramples the proprieties
of life?

In THE DEER LEAP (Little, Brown, $15.95), Martha Grimes continues her series
named after British pubs. It has the usual cast - Superintendent Richard Jury,
that competent Scotland Yard detective and lady-killer supreme; his aristocratic
friend Melrose Plant; and one of those mysterious adolescent girls who figure in
so many Grimes books. This one, an animal lover, goes around doing battle with
all who mistreat four-footed creatures.

The plot ingredients? The possible murder of an old woman. Two fatal accidents.
The apparently aimless slaughter of pets in an English village. The usual mixed
bag of townspeople. One nice thing about this book is that the author has
discovered a new and most ingenious method of murder. ''The Deer Leap'' is deft,
often amusing and worthy of Martha Grimes's generally admired series.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Edward Herrmann (NYT/Ruby Washington)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR GRUMANN TEST PILOT, A LIFE ON THE EDGE

BYLINE: By ALAN FISK

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 1, Column 2; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2872 words


ONE morning several years ago, Charles A. Sewell rose at 6:30 at his home in
East Setauket, jogged two or three miles, then headed for the office as usual.

After several hours of shuffling papers at his desk, he donned his flight suit,
climbed into the cockpit of a sleek, twin-engine F-14 Tomcat fighter plane and
flew it high over Long Island.

The mission that day was to put the plane through maneuvers in which it would go
out of control, and then try to determine recovery procedures. At 35,000 feet,
Mr. Sewell turned off the engines and turned the plane into a violent
upside-down spin.

Suddenly, without warning, a chemical from an emergency power unit leaked and
ran into the left engine. The fire-warning lights went on, he recalls. Flames
shot from one engine, melting the side of the plane.

''I managed to get the engines restarted and headed back to the field,'' he
said. ''I was flying so that the wind kept the flames blowing away from the
plane and the cockpit.''

When the plane touched down, at high speed, it had no brakes. ''The tail hook
caught the wire on the runway, and we stopped,'' he said. ''Forty more seconds,
and the flames would have gotten to the fuel tanks.''

It was not a typical day for Mr. Sewell, the 55-year-old chief test pilot and
deputy director of flight testing for the Grumman Corporation - but it was not
completely unusual either.

His job is to supervise the testing of the high-performance military aircraft
built or modified by Grumman. His joy is to take a multimillion-dollar fighter
into the sky, stall the engines and see what happens. And what happens, he says
matter-of-factly, is that the airplane ''is no longer a flying object, but a
falling object.''

On a recent rainy morning, a day when the weather was too bad for flying, Mr.
Sewell sat in his cluttered office overlooking the flight line and the airstrip
at Grumman's 4,000-acre test area in Calverton.

The office is filled with plastic models of the planes he has flown, including
Grumman's experimental X-29, a plane with the wings swept forward rather than
backward. In December 1984, Mr. Sewell was the first pilot to fly the X-29.

As he sat at his desk, piled high with reports, test data and other paper work,
describing what he and the dozen other Grumman test pilots he supervises do, his
eyes occasionally strayed to the streaked windows and the yellow-brown fields
beyond.

''I'd rather fly than sit behind a desk,'' he conceded. ''I can't think of
anything I'd rather do than fly. You'd cut your best buddy's throat to get a
flight.''

Mr. Sewell has been a flier for 36 years, 20 of them with the Marines. He was
shot down over Korea and led a fighter squadron in Vietnam. He is short, trim,
muscular, often intense. His face is deeply lined and creased, as if reflecting
years spent squinting into the sun from jet cockpits.

Yet he seems younger than his years, only his baldness betraying his age. The
lack of hair does not gibe with the Hollywood image of test pilots as young,
brash, swaggering. On this day, he was wearing a short blue jacket with an
American flag on one sleeve and an X-29 patch over the breast. On the patch was
a Latin motto.

''They tell me it means, 'Fortune favors the bold,' '' Mr. Sewell said. ''But I
say it means, 'Fortune favors the bald.' ''

He and his wife, Bonnie, have been married 33 years and have two grown children.
They met after he had been wounded in the Korean War, while she was a Navy
nurse.

''She tells people she wasn't my nurse,'' Mr. Sewell said. ''If she was, she
never would have married me.''

His wife, he said, understands what being a flier means to him and that the
danger inherent in his profession is not something that will deter him. ''I told
my wife before we got married,'' he said, ''that I married an airplane first.''

Mr. Sewell keeps physically fit. He is a scuba diver and enjoys hang gliding and
soaring. Four or five nights a week he goes to a local gym and works out. He had
a gym and exercise area set up in the pilots' locker room at Calverton. He
stresses fitness, because it is crucial to his job.

He points out that in a plane he can endure eight and a half G's - eight and a
half times the normal pull of gravity - because of his upper-body strength. In
violent aerial maneuvers, he tenses his muscles to help keep the blood from
rushing from his brain.

A number of pilots have been killed recently, he believes, because they have
blacked out at nine G's. That kind of pressure is so enormous, he says, that
even when the pilot regains consciousness, it takes 20 to 30 seconds to get
command of his reflexes. By that time, the plane can be a crumpled pile of
smoking metal.

High-performance fighters such as the Grumman F-14 Tomcat and the F-16 and the
F-18 ''can perform more than the pilot can handle,'' he said. ''We may have
reached the maximum capacity of the human body.''

As with cars coming off the assembly line, fighter planes - which are enormously
more complex - have to be tested. In addition, fighters are constantly being
updated with new engines, new weapons systems and new control devices.

Mr. Sewell was test flying another F-14 over the South Shore a couple of years
ago when, without warning, there was a double-engine explosion.

''You can't 'dead-stick' a modern jet,'' he said, meaning that without power the
hydraulic and electrical systems that control a plane are gone, and a pilot is
suddenly sitting in several tons of flying scrap metal. When the engines would
not respond, Mr. Sewell bailed out and was picked up in the Atlantic off the
Island. The plane crashed into the sea.

''We never found out what happened,'' Mr. Sewell said. ''We only picked up
little pieces.''

Often, he said, he does not tell his wife about such incidents. ''Emergencies,''
he said quietly, ''are not the subject of discussion at home.''

Sometimes, like the boy who cried wolf, he and a neighbor joke about what Mr.
Sewell does for a living. One day, he recalled, he had to bail out of a test
plane and, after he had been picked up by helicopter, he called home from a
Riverhead hospital to tell his wife he was safe. But nobody was home to answer
the phone.

''So I called the neighbor next door and told her I'd ejected, but I was O.K.,''
he said, ''and she didn't believe me.''

In a small room jammed with computers and electronic equipment Mr. Sewell sat in
a flight simulator, headphones over his ears. Before him were half a dozen
instruments and a computer panel on which he could punch instructions for the
type of test he and the engineers wanted to run.

Next door, in a much larger room, were more computers and machines that spewed
out readings of the tests on long streams of paper. The squiggles on the paper
were similar to seismograph results or the lines on a heart monitor.

Mr. Sewell and the engineers can study the squiggles and lines and tell whether
the plane they are testing should adequately perform a certain maneuver. The
simulator can test 600 different variations before a plane leaves the ground. It
saves hundreds of hours of test flying and millions of dollars. It also saves
lives.

''Sometimes what the engineers want to do and what the planes can do are
different things,'' Mr. Sewell said. Using the simulator allows them to ''weed
out unsafe maneuvers.''

He punched several instructions into the machines. One test simulated turns and
dives by the Grumman A-6 medium bomber at 30,000 feet at .55 Mach, just above
half the speed of sound. Mr. Sewell grabbed the control stick with both hands
and slammed it toward him and to one side. The instruments began to go crazy,
the altimeter needle spinning wildly. A black and white ball - the horizon
finder - twirled out of control.

A Grumman group leader and a flight control engineer for the A-6 tests, Ralph B.
Wittman, looked over Mr. Sewell's shoulder, watching the assortment of dials and
scribbling on a pad. ''Are you doing that consciously?'' Mr. Wittman, of
Amityville, asked quietly.

Mr. Sewell made suggestions; then they tried another test. ''There's forward
stick,'' Mr. Sewell murmured into his microphone to the engineers in the next
room. ''I'm in my third spin recovery - I'm off the data base. . . . Full aft
stick, 100 percent yaw rate. Left rudder, half-stick right.''

The horizon finder jumped and twisted and spun - soaring out of control, yet
bound forever to earth.

Mr. Sewell refers to test flying as a ''black art'' because it is so
unpredictable. His specialty is spin-testing fighters - purposely putting the
plane into a situation where it is out of control - certainly one of the most
precarious and dangerous situations for a pilot.

In the simulator, one can study how a plane will react in certain situations, he
said, ''but we don't have the knowledge to know what the plane will do until we
actually try a spin.''

In spin testing, the engines are shut down and the plane falls, sometimes
backward, often spinning around its own axis like a leaf twirling in the wind.
The previous spin-testing pilot at Grumman was killed in 1967. Mr. Sewell was
hired to take his place.

''I like it,'' he said offhandedly. ''You have to depend on yourself -improvise
quickly.''

In Mr. Sewell's office there is a poster showing a grizzled old man with long
white hair and a long white beard in the cockpit of an airplane. The caption on
the poster says, ''Spins take a lot out of you.''

''If they built them perfectly,'' Mr. Sewell said of the planes he flies, ''I
wouldn't have a job.''

The office at Calverton next door to Mr. Sewell's belongs to Roger Ferguson. Mr.
Ferguson, of Setauket, flies as Mr. Sewell's ''gibs,'' or ''guy in the back
seat.''

Modern fighters are so complicated and have so many systems that most have two
seats. The ''guy in the back seat,'' Mr. Ferguson said, is officially called the
weapons systems officer, although he also functions as bombardier, navigator,
radar operator and an extra pair of eyes.

''Four eyeballs are better than two,'' said Mr. Ferguson, who has been flying
with Mr. Sewell for years.

''In modern fighter combat,'' Mr. Sewell said, ''the first guy who screws up is
going to lose.'' Having a reliable man in the back seat allows the pilot to
concentrate on flying. ''An all-weather plane needs two seats,'' he added.

In an emergency, it is the man in back who ejects first.

The two men have an easy, joshing relationship, almost like longtime partners in
a police car. ''The guy in the back seat,'' Mr. Ferguson joked, ''is the one
with the deep voice and the high I.Q.''

As Mr. Sewell laughed, Mr. Ferguson added:

''Do you know why the guys in the back seat call pilots 'flatheads'? Because
pilots are always slapping their foreheads and asking, 'What happened?' ''

Mr. Sewell got hooked on flying, he said, when he was a child growing up in
Texas and Oklahoma. When he was 5 years old, a biplane landed in a field near
his home and he ran out to see it. From then on, he knew he wanted to be a
pilot. At 14, while he was working in oil fields, he got into his first plane.

In 1951, he won his wings as a Marine aviator. It was just in time for the
Korean War.

''In Korea, I used to get hit all the time,'' Mr. Sewell said. ''I was hit on 16
missions in a row - and shot down on the last one.''

While raiding North Korea, Mr. Sewell's plane was struck by ground fire. With
''fire burning my neck,'' he bailed out over enemy territory and spent three
days evading North Korean troops. He hid in a wooded area and ate dried fish
stolen off the roofs of houses. Eventually, he made his way to the coast and
decided to swim to an island 10 miles out.

''I started to go out with the tide when they started shooting at me from the
shore,'' he said. Suffering from shrapnel in his right arm, he was picked up and
taken to an American cruiser. Shortly after, he was back in combat.

In January 1952, he was to be rotated back to the United States because he had
flown too many missions. To stay in Korea, he volunteered to be a forward air
controller with Marines on the ground, calling in air strikes on enemy troops.
''We were taking this big mountain, and I got shot climbing up a hill,'' he
said. ''It shattered the bone in my left arm.''

The two big hangars at Calverton are jammed with planes, their noses drooping,
wings folded like sleeping birds of prey. Hatches and doors are open on many of
the planes under repair. Bundles of wire and circuit boards protrude.

In his career Mr. Sewell has flown 140 types of planes - including the F-14's,
A-6's and the F-111 fighter-bomber in the hangars - for a total of more than
10,000 hours in the air.

He clambered easily into the cockpit of an F-14, stroking the screens, gauges
and instruments with obvious pride. ''The F-14's cockpit is the only one
designed by pilots and weapons officers, so it is simple and efficient,'' he
said, pointing out the wide field of view from the cockpit.

The F-14, he said, can track 24 targets and attack 6 simultaneously. ''It's a
great plane to fly,'' he said, ''a good performer.''

More than 500 have been built for Navy carriers, and 82 were sold to Iran. The
plane carries three types of missiles, and its cannon can fire up to 4,000
rounds a minute. F-14's shot down two Libyan fighter planes in the Mediterranean
in 1981.

And Mr. Sewell said with pride that an electronics-packed version of the Grumman
A-6 was used last year to jam communications so that the United States could
divert to Malta an Egyptian airliner carrying the hijackers of the cruise ship
Achille Lauro.

''Aerial combat hasn't changed essentially since World War I,'' he said, his
hands twisting and turning to show how planes maneuver in battle, ''but the
details and the weapons have changed.''

Mr. Sewell has never flown the F-14 in combat, although, he said, he would enjoy
doing so. He has, however, flown against Soviet warplanes in simulated computer
combat, a process that, he said, left him ''soaked in sweat.''

As a professional warrior, Mr. Sewell was proud to serve in Korea. Vietnam,
however, was another matter.

''I couldn't wait to get to Vietnam,'' he said, anger unexpectedly rising in his
voice, ''and then I couldn't wait to get out.''

Mr. Sewell went to Vietnam as the executive officer of a squadron of F-4's.
Later he commanded an F-4 squadron. He flew 220 missions in all.

But, he asserted, ''We were flying with one hand behind our backs.'' Combat in
World War II was ''no holds barred,'' and there were few restrictions in Korea.
But in Vietnam, he said, ''the rules of engagement were designed so that we
couldn't win the war.''

''We could not engage MIG's or hit missile sites without permission from
Washington,'' he said. He and his fellow pilots could see ships in Hanoi Harbor
unloading war materiel, including missiles, but they were prohibited from
attacking, he said.

''We had people tell us this war's not worth losing your life for,'' he went on,
disbelief still in his voice. ''I lost four guys in my squadron. I lost a lot of
good friends.''

Mr. Sewell retired from the Marine Corps in 1969 as a lieutenant colonel with a
chestful of decorations, including two Purple Hearts. He had been a military
test pilot and had been an exchange fighter pilot with a Royal Air Force
squadron.

Life quieted down - a little - after he arrived at Grumman later that year. Now,
he says, in addition to flying, he travels regularly to the main Grumman plant
in Bethpage to talk with executives and engineers. He gives talks to engineering
and aviation groups, as well as such organizations as the Rotary Club.

Last year, he spoke to a fifth-grade class in Bay Shore. ''The class adopted me
as a role model'' after the flight of the X-29, he said. ''I seriously question
their judgment.''

At the other end of the corridor from his office is the equipment room, where
Mr. Sewell and the other pilots and weapons officers store their bulky flight
suits and helmets. Tommy Block, of Riverhead, the flight-equipment manager,
joshed with the pilots on this rainy day. It is his job to store and repair such
equipment as parachutes. He also comes up with new ideas for safety gear. A sign
over a door says, ''Parachute sale - save on factory seconds.''

Mr. Sewell demonstrated the features of his flight helmet, pointing out that it
is specially modeled to fit his head alone.

Another test pilot, Tommy Gwynne, 46, of Stony Brook, wandered by. Like Mr.
Sewell, he seemed low-key, the friendly suburbanite next door - hardly the
hard-flying jet jockey type. Inevitably, the conversation shifted to flying and
their jobs.

Mr. Sewell pointed out that it costs $11.8 million to train a test pilot -from
the military through test-pilot school. It also costs $5,000 to $6,000 an hour
to fly high-performance test planes, yet test pilots earn less than civilian
airline pilots.

''But we have more job satisfaction,'' Mr. Gwynne said with a smile.

Test pilots, Mr. Sewell agreed, ''are in love with their jobs.''

There is only one aspect of flying Mr. Sewell cannot abide. He hates being a
passenger on an airliner, away from the controls.

''But I get three of those little bottles of wine,'' he said with a grin, ''and
I'm O.K.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Charles A. Sewell (NYT/Keith Meyers)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodia Rebels Report Killing Vietnam Troops

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 127 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 26


Cambodian guerrillas of the Communist Khmer Rouge said today that they killed 30
Vietnamese soldiers and wounded 20 last week in a town near Phnom Penh.

The Khmer Rouge radio, monitored in Bangkok, said guerrillas attacked the
Vietnamese Jan. 19 at Sithor Kandal in Prey Veng Province and ''liberated'' the
town. Prey Veng is about 30 miles east of Phnom Penh.

The Vietnamese twice tried to recapture the town that day but were repulsed by
the guerrillas, the clandestine radio said.

No Khmer Rouge casualty figures were given. The broadcast did not say how long
the rebels held the town.

The report could not be independently confirmed.

The Khmer Rouge is joined with two non-Communist groups fighting Vietnamese
forces that invaded Cambodia in 1978.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 28, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EDUCATION;
WAR COLLEGE TURNS AGAIN TO WAR

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words

DATELINE: CARLISLE BARRACKS, Pa.


After many years of emphasizing politics, diplomacy and budgets, the Army War
College has recently returned to its tradition of educating bright young
colonels to be warriors competent in the operational art of battle.

Charles M. Hersh, the director of academic affairs, says that while the war
college teaches ethics, strategy and the role of the military in American
society, the central message is: ''As a professional, you should be more
competent in knowing how to fight and win wars.''

The objective is to educate the students to be staff officers and ultimately
commanders able to plan and execute large operations like the invasion of
Normandy in World War II.

Such operations would most likely involve forces from the Army, Navy, Air Force
and Marine Corps and could include forces from allies. The Army element might be
a corps of three divisions, or 50,000 soldiers, or a field army of several
corps.

Maj. Gen. James E. Thompson, the commanding officer here, says the purpose of
the war college is to prepare the officers for the next 10 years of service.
When they leave here in June, they will fan out across the Army to senior
positions in the field and the Pentagon.

The war college gives no examinations and no grades. ''But all I have to do to
motivate them,'' says General Thompson, ''is to walk into that auditorium and
say that we are going to identify the third of you who are going to be general
officers.''

General Thompson says teaching operations faded after World War II for reasons
that are unclear. Part of the reason may have been because of nuclear weapons,
which would probably obviate military operations, and another factor may have
been the Vietnam War, which was fought mainly by small units.

After the war in Vietnam, the war college taught students ''to wear big hats,''
says Mr. Hersh. The emphasis was on United States interests, treaties and
commitments, regional affairs and national strategy.

From that time until recently, the military services have been accused by some
critics of lacking a martial spirit, of emphasing management over leadership and
of neglecting strategy.

Losing sight of the operational level of war was a mistake, General Thompson
says. Even though the war college seeks to broaden the thinking and awareness of
the students, the focus has been narrowed to their profession as warriors
executing military operations.

Mr. Hersh says a review of the college's purposes and curriculum in 1981 led to
the new emphasis on the operational art of war and the application of military
power as an instrument of national policy.

The Army War College is the peak of the military educational system, along with
the Navy War College at Newport, R.I., the Air War College at Maxwell Air Force
Base in Alabama, and the National War College and the Industrial College of the
Armed Forces, both in Washington.

The service schools concentrate on land, sea and air warfare respectively while
the National War College prepares officers for duty in joint, four-service
commands and the industrial college concentrates on procurement of weapons and
on logistics.

Below the senior service schools are several levels of military schools. In the
Army, new officers are trained in tactics of the infantry, artillery or armored
forces at basic schools when they are commissioned. They get more of the same at
advanced schools at about the fifth year of service.

When the officers are majors, between the 11th and 13th year of service, the
best are selected for the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth,
Kan.

The gates through which the officers must pass to be selected for military
schools become more and more narrow as they progress. Of all the officers who
begin in a given year, only 3 percent to 5 percent will make it to the Army War
College.

Most of the 168 Army officers in this year's class of 266 were senior lieutenant
colonels when they got here in August, have been battalion commanders or the
equivalent and will be promoted to colonel during the year. The class is rounded
out with officers from the other services, plus some foreign officers, reserve
officers and civilians from Government agencies.

New students begin with an intensive academic year of seven courses taken one at
a time, centering on lectures by military and civilian leaders and seminars of
about 16 students each.

''We are preparing a guy to live in a different world, in an ambiguous
situation,'' Mr. Hersh says.

An instruction booklet expands on those thoughts: ''The nature of the curriculum
is such that it cannot be free of controversy. There are at least two sides to
every issue you will address at the war college, and there are no school
solutions.''

The courses include the study of military history and war, strategy, the
national security process, war and operational planning, military doctrine,
leadership of the Army and management of financial and material resources,
contingency planning and applications of power.

But it is operations that is the continuing theme. ''The thing that is going to
deter a potential adversary,'' says Col. Donald E. Lunday, chairman of the
Department of Military Strategy, Planning and Operations, ''is the student who
walks out of the war college prepared to whip him.''

Teaching operations relies on case studies, such as Normandy and Inchon.
''History is the best way to focus on the operational level of war,'' says
Colonel Lunday.

In addition, the students are put through exercises. They are given situations
in Europe, the Middle East and Central America and told that the President has
decided to send in American forces. They make plans for assembling,
transporting, employing and sustaining those forces.

In a political-military simulation, the emphasis is less on the application of
military power and more on political and economic moves. ''We are interested in
the reasoning process that these guys will go through in the real world,'' says
Lieut. Col. Arthur G. Lozeau.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE SHUTTLE EXPLOSION;
THE SEVEN WHO PERISHED IN THE EXPLOSION OF THE CHALLENGER

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 292 words


Francis R. Scobee Francis R. (Dick) Scobee, a veteran test pilot who served as
pilot on a Challenger shuttle mission in 1984, was the commander of the
Challenger.

Mr. Scobee, who was 46 years old, was killed on his second space mission.

Mr. Scobee had logged more than 6,500 hours of flight time in 45 types of
aircraft.

He was born May 19, 1939, in Cle Elum, a community known for its production of
hothouse flowers, on the Yakima River in Kittitas County in central Washington.

After graduating from high school, he joined the Air Force in 1957 as an
enlisted man and became an engine mechanic. He attended college at night while
he was stationed at Kelly Air Force Base in Texas, where he was named to an
officer training program.

In 1965 he was commissioned an officer and completed his work for a bachelor of
science degree in Aerospace Engineering from the University of Arizona.

He won his wings in 1966, flew combat missions in Vietnam and went to the
Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards Air Force Base in California.

After qualifying as a test pilot, he flew a variety of civilian and military
aircraft.

Chosen in 1978 for the astronaut program, he served as an instructor pilot on
the aircraft used to ferry shuttle spacecraft between ground stations.

He was pilot of the Challenger on its 1984 mission when the crew retrieved the
malfunctioning Solar Maximum Mission satellite, repaired it on their winged
spacecraft and put it back into orbit.

On that mission the crew also deployed the Long Duration Exposure Facility.

In his spare time Mr. Scobee liked to jog, ride motorcycles, do woodworking and
paint in oils.

He was married to June Kent of San Antonio, Tex. They had two children, Kathie,
25, and Richard, 21.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE SHUTTLE EXPLOSION;
THE SEVEN WHO PERISHED IN THE EXPLOSION OF THE CHALLENGER

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 300 words


Michael J. Smith Comdr. Michael J. Smith of the Navy, an astronaut since 1980,
was pilot of the Challenger shuttle mission. The 40-year-old flier had never
been in space.

He was born April 30, 1945, in Beaufort, N.C., and grew up there. He graduated
in 1967 from the United States Naval Academy with a degree in naval science, and
the next year got a master's degree in aeronautical engineering from the Naval
Postgraduate School.

Commander Smith was one of the most seasoned pilots in the astronaut corps,
having flown in 28 kinds of civilian and military aircraft and logging more than
4,300 hours of flight time, mostly in jets.

He finished jet training in 1969 and went on to serve, from 1969 until early in
1971, as a jet training instructor.

In the next two years he flew A-6 Intruder aircraft and served in Vietnam while
assigned to an attack squadron aboard the aircraft carrier Kitty Hawk.

Commander Smith was later assigned to the Strike Aircraft Test Directorate at
Patuxent River, Md., where he worked with cruise missile guidance systems.

Subsequently, he became an instructor of Navy test pilots and saw duty in the
Mediterranean while assigned to another carrier, the Saratoga. He was
maintenance director for an attack squadron on the Saratoga when he was chosen
as an astronaut candidate by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

Later he was assigned for a time to the shuttle avionics laboratory and, among
other jobs, served as an assistant to the fight operations director.

Commander Smith held a number of military honors, including the Navy
Distinguished Flying Cross, three Air Medals, 13 Strike Flight Air Medals and
the Vietnamese Cross of Gallantry with Silver Star.

He was married to the former Jane Jarrell and was the father of three children.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE SHUTTLE EXPLOSION;
PRESIDENT AS HEALER

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 882 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 28


A national disaster like the destruction of the space shuttle Challenger
presents a leader with an especially difficult problem. He must identify with
the ensuing national grief - lead the mourning, in a sense - but he must also
confine it and direct it, lest it evolve into a sense of national despair and
futility.

That need to channel emotion, to share it but shape it and, if possible, to
transform it eventually from a negative into a positive force, lay behind
President Reagan's decision today to defer his State of the Union Message and
substitute for it a brief televised speech to the American public.

Mr. Reagan needed not only to head off any suggestion of cutting back the space
program, or of eliminating future ''citizen passengers'' such as Christa
McAuliffe, the 37-year-old social studies teacher from Concord, N.H., who
apparently perished along with the six crew members.

He also needed to guard against any diminution of the sense of adventure, of
self-confidence, of destiny to lead that he has striven so hard to reinstill in
the American people after the will-sapping failures that befell the United
States in Vietnam and Iran.

Invoking the Pioneers

So the President assured his listeners that ''nothing ends here,'' that other
teachers would make the journey into space and that the United States would
continue to explore far horizons. Like one of the men who hope to succeed him,
Senator Gary Hart, Democrat of Colorado, he invoked the greatest of American
myths, that of the pioneers.

''They had that special grace, that special spirit that says, 'Give me a
challenge and I'll meet it with joy,' '' Mr. Reagan said. ''The future doesn't
belong to the fainthearted, it belongs to the brave. The Challenger crew was
pulling us into the future, and we will continue to follow them.''

The need that the President addressed tonight is a need as old as organized
societies. In crises past, it has been successfully met by the celebration of
heroes and martyrs, by the defiant rhetoric of Charles de Gaulle after the fall
of France and Winston Churchill during the Blitz, even by the popularization of
gritty, bittersweet songs like ''Tipperary'' or ''Praise the Lord and Pass the
Ammunition.''

Failure to meet the need is inevitably costly. It ruined Herbert Hoover's
Presidency after the Great Crash, Lyndon Johnson's Presidency after the Tet
offensive, Jimmy Carter's Presidency after the capture of the American Embassy
in Teheran.

Augmented by Television

The sense of national catastrophe is inevitably heightened in a television age,
when the whole country participates in it. A first hint of the power of the
electronic media to bring disaster directly into living rooms came with the
radio broadcast of the explosion of the zeppelin Hindenburg in 1937; but that
was as nothing compared with the pictures this morning of the space shuttle
exploding, disintegrating and etching chaotic, sickening contrails against the
blue sky.

White House staffs, and this one was probably no exception, always urge in
moments of stress that Presidents carry on with their schedules, with ''business
as usual,'' to give an impression of steadiness and continuity in the Oval
Office. According to several sources, that was the initial intention of Mr.
Reagan with regard to the State of the Union speech.

But he himself, as he said shortly after the explosion, had found the television
pictures ''traumatic,'' and he obviously sensed that the country as a whole
would find them similarly wounding. He quickly decided to change his plans.

'Pained to the Core'

By remarking that he and his wife had been ''pained to the core'' by the
catastrophe, Mr. Reagan established an elegiac tone, but by his homiletic words
about the need to press ahead and by recalling a great explorer of another era,
Sir Francis Drake, he sought to insure that the initial shock and sadness would
evolve, in time, into a renewed sense of determination.

Mr. Reagan has shown in the past that he was willing, when he felt the situation
called for it, to put aside carefully laid plans. In April 1983, for example,
following the bombing of the United States Embassy in Beirut, he went to Andrews
Air Force Base south of Washington to take part in a ceremony marking the return
of the flag-draped coffins from Lebanon.

That night, he was scheduled to make the traditional joke-studded Presidential
speech at the annual dinner of the White House Correspondents' Association. He
went to the dinner, but he discarded his speech. He told the guests that he
hadn't the heart to deliver it and said, ''I hope you understand.''

Postponing the State of the Union Message was a more serious matter. Although it
has not always been delivered in person to a joint session of Congress - no
President between John Adams and Woodrow Wilson did so, and there have been at
least eight years in the last half-century when the President refrained from
going to Capitol Hill in person - Mr. Reagan was apparently the first chief
executive to decide upon a last-minute postponement.

In breaking with precedent, Mr. Reagan gave further emphasis to his plea for
national solidarity and resolve at a moment of shared loss. In a week's time,
aides hope, the nation's nerves will have steadied.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE SHUTTLE EXPLOSION;
REFLECTING ON LOSS: WELLING OF TEARS, A DESIRE TO PRESS ON

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2144 words


The explosion yesterday of an American shuttle shortly after liftoff, with the
death of its crew of seven people, stunned and deeply saddened much of the
nation. Many of those who reflected on the disaster tell how it appeared from
their perspective, as religious leaders, writers, students, psychiatrists,
educators, scientists and test pilots.

Daniel J. Boorstin

The Librarian of Congress I have a terrible feeling of sadness, I want to weep.
In the long run, this shows us that the best things in life are not free. It
makes us more grateful to the people who have been taking these risks all along
without our knowing it.

I hope this won't stop the space program, I don't think it will. Sir Francis
Drake, Magellan, countless other great explorers lost their lives; this happens
in any great adventure. It's sad it has to happen but somebody has to take these
chances if we're to do things that have never been done before.

It does affect us deeply; something like this brings the nation together. The
space program in general has done that; people understand the grandeur even if
not the technology, and to share that grandeur is what makes a great nation.

The Rev. Billy Graham

Evangelist We've had so many of these tragedies lately that I think it has
sobered the American people and made it much more easy to talk philosophically
and religiously to people. People listen more attentively because they realize
how fragile life is, and how quickly it can be snuffed out. People are dying
every day of cancer, heart attacks and in other ways, our lives are very brief.

I also think a tragedy like this tends to bring us together almost like the
events of Pearl Harbor many years ago. It makes us realize how interdependent we
are on each other. And I think it bring tears to our eyes. It did to me when I
think of those schoolchildren watching and I think of what they saw and the
impact it had on them. They'll neve forget that. I'ts a terrible tragedy but
there will be some positive things that will come out of it. There will be a
greater understanding of the risks these astronauts have been tkaing through the
years. It will cause us when we watch their launch to say a prayer of their
safety. We've taken it for granted for so long.

David Leavitt

Author of ''Family Dancing,'' a collection of short stories What seems to have
impressed me as most sad about this is that there was such an association with
this space shuttle and children. Children in Oakland, N.J., actually built a
cardboard space shuttle to replicate the mission. It was such a fantasy - this
wonderful teacher on board, and we all remember the great love which one has for
a teacher in our past. In certain ways, it brought the shuttle to a new symbolic
height. What I'm feeling most profoundly, if it doesn't sound too hifalutin, is
that there's a certain loss of innocence associated with it. It wasn't just any
space shuttle. It's the one that became the children's crusade, a journey the
children were taking into outer space.

I grew up with Star Trek as my major cultural influence and this was the
ultimate dream, every kid's fantasy going to moon, being invited to be a visitor
on the Starship Enterprise. I think it will be emblematic of a loss of innocence
about the dangers of space travel.

It's as if the revolution in transportation technology has gotten to point where
it's almost time to say, 'Hold on, we're gone too far, there are too many
risks.' The lunacy of sending people up with liquid nitrogen and hydrogen
attached!

I was too young to absorb the shooting of the Kennedys. But what I found
particularly horrible about the whole thing is how often they showed the
reaction to Christa McAuliffe being killed by the people who loved her. They
showed in excruciating detail, her parents, the children at her school in the
auditorium. They're the video equivalent of other famous images of cataclysm,
like those from the Kent State riot, or the child running in Vietnam. Those
images will hang in people's minds and be hard to erase.

Gen. Chuck Yeager

Test pilot and author of ''Yeager''

I probably look at it a little different from someone who's never seen an
accident such as this. I've seen accidents, a lot of accidents and I've been
around accidents and having been director of safety for the Air Force and of
course the shuttle is unusual because it receives a tremendous amount of
exposure.

It won't cause any great long term effect on the space program. I see a need to
look at all information we have, telemetry data, photo coverage and the
documentation of the vehicle and then find out what caused the accident and take
corrective action and then press on. It's already happened, so there's nothing
you can do about. The object is to prevent it from happening again.

Dr. Robert Coles

Child psychiatrist at Harvard I was in the supermarket when I heard about it and
it was in the morning; most of the people there were young parents with their
children, shopping, and several of them started crying, and I couldn't help but
getting choked up with them.

As an educator, one who works with children all day, what I've been thinking of
is the children of all the astronauts, and especially the children of the school
teacher. We've gotten to know them on television. Can you imagine those two
children watching it with their father? It's such an unparalleled situation,
never before had two children and their father watched their mother go into
space. That psychological situation has never before been faced by anyone.

I think it's a moment of sadness and tragedy, but I would hasten to add that
there are tragedies that take place all the time and they are followed by
moments of courage and determination and I don't think this need be an
irreversible tragedy. I think the children will understand that the country goes
on and that the country is more than just one tragedy, that it will survive this
tragedy as it has survived other tragedies.

Eleanor Holmes Nortion

Georgetown U. Professor I feel the same sense of loss for each one of the seven.
But I cannot help but note that for me this flight somehow symbolized America as
we are trying to make it, an America with a black, an Asian, a woman, and with
white men, perhaps the most fully integrated flight ever made, all joining in a
common cause. Still, I believe in America's resilience and that we will use this
tragedy to rebuild. Cardinal Bernardin Archbishop of Chicago The first thing I
thought of was the lives that had been lost and my heart went out to these seven
people as well as to their families. I was very saddened. I immediately offered
a prayer on their behalf.

Death is part of the human condition. It's something that we all have to face.
But it becomes especially difficult when it's sudden or the result of an
accident or tragedy of this kind, and I think at a time like this that faith is
very important. We believe in a merciful and provident God. We believe that God
will take care of us, no matter how long or brief our journey in this lfie is.

And I just think that our faith in God makes it possible for us to accept the
human tragedies that we face in life. We don't have answers for all of life's
mysteries, but what's more important is our faith in God, and its that faith
that makes it possible for uis to cope with these tragedies when they occur.

Dr. Willard Gaylin

President of Hastings Center Television - this is the extension of the power of
vision, or contact. Seeing them at breakfast, seeing them disappointed - it
makes these astronauts real. I connect all this with what I call a theory of
proximal identification. It's not pretty, but we tend to identify with things
close to us. If your child burns his hand it causes you more pain than if
something awful happens in India. You may care what happens in India, but your
child causes you more real pain. That's why local news interests people so much.
These people are closer. Did you know that TV stars are approached by strangers
more on the streets than movie stars are? They're closer. Movie stars seem
relatively distant and unapproachable. But you feel you know this TV
personality, you've seen her in her curlers, she's seen you in your pajamas.

''There's something else. The difference between airplane crashes and the space
shuttle - although an airplane may kill hundreds of people - is that the shuttle
is magic. It has grandiosity. This one was going to study a comet. There's an
element of hubris in it, as if it were a Greek tragedy.''

Lowell Wood Scientists at Livermore Laboratory I don't expect this will make a
substantial difference to the national space program or those aspect that affect
our work. We assume they'll pin down the cause of the accident and fix it. The
only real question is how much of a pause there will be in this year's ambitious
space program; 1986 was going to be a banner year for the space program.

The scale and visibility are different, but these problems happen all the time
when you have really complicated, high-tech systems. This is new, visible and
spectacular and has more public impact than a civilian air crash, which kills
far more people. But in perspective, it's just one of those accidents of the
pioneering days. It's astounding that nearly 2 decades have gone by since the
last loss of life in the space program. In the entire lunar flight program, it's
stunning we didn't lose any lives. There's never been a safety record like
NASA's.

Ellen Futter

President of Barnard College Obviously, it's a huge human tragedy, and an
especially poignant one for everyone and especially for young people.
Particularly in the context of a teacher, a woman, a mother, especially someone
not associated with the space program. She didn't step into this assuming the
risk that goes along with an astronaut career; she was tapped for it and went
along with it. There was a feeling she was Jane Q. Public, it could be any of
us.

As this plays out, it will be devasting to think of the incredible irony of
Christa McAuliffe's family and students watching this thing through the wonder
of one form of technology, even as another form of technology is failing at that
moment.

In more philosophical terms, it touches on certain basic themes regarding the
human condition in modern life. It touches on central themes of liberal arts,
the fine line between tragedy and triumph, and really speaks directly to the
limits of technology, as well as what we've focused on more lately - the
unbelievable capacity of technology. It represents a uniquely modern tragedy. It
points out the need for prudence as well as continuing hope.

Our students will identify with the death of this young woman. The big issue for
young people will be maintaining hope and the courage to pursue space
development and science and technology even while acknowledging the real risks.
That's always a tension.

Sean Keegan

Senior at Fordham University It's almost like we see death every day, every
hour, on television. But when something so tragic like this happens, it hits a
different core. It makes you realize there are more risks in life. It does bring
you closer to the idea that the astronauts are taking an incredible risk.

You'll remember it for years. It's funny, I hear my parents talk about
remembering exactly where they were the time Kennedy was shot. I'll remember
exactly where I was the time I heard about the space shuttle exploding. It's one
of those events.

What happened today was sort of a ''freak'' accident. I do think we should
continue going, keep up the space travel, so that someday, when I'm old and
gray, space travel could become a regular thing. We have learned so much that
each mission. It's essential one day for travel in space to occur. If we stop
now, we may never get up there.

Ann Beattie

Novelist A friend said it best, in a phone call around noon. He said, 'Not
again.'

Everything affects me as a writer. I was sitting alone writing and it pulled the
rug out from under me. When you are a writer, in some ways, you space out when
you're working. After the phone call, I just spent most of the day looking out
the window and thinking.

It calls attention to the fact that there's a great big other world out there.
Imagination pales in comparison with real stuff.

I was thinking about ''The Birds,'' that sang that song, ''Lost away in space,''
when the three astronauts burned up years ago. I was remembering snatches of it,
''millions of hearts are lifted out of human race, space control in Houston,
military command.'' Quite frankly, I thought, God, Ann, here you are working and
there's a tragedy in the world out there. It shakes you back to reality. It's
not something that happened to somebody else. It happened here in this country
and I'm in this country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Daniel Boorstin; photo of Gen. Chuck Yeager; photo of the Rev.
Billy Graham; photo of Ann Beattie; photo of Eleanor Holmes Norton; photo of
Joseph Cardinal Bernardin

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Pentagon and the Press: The War Goes On

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1185 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 28


When the Defense Department prevented the press from covering the first days of
the invasion of Grenada in October 1983, editors erupted in anger, asserting
that the people's right to know had been violated. Equally angry, military
officers contended that the press could not be trusted to preserve security in
the course of military operations.

After the dust settled, journalists and officers began talking about improving
relations. A special commission of military officers and former journalists
recommended greater access by the military and greater restraint by journalists.
Seminars have been held at the top military schools, giving each side a chance
to present its views to the other, face to face.

Today, with two years of discussion behind them, the soldiers and the scribes
have declared a truce, at least on the surface. But underneath, many of the old
animosities seem to remain.

It May Get Worse

Some argue that these animosities may get worse, that the differences between
the press and the military are, at heart, inherent to their conflicting roles in
American society, not just to disagreements over press access and military
security.

Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, in a recent speech, applauded the
principle of a free press, and then came close to accusing the press of treason.

''Sometimes there seems to be little or no thought given,'' he said, ''to
whether publication of facts will harm the national security; whether it will
give aid and comfort to our enemies; whether it will complicate the conduct of
our foreign policy or, most important, whether it will endanger American
lives.''

Even before Mr. Weinberger spoke, journalists and military officers who have
lamented the antagonisms were saying that they saw little evidence of progress.

''I think the most you could say is that we understand each other better, but no
more than that - nothing else has changed,'' said Fred W. Friendly, the former
CBS News producer who now directs seminars on the press and society at Columbia
University and who has taken part in some of the military-press seminars.

Gen. Edward C. Meyer, a retired Chief of Staff of the Army, agrees. But, the
general says, ''a larger number of military officers are ready to speak out now
if they aren't gagged.''

Robert B. Sims, a retired naval officer who is the Pentagon's chief spokesman,
contends that it has done its share to improve relations, particularly by
organizing a press pool that might cover contingencies like Grenada as
representative of the entire press corps. The pool has been run through three
practice drills.

But Mr. Sims is critical of younger reporters with no military experience,
saying many do not understand how the military works. He says the Defense
Department plans to invite some on trips to the field to get a taste of military
operations.

Over all, Mr. Sims adds, the complaints of the military against the press for
seeing the dark side of life are much the same as those of other institutions.
''The news media's problem with the military,'' he said, ''doesn't just pertain
to the military but is a problem with a lot of segments of society.''

On the press side, Charles Corddry of The Baltimore Sun, the dean of the
Pentagon press corps, sees little change in the military's attitude toward the
press.

''I don't sense that things have improved,'' he said, ''although some of the
things they're doing are good. Pools are good for the press, who need educating,
and good for the Defense Department.''

The Grenada invasion helped bring into the open antipathies rooted in the
Vietnam era, says Col. Harry G. Summers Jr., a retired Army officer who has
written on the lack of public support for the war in Vietnam. Most military
officers felt that press coverage of the war was unfair, and many journalists
felt that the military and other Government spokesmen were less than honest in
their reports to the press.

''Grenada was a shock that scared everybody,'' Colonel Summers said. ''I don't
think either side realized the depth of the problem.''

Although the climate is better among the older soldiers whose memories of
Vietnam are fading, Colonel Summers agrees with Mr. Sims that the animosities
are worse among military people who were too young for Vietnam and among younger
journalists who have not been in military service.

''The follow-on generation in the military believes all the myths about the
media losing the war in Vietnam,'' said Colonel Summers, now a military
correspondent with U.S. News & World Report. ''And the follow-on generation in
journalism knows nothing about the military.''

In the past two years, scores of journalists have participated in seminars at
the National Defense University here or at the top Army, Navy, Marine Corps and
Air Force schools around the nation. From the seminars has emerged a clear
conclusion that the issue of operational security, the explanation given by the
Pentagon when coverage of Grenada was blocked, has little to do with the
antipathy of the military toward the press.

At the Naval War College in Newport, R.I., a retired admiral went to the heart
of the matter. ''Operational security is not the problem,'' said the admiral,
who cannot be named under conference rules. ''The problem is that when you write
about us, you make us look bad.''

Mr. Friendly said that from the military viewpoint, ''the real problem is the
lack of context,'' or telling the full story. The military, he added, thinks a
two-minute television report or 1,000 words in a newspaper are too brief to tell
everything that happened.

General Meyer made a similar point. ''I don't think it's the military and the
media in the context of war,'' he said, ''but the military and the media in the
way people function in peacetime.''

At the National War College here, a reporter asked each officer around a table
to state what bothered him most about the press. Arrogance, slanted news,
invasion of privacy, inaccuracy and emphasizing bad news were among the replies.
None mentioned the protection of operational security.

'Different Sets of Values'

At bottom are sharp differences in culture. The Twentieth Century Fund, a
research foundation in New York, commissioned a study by journalists and
military leaders last year that concluded: ''The divide between the military and
media is in danger of widening.''

''Each tends to attract different personality types and to foster different sets
of values,'' the study said. ''Of necessity, military people are schooled to
respect tradition, authority and leadership; obedience is an inescapable part of
military life. In contrast, because journalists on occasion have the job of
challenging official wisdom, their ranks tend to be filled with those who are
more free-wheeling, irreverent and skeptical of authority.''

Mr. Friendly agrees that there are built-in differences between soldiers and
journalists. ''The soldier hides behind national security,'' he said, ''and the
journalist hides behind the First Amendment.''

With a touch of regret, he concluded: ''There's no real answer.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE SCREEN: 'A.K.' AND 'ULYSSE'

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 818 words


''WE'RE lucky just to be on the set,'' says the reverent narrator of ''A. K.,''
somewhat in the manner of a rock groupie watching a music video being shot. A
little later the narrator sounds as if he were being initiated into the
Eleusinian mysteries: ''We were to become more familiar every day with those who
form his little solar system. Sensei is the center.''

Sensei (Master) is Akira Kurosawa and ''A. K.'' is Chris Marker's 77-minute
documentary that records the French film maker's several days on location with
Mr. Kurosawa during the production of ''Ran.'' The documentary opens today at
the Film Forum 1 on a bill with Agnes Varda's 22-minute ''Ulysse.''

Considering the talent, stature and complexity of both Mr. Kurosawa and Mr.
Marker, as well as the achievement of ''Ran'' itself, ''A. K.'' is, though
handsome, singularly superficial. It looks and sounds like a desperate attempt
to impose significance on footage no more or less interesting than Mr. Marker
might have found on the set of ''The Jewel of the Nile.''

What we learn, we learn not from the overblown, English-language soundtrack
narration but for ourselves, by watching the screen. While shooting at the base
of Mount Fuji, Mr. Kurosawa wears a blue cap, a tan windbreaker, a red shirt,
jeans, jogging shoes and dark glasses. He has his own chef at hand.

Sometimes, during a break, he sits alone in the grass. The narrator tells us
that Sensei is meditating, though he could be just thinking or even
day-dreaming. When a big, complicated scene is being set up - a scene on which a
lot of money is riding - Sensei may display the tiniest bit of impatience by
barking: ''You, over there. What do you think you're doing!''

Some basic facts are revealed. Mr. Kurosawa likes to shoot spectacle scenes with
three cameras. To get the necessary dusty effect when horses gallop across a
plain, powdered cement is mixed with the surface soil. The costumes of the
hundreds of extras have been exhaustively researched for authenticity, and the
extras themselves carefully drilled.

This sort of information is interesting if not mind-boggling. Mr. Marker
attempts to upgrade his footage by dividing the film into segments titled
''Battles,'' ''Patience,'' ''Rain,'' ''Fire,'' ''Fog'' and so on, though what we
see in any one segment could just as easily have been in another.

At one point, the narrator (Robert Kramer) introduces by name seven men who have
worked with Mr. Kurosawa through the years, known, we are told, as ''the seven
samurai.'' The camera zeros in on the face of one of them as the narrator muses,
as if looking at the Sphinx, ''These are the eyes that saw Mifune riddled with
arrows in 'Throne of Blood.' ''

Though made by Mr. Marker (''Le Joli Mai,'' ''Far From Vietnam''), ''A. K.''
isn't good enough.

In ''Ulysse,'' Agnes Varda, who began as a still photographer and went on to
direct some good films (''Cleo From 5 to 7,'' ''Lions Love'') and some not so
hot (''One Sings, the Other Doesn't''), ponders the meaning of a photograph she
took 30 years ago. It's a crystal-clear, black-and-white composition in which a
naked man, his back to the camera, stands on a rocky beach, looking toward the
sea, while a naked little boy sits nearby, staring at the photographer and
ignoring the carcass of a goat in the foreground.

The photograph is initially mysterious and striking, like Andrew Wyeth's
''Christina's World,'' and, like the painting, the film Miss Varda has made
about the photograph has its moments of pretentiousness. ''You see everything
and you see nothing,'' Miss Varda says on the soundtrack, which, taking my lead
from Miss Varda's oblique, self-absorbed narration, I can say is only half-true.

Ulysse is the name of the naked boy, the son of Spanish Republican refugees who
had been Miss Varda's friends in Paris. The film's most interesting moments come
when Miss Varda calls on Ulysse today at the Rue de Rivoli bookshop he runs.
Ulysse is a bit startled.  Shown the photograph, he says he remembers nothing of
the circumstances in which it was taken. Miss Varda cross-examines him as if she
were an attorney, then shows him a painting he made as a child, copying the
photograph. He still doesn't remember. Miss Varda finds that so difficult to
believe that she seems to think he is lying. Suggests the patient Ulysse, ''It's
reality and fiction.''

Miss Varda is an excellent photographer. The Creative Process A. K., directed
and written by Chris Marker (in English, and in Japanese with English
subtitles); director of photography, Frans-Yves Maresco; music by Toru
Takemitsu; narrated by Robert Kramer; produced by Serge Silberman; an Orion
Classics release. Running time: 77 minutes. This film is unrated. ULYSSE,
directed and written by Agnes Varda (in French with English subtitles).

Running time: 22 minutes. This film is unrated. Both films at Film Forum 1, at
57 Watts Street.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Tatsuya Nakadai

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 30, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DAY OF DECISION AT THE NAVAL ACADEMY

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 960 words

DATELINE: ANNAPOLIS, Md., Jan. 23


Midshipmen who will graduate from the Naval Academy in June decided this week
whether they wanted to be aviators or nuclear submariners, destroyermen or
engineers, marines or oceanographers.

From late Thursday afternoon through the wee hours of Friday morning, the first
classmen, or seniors, lined up according to their standing in the class, walked
up to a long table lined with officers from each specialty and made their
choices on a first-come, first-served basis.

The No. 1 midshipman in the class of 1026, Jeffrey D. Semancik of Manchester,
N.H., chose to become a nuclear submariner. Altogether, 302 midshipmen opted for
aviation, 270 for the surface Navy, 171 for the Marine Corps, and 156 to become
submariners.

Denise M. Edson of Pensacola, Fla., the highest-ranking of the 65 women in the
class, chose duty aboard the destroyer tender Yosemite. Women are limited to
assignments aboard noncombatant ships, and Midshipman Edson, the daughter of a
naval aviator, said she thought the Yosemite would have more time under way than
other vessels open to women.

Emotions Were High

Smaller numbers elected to go into the Civil Engineering Corps, become supply
officers, go into cryptology or intelligence, or join the Navy's commandos, the
Seals. Six will go to medical school and five chose the Air Force.

Emotions sometimes ran high in the selection. There was elation for those who
got their first choices, tension in the middle of the class for midshipmen who
had to make spot decisions depending on what was still open, and disappointment
for some of those at the bottom.

The Academy's Director of Professional Development, Capt. Douglas J. Katz,
summed it up, saying: ''This is the last chance where he or she has sole control
over his destiny. After this, it's the needs of the service.''

But the officers lightened the mood by not requiring midshipmen to snap to
attention or render salutes. It was more like a college fraternity rush, where
the midshipman was greeted by members of his specialty with a handshake and a
''welcome to our community.''

When it was over, the sense of relief was palpable as the midshipmen trooped
into a lounge for pizza and beer and to talk over their fates. A midshipman with
an injured foot hopped down the stairs two at a time on crutches.

With their choices, the future for the midshipmen, and for their contemporaries
at West Point and the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, has been mapped
out, in contrast to many seniors in civilian colleges who are in a period of
uncertainty as they seek jobs starting in June.

Specialty Training Next

After graduation, the midshipmen will train for their specialties, for periods
ranging from four months for conventionally powered surface ships to 18 months
for nuclear submarines. After tours at sea, most will have come close to
fulfilling their five-year obligation to the Navy. Over the long run, however,
about 70 percent will make the service a career.

Midshipmen gave a variety of reasons for their choices.

William J. James of Detroit, the ninth-ranking midshipman in the class, decided
on a destroyer based in Japan because ''I joined the Navy to travel and to
manage people.''

Daniel J. Merzke of Rochester, N.Y., ranked 17th and is currently the brigade
commander, or top officer among the midshipmen. Formerly an enlisted machinist's
mate in a submarine, he chose to obtain a graduate degree in nuclear
engineering, then to become a pilot.

Another former enlisted submariner, Craig F. Merrill, decided to return to ''the
silent service'' after considering the Marine Corps. ''I like the tightness of
the small group,'' he said. Midshipman Merrill, of Orlando, Fla., was brigade
commander during the fall term.

Among others in the top quarter of the class, Charles B. McClelland of
Lewisville, Tex., joined the Marine Corps because ''I like the way they work,
the way they talk about their service.'' The eyesight of John K. Martinelli of
Alexandria, Va., is not quite good enough for piloting, so he wants to be a
naval flight officer operating weapons aboard attack aircraft. Mark J. DeClue of
Cocoa Beach, Fla., chose the nuclear-powered cruiser Texas because
nuclear-trained officers have risen quickly in recent years.

Education Begins Early

The Naval Academy begins to educate midshipmen on possible careers in their
first summer in Annapolis, when they receive basic military training. During the
next summer, they serve at sea as enlisted sailors to learn the ropes of
seamanship.

The summer between the second and third years, the midshipmen sample life in a
submarine, as fliers, and in the Marine Corps. In their last summer, many spend
several weeks with the branch in which they are most interested.

Meantime, officers here are role models and counselors. Comdr. David M. Lee
tells midshipmen that the surface navy in recent years has regained its earlier
prestige. Comdr. Richard D. Evert, an aviator, said, ''Many midshipmen see
themselves as fighter pilots when they walk in the door.''

Capt. Albert H. Konetzni says submarines are for those ''who really want to test
themselves and to be on the cutting edge of what we do.'' Bonuses for choosing
to train in nuclear power, for undersea duty, and for continuing in submarines
are an added incentive.

For the Marine Corps, Col. John W. Ripley, who won the Navy Cross for heroism in
the Vietnam War, tells prospects, ''You must really want to be a marine.'' He
added, ''We are extremely careful not to lead them down the garden path.''

In addition to encouraging top midshipmen to become marines, Colonel Ripley
looks for people near the bottom. ''They're the ones I want,'' he said.
''They're the strugglers; they've had to cope with adversity.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of midshipmen

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 30, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE SHUTTLE INQUIRY: SEARCH FOR ALTERNATIVESISSUE AND DEBATE;
SHOULD U.S. CONTINUE TO SEND PEOPLE INTO SPACE?

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1302 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 29


The explosion of the space shuttle Challenger Tuesday is raising anew the
question of whether it is worth the risk and the expense for the United States
to send people into space.

The question has arisen time and again since the space age began in the 1950's,
and while space travel has become ever more sophisticated, the arguments about
humans versus machines in space have remained basically the same.

The position held by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and a
succession of American Presidents is that mankind must expand the horizons of
knowledge and that no machines will ever be invented that can make judgments as
well as human beings.

On the other side, some scientists and politicians hold that remote-control
robots and cameras can perform almost every identifiable mission in space at a
far lower cost in terms of money and human lives.

Both sides agree on one point: Had it not been for the drama provided by men in
space - from the first flights of Yuri A. Gagarin and Alan B. Shepard Jr.
through the landing on the moon in 1969 and the shuttle flights of recent years
- Congress and the American people would have been less enthusiastic about
providing the backing for the space program.

The Background

Manned space travel, a subject of science fiction for centuries, became a
reality in April 1961 when Mr. Gagarin, the Soviet astronaut, was launched into
orbit, three weeks ahead of Mr. Shepard's suborbital flight.

With Americans frustrated by the Russians' apparent lead in space exploration,
President Kennedy went before Congress and pledged a national commitment to land
a man on the moon ''before the decade is out.''

For the next eight years, with the nation's economy basically healthy and with
only occasional complaints that the Apollo moon program was too expensive, the
United States was committed to what a top NASA official called ''the largest
single engineering undertaking attempted in peacetime.''

The landing on the moon in July 1969, seen on television around the world,
provided an important lift to American morale and enhanced the prestige of the
United States at a time when the country was increasingly under attack
internationally for its presence in Vietnam.

Political opposition to manned space travel accelerated as the Apollo program
wound down and the American economy turned sour. One of the leading critics,
then-Senator Walter F. Mondale, a Minnesota Democrat, complained in 1972 that
the space shuttle would be a ''senseless extravaganza in space,'' swallowing
money that ''should go to solve human problems such as mass transit, housing,
education and the environment.''

But NASA officials proclaimed that the shuttle would pay for itself by carrying
commercial payloads, a prediction that has not been borne out. President Nixon
endorsed the project and it was generally accepted in Congress, in large part
because of the many jobs it would create in the flagging aerospace industry.

Unmanned space exploration continued through the 1970's and 1980's, providing
occasionally spectacular results like the photographs of Uranus and its moons
that were sent to earth by the Voyager 2 spacecraft last week. Important as such
findings were scientifically, they never captured the imagination of the public
the way people in space did.

In his 1984 State of the Union Message, President Reagan directed NASA ''to
develop a permanently manned space station and to do it within a decade.'' That
has become the centerpiece of the Reagan Administration's space policy.

For Human Crews

The fundamental argument for sending people into space was expressed last week
by Eugene A. Cernan, the last astronaut to walk on the moon. ''Our insatiable
desire for knowledge,'' he said in an interview on the ABC News program
''Nightline,'' ''would never be satisfied by the simplicity of a picture or some
remote sensors that give us some information back.''

''Exploration without man,'' he added, ''is not exploration at all.''

One of the most powerful arguments on this side is the analogy to Christopher
Columbus. Mankind, this argument goes, cannot always rely on observations that
have been made before. Sometimes, we must bet on the unknown, and occasionally
we will reap unexpected rewards.

More narrowly, the Americans who landed on the moon obtained much more important
scientific data than did the Russians, who depended on unmanned moon shots. The
space shuttle has performed tasks that probably could not have been done by
machines, such as retrieving satellites and serving as a platform for
astronauts' repairing satellites.

NASA argues that the next step in manned space exploration, a permanent space
station, would be useful for manufacturing, for servicing satellites and for
studying humans in space. ''Astronauts will be employed in tasks and roles where
our experience and instruction tell us that the presence of man is uniquely
valuable,'' said James M. Beggs, a former NASA Administrator.

Against Human Crews

Opponents of manned space flight argue primarily that the cost of putting people
in space is too great to justify the scientific results. Some would like the
money to be used for more ambitious unmanned space exploration. Others believe
the money could be better used elsewhere in the Government.

Prof. Thomas Gold of Cornell University, one of the most outspoken academic
advocates of this point of view, made an argument 15 years ago, when the Apollo
program was in full swing and the space shuttle was in its embryonic stage, that
he adheres to today. ''In the science field, it is of course true that some
valuable observations can be made'' by a person in space, the astronomer wrote.
''But equally it is true for every one of those that they could be made by
instrumented flight at much lower cost.'' Often, Professor Gold continued, the
presence of a person ''is in fact a hindrance by introducing a disturbance level
and by introducing the severe operational constraints on the mission.''

Another longtime scientific critic of space travel, Prof. James A. Van Allen, a
physicist at the University of Iowa, points to severe cutbacks in other space
programs in recent years and argues, in Scientific American, ''The progressive
loss of U.S. leadership in space science can be attributed largely to our
excessive emphasis on manned space flight and on vaguely perceived, poorly
founded goals of a highly speculative nature.''

One of the leading Congressional spokesmen on space matters, Representative Bill
Green of Manhattan, contends that manned space travel is sometimes justified but
that a manned space station would be unnecessarily expensive. ''Most scientists
surveyed tell us they do not need a space station for their projects,'' said Mr.
Green, the ranking Republican on a subcommittee with jurisdiction over NASA.
''Even among those who would welcome or accept a station, more would prefer an
unmanned station.''

The Outlook

The space program will surely be delayed while Tuesday's disaster is
investigated, but most politicians believe that space exploration with human
crews will be renewed after the investigations are completed.

In his address to the nation Tuesday, President Reagan declared, ''There will be
more shuttle flights and more shuttle crews and, yes, more volunteers, more
civilians, more teachers in space.''

Congress will surely address the question in forthcoming hearings on the
Challenger, but the public seems firmly behind Mr. Reagan's position. An ABC
News poll conducted hours after the explosion of the shuttle found that 79
percent of 507 adult respondents want to ''continue the manned space shuttle
program'' and that 72 percent believe ''civilians such as teachers, senators and
journalists'' should be ''included in future crews.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mars mission (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY GROUNDS NEW COPTERS AFTER DEFECT IS FOUND

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 633 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 30


The Army has grounded its fleet of 68 AH-64 Apache helicopters after the
discovery of cracks in the main rotor blades of 13 of the new attack
helicopters, the Pentagon said today.

The service also suspended the acceptance of any more of the helicopters from
the manufacturer, the McDonnell Douglas Helicopter Company, pending the results
of an investigation.

In a statement, the Defense Department said the Army had issued the grounding
order ''as a precautionary measure.''

'No Accidents Related to Blade'

''There have been no accidents related to the main rotor blade,'' the Pentagon
said.

Michael I. Burch, a spokesman for McDonnell Douglas, said the company was
working closely with the Army to investigate the cause of the cracking.

In St. Louis, the headquarters of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, a spokesman
for the Army Aviation Systems Command confirmed that at least 13 of the advanced
helicopter gunships had been found to have cracked blades.

The spokesman, Howard DeMere, reached by telephone at his office, said the first
instance of blade cracking was discovered on Jan. 15 on an AH-64 that had been
set aside for testing. Examinations were immediately ordered for all 68 Apaches
now in service, leading to the discovery of 12 more cracked blades, he said.

He said that prompted the orders on grounding and the delivery suspension, which
were issued to field units on Jan. 27.

The blades, made of a combination of metals and composite material, were
designed to last for at least 4,500 flight hours. The blade in which the first
crack was found had been flown for only about 330 hours, Mr. DeMere said.

Total Cost of $9 Billion

The Apache helicopters are designed to replace the attack helicopters known as
the Cobras, which were developed in the Vietnam War. The Army planned to acquire
675 of the powerful twin-engine helicopters by the end of the fiscal year 1988
at a total cost of about $9 billion.

According to Mr. DeMere, each of the helicopters cost about $8.8 million,
excluding research and development expenses.

The Apache has been designed as the Army's most deadly front-line aerial weapon
for use in providing ''close combat support'' against enemy tanks. The
helicopter, designed to navigate and attack in darkness and poor weather,
carries missiles, rockets and machine-guns.

''When fully deployed, the Apache will be the Army's primary attack
helicopter,'' the service said last year.

Cracks Were a Surprise

The Pentaton statement issued today said that the main rotor blades on the
helicopters ''demonstrated a capability for continued safe operations after tree
strikes or ballistic impact caused by enemy weapons.''

The discovery of the cracks thus came as a surprise, Mr. DeMere said, adding
that Army safety investigators had no idea of the cause.

The spokesman said the blades were 22 feet long. The first crack was discovered
about 10 feet from the tip edge, he said. The other cracks were similar, Mr.
DeMere said.

''A comprehensive investigation has begun to determine if there is any possible
design flaw in this blade, or if there are other factors which contributed to
the crack,'' the statement said.

According to Mr. DeMere, McDonnell Douglas Helicopters has been producing
between nine and 12 of new helicopters each month.

The decision to suspend acceptance of the Apaches comes at a time when McDonnell
Douglas continues to receive reduced payments for its overhead expenses because
of which the Defense Department called ''accounting irregularities.''

The McDonnell Douglas Corporation was the nation's largest defense contractor in
the fiscal year 1984, having received contracts worth $7.7 billion. The concern
acquired Hughes Helicopter Inc. in 1984, later renaming it McDonnell Douglas
Helicopter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
A Touch of Class

BYLINE: By Wayne King and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 166 words


When Senator Frank H. Murkowski of Alaska brought two Vietnamese children from
Hanoi to Washington to reunite them with their parents after seven years, his
staff thought a touch of home would make Nguyen Vu Chinh, the 10-year-old boy,
and Tran Thanh Quynh Chi, his 9-year-old sister, feel better in a strange and
confusing land. So a call went out Monday from Capitol Hill to Germaine's
restaurant, whose proprietor is Vietnamese.

The same evening, some of the Senator's staff took the children and their
parents, William Uhlig and Xuan Thi Nguyen, to the restaurant just north of
Georgetown, to find that Germaine Swanson had run up a special repast of shrimp
sour soup, spring roll, lemon grass chicken, rice noodles with barbecued pork,
fried grouper with fried ginger and fish sauce and beef sauteed with vegetables.
Between courses, the children practiced saying ''We are glad to meet you'' for a
visit to the White House the next day, after which the family flew home to
Fairbanks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY

BYLINE: By Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1208 words


IF it's Sherlock Holmes, it must be a thriller -and it is - but the master
sleuth's final foray is something more than twisty detecting and surprising
revelations. It's also an exploration of ego and envy and what that really means
is anyone's guess because Frank Langella isn't talking, nor are his associates.

What they are saying is that ''Sherlock's Last Case,'' by Charles Marowitz, will
be on Broadway in early October with Mr. Langella, a Tony Award winner, dealing
with clues on stage, and his company, Alfie Productions, dealing with financing
offstage. Jerry Roberts and Herb Kendall of R. K. Theaters Inc. are
co-producing, with some involvement by the Jujamcyn Theater organization,
including the possible use of the Martin Beck Theater.

Although the play's Watson has not yet been cast, directorial chores have gone
to A. J. Antoon, another Tony winner. Douglas Schmidt will design the sets and
Robert Morgan the costumes.

The thriller, expected to begin rehearsals in mid-August, is Mr. Langella's
second venture in producing. He co-produced and starred in the Off Broadway
revival of Arthur Miller's ''After the Fall'' in 1984.

How can there be a play called ''Moby Dick'' without a Moby Dick? Easily, when
the postage-stamp sized stage won't accommodate even an anorectic whale. The
solution, in this production by the York Theater Company, is to have everyone
from Ahab and Ishmael to Starbuck and Pip talk, talk and talk about the great
white whale that isn't there. The musical adaptation of Herman Melville's
classic has a libretto by Mark St. Germain, music by Doug Katsaros and direction
by Thomas Gardner. The York is presenting it, beginning Feb. 12, at the Mazur
Theater at the Murphy Center, 555 East 90th Street (534-5366).

Art not infrequently imitates life, or vice versa. Keith Reddin plays a
playwright in ''Room Service,'' a production of the Roundabout Theater Company,
which opens Feb. 13. The same Keith Reddin is the playwright of ''Rum and
Coke,'' which opened this week at the Public Theater.

When Keith Baxter was an 8-year-old in South Wales, he returned from school one
day to find painters in the house. He wrapped himself in one of their white
dropcloths and, as he recalls it now, ''declaimed, rather pathetically,
'Friends, Romans, countrymen.' ''

''One of the painters said, 'You ought to be an actor,' and that was the first
time a name was put on what I wanted to do,'' he said. ''But for anyone brought
up in Wales, an interest in the arts was not unusual.''

Mr. Baxter, who's now starring in ''Corpse!,'' said that he didn't know how the
acting seed planted itself in his head, but that he was happy it had. He was
pleased, too, that he bypassed university in favor of two years in the Army
followed by studies at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. ''Maybe it's an
inferiority complex talking,'' he said. ''But I think the groves of academe are
death to the theater.''

His Welsh nationality made him feel equally at home in New York and London, he
said.

''There's a lot of extravagance in New York, but no eccentricity, a trait I find
very endearing in England,'' he said. ''But there's an exhilarating feeling
here.''

The 53-year-old actor was not, he said, a creature of the past but he did miss
one theatrical tradition - an opening night attended by all the critics.

''Now the critics come to one of the preview nights and the tension is spread
over a number of performances,'' he said. ''It's like completing the Grand
National, looking forward to going back to the stable for a feed, and having the
saddle clapped on you again for another race. No one thinks of the actors.''

The National Theater of the Deaf is taking two plays to China in May for a
monthlong tour and New Yorkers will get a chance to preview them -and help an
obviously worthy cause - on Feb. 10. The plays are ''Farewell, My Lovely,''
based on an E. B. White essay, and ''In a Grove,'' from a Ryuonosuke Akutagawa
short story, the first to be directed by William Rhys of the Cleveland Playhouse
and the second by Arvin Brown of the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven. There will
also be selections from ''Miracles and Journeys,'' prose and poetry collected by
Richard Lewis and directed by David Hays, who founded the National Theater of
the Deaf. It will be performed by such friends as Chita Rivera and Alan Arkin.
All this and light refreshments for $50, at the Promenade Theater, Broadway and
76th Street (203-526-4971). Performances combine sign language and speech so
that both the deaf and those who can hear can follow the plot.

This one is big bucks - $10,000 - but for anything less you'd probably get a
giraffe or a zebra instead of a lion. The New York Public Library has had, for
several years, ''literary lion'' evenings, but the dinner Feb. 26 will be the
first featuring lions of the performing arts. The $10,000 contribution entitles
the patron to invite seven or eight guests who will sit at a table presided over
by Rex Harrison, Neil Simon, Hal Prince, Jessica Tandy, Garson Kanin or any one
of 16 others. There will also be, for everyone, guitar music by Andres Segovia
and, for the man or woman who signs the check, a gold lion's-head medallion.
Norman Lear, Ann Getty, Gerald Schoenfeld and Alan Greenberg have already signed
theirs.

Marilyn Abrams and Bruce Jordan, who are producers in Chicago, aren't saying
that anything New Yorkers can do, they've already done. They are saying that a
whodunit, with the audience voting on the murderer, a la Edwin Drood, is
something they've been doing in the Windy City for more than three years.

Their comedy, ''Shear Madness,'' set in a unisex hair-styling salon, will have
played 1,457 performances as of April 1, bettering the previous Chicago record
set by ''Do Black Patent Leather Shoes Really Reflect Up?'' Written by Paul
Portner, a Swiss playwright, and adapted by the two producers, the play ends
with the audience questioning the suspects and voting on who did it. There are
no plans yet to bring it to New York, just hopes. It's in its seventh year in
Boston and played five years in Philadelphia.

Calvin Levels, an actor who received a Tony nomination in 1984, has written a
play called ''Common Ground,'' which will be presented for two nights only next
week at Lincoln Center. It's a two-character drama, with Robert Heller
portraying the author of a play on Vietnam, and Mr. Levels a Vietnam veteran who
is auditioning. The presentations, at 6 P.M. and 9 P.M. Tuesday and Wednesday,
are free of charge, and Mr. Levels is hoping that veterans will take advantage
of the offer. The performances will be at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, 150
West 65th Street (580-7005).

Avner Eisenberg, better known as Avner the Eccentric, is returning to the New
York stage after his Hollywood debut in ''The Jewel of the Nile.'' His
tomfoolery begins Feb. 11 at the Samuel Beckett Theater, 410 West 42d Street
(594-2826).

The author J. E. Franklin has revised ''Black Girl'' since its original run in
1971 but it's still the story of four generations of women living in a small
Texas town. It's coming back as the second production of the season at the
Second Stage. Performances begin Monday at 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street
(873-6103).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 31, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JOAN COLLINS IN 'SINS,' A MINI-SERIES

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 30, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 665 words


''SINS'' isn't improbable or unlikely; it's something grander than that:
preposterous, say, or absurd. At the same time it's not really about what it's
supposed to be about; it's really about Joan Collins and her Valentino clothes.
On ''Sins,'' a seven-hour, three-part mini-series, they wear one another. The
mini-series begins with a three-hour episode on Sunday at 8 P.M. on CBS.

''Sins'' isn't good, great or uplifting television; it's just television.
Actually, it's like the star herself. She is a professional, although we don't
expect to see her as one of Chekhov's three sisters. We don't want to, either.
The high point of ''Sins'' may be when the camera closes in on Miss Collins, and
we see her playing a character in her 20's. Can she do it? Is it believable?
After all, Miss Collins is 52.

Yes, it is believable, and hooray for Miss Collins. She is wearing a little
white bow in her hair, and looks positively dewy. At this point in ''Sins,'' she
has become the ''directress'' of a Paris fashion house, and is starting her rise
to the top. In no time at all, she will be head of a publishing empire, with her
name on a building in New York.

Is this believable, too? Of course not, but what do you expect? ''Sins'' is a
hymn to consumerism - expensive clothes, nice table settings, big houses - and a
fantasy as well. However, it does have a moral: Pluck will win out; it gets you
the clothes and big houses.

Thus, Miss Collins as a child (played by Catherine Mary Stewart) is raped and
beaten by Nazis. Her mother is killed; her brother and sister are imprisoned. As
a teen-ager (still played by Miss Stewart), she runs into a despicable French
count (Jean-Pierre Aumont) and his equally despicable son (Neil Dickson).

Then, as an adult, Miss Collins falls in love with James Farentino. He
disappears in Vietnam. Later she marries Gene Kelly, but something awful happens
to him. Eventually, the rottenest Nazi of all (Steven Berkoff) enters her life
again. Meanwhile, Giancarlo Giannini cheats her, and Lauren Hutton tries to do
her in. Only Capucine is consistently nice, but she's not around for very long.
Will Miss Collins ever find happiness? Even a brief fling with Joseph Bologna
ends in disaster.

It's not giving anything away to say that Miss Collins does find happiness, and
that we last see her in a gondola on the Grand Canal. We also see the last
Valentino. It is white, and looks like a cotton knit.

In fact, ''Sins'' can be watched, and probably better enjoyed, with the sound
turned off. One piece of dialogue sounds much like the other. On the other hand,
it does take place on the Riviera and in Paris, Venice and tony places in New
York. Meanwhile, whole scenes are framed around suits and dresses.

This viewer particularly admired a white suit with a boater and black trim, the
gray tweed with matching hat and scarf, and a black jumpsuit. The evening
dresses, of course, are all drop-dead, and Capucine, when we first see her,
looks sensational in a gray dress, turban and silver fox.

''Sins'' is a very pretty production, and despite the title, Miss Collins is
never much more than naughty. One is pleased by that. Miss Collins and Peter
Holm, her husband, are the producers, and so the mini-series, directed by
Douglas Hickox, presumably reflects Miss Collins's taste.

Judging ''Sins'' by its own standards, however, there are two breaches. In the
first, the camera lingers on a pregnant woman who is being beaten. We don't see
the actual beating, but sadism is graphically implied. The scene should have
been cut.

The second breach is less egregious, but remember that ''Sins'' has its own
esthetic, and by this it must be weighed. Therefore, Miss Collins should not be
in the orange-red Valentino she wears in Part I. In a scene in the office of the
publishing empire, the senior editor (Marisa Berenson) is wearing the same
orange-red. Is this a mere trifle? So what if it is? It's the kind of trifle you
don't want to find in ''Sins.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Joan Collins

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 1, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN PAYS TRIBUTE TO 'OUR CHALLENGER HEROES'

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1218 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Jan. 31


President Reagan mourned the loss of ''our seven Challenger heroes'' today,
paying tribute to their ''brave sacrifice'' and pledging to honor them with a
renewed national commitment to the conquest of space.

''Sometimes when we reach for the stars, we fall short,'' Mr. Reagan said
quietly in a solemn outdoor memorial ceremony at the Johnson Space Center before
an audience of thousands, including relatives and colleagues of the fallen crew
of the space shuttle. ''But we must pick ourselves up again and press on despite
the pain.''

As many in the audience dabbed their eyes with handkerchiefs, the President
said: ''Man will continue his conquest of space. To reach out for new goals and
even greater achievements, that is the way we shall commemorate our seven
Challenger heroes.''

Emotion Was Heavy

The ceremony, a farewell to the crew of the spaceship that exploded Tuesday, was
marked by heavy emotion. After Mr. Reagan's address on a cool, sun-drenched
morning at the space center, the band from Lackland Air Force Base in San
Antonio played ''America the Beautiful.'' People in the audience began to sing,
tentatively at first, then with fervor, many with tears rolling down their
cheeks.

As the band played ''God Bless America,'' NASA T-38 jets flew overhead in what
is called the Missing Man Formation, with one plane missing, and many of the
wives, children and relatives of the Challenger crew, seated in the first row,
dissolved into tears and choking sobs.

The President, in a black suit, white shirt and dark tie, appeared ashen and bit
his lip during the 20-minute ceremony. As June Scobee, wife of the mission's
commander, sobbed, Nancy Reagan firmly held her hand.

Lorna L. Y. Onizuka dropped her head on the shoulder of her brother-in-law and
wept when Mr. Reagan mentioned the name of her husband, Lieut. Col. Ellison S.
Onizuka. Allison Smith, 14-year-old daughter of Comdr. Michael J. Smith, the
pilot, was inconsolable throughout the ceremony.

Mr. and Mrs. Reagan flew with at least 90 members of Congress to nearby
Ellington Municipal Air Field this morning to attend the memorial.

A Private Meeting

Before Mr. Reagan addressed the audience, he and Mrs. Reagan met privately for
15 minutes with about 25 members of the astronaut families.

Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said the family members stood in a
semicircle. The President greeted each with a handshake, and said, ''Hello, nice
to see you.'' Mrs. Reagan followed with hugs and kisses. Erin Smith, Commander
Smith's 8-year-old child, gripped a teddy bear.

''We'll all go out together in a few minutes,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''I wish there
was something I could say to make it easier, but there aren't any words. We
sorrow more for ourselves and in the fact that we will miss them. This should be
tempered by the joy that they are receiving the blessings God reserved for them.
We shall all see them together again.''

The families, some in tears, held hands as they were escorted outdoors to the
service, attended by as many as 10,000 people.

The only Challenger crew member whose family decided to forgo the service here
was Dr. Judith A. Resnik. Instead, the Resnik family held a memorial service
this afternoon at Temple Israel in Akron, Ohio.

The crew members honored in the ceremony here were Francis R. (Dick) Scobee, 46,
commander of the Challenger; Commander Smith of the Navy, 40, the pilot; Dr.
Resnik, 36, mission specialist; Colonel Onizuka of the Air Force, 39, mission
specialist; Dr. Ronald E. McNair, 35, mission specialist; Gregory B. Jarvis, 41,
payload specialist, and Christa McAuliffe, 37, chosen to be the first teacher in
space.

Mrs. McAuliffe's husband, Steven, and one of her two children, 9-year-old Scott,
attended the service.

The President, in his remarks, spoke of the loss of the crew as a tragedy
affecting their families and, especially, their children. He also spoke of
profound shock to the nation and hope for the future.

''Dick, Mike, Judy, El, Ron, Greg and Christa, your families and your country
mourn your passing,'' said the President. ''We bid you goodbye, but we will
never forget you.''

'Words Pale,' He Says

''Words pale in the shadow of grief,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''They seem insufficient
even to measure the brave sacrifice of those you loved and we so admired.

''Their truest testimony will not be in the words we speak, but in the way they
led their lives and in the way they lost their lives: with dedication, honor and
an unquenchable desire to explore this mysterious and beautiful universe.''

The President decided to lead the ceremony here because the families of five of
them live in Houston.

As a soft wind fluttered across the 1,620-acre space center, the crowd was
especially stirred when Mr. Reagan evoked the memory of the Challenger crew
members.

''We remember Dick Scobee, the commander who spoke the last words we heard from
the space shuttle Challenger,'' said Mr. Reagan, recalling the medals that Mr.
Scobee and Commander Smith won in Vietnam.

''We remember Judy Resnik, known as J.R. to her friends, always smiling, always
eager to make a contribution, finding beauty in the music she played on her
piano in her off hours,'' Mr. Reagan said softly.

Dreams of 2 Boys

''We remember Ellison Onizuka, who, as a child running barefoot through the
coffee fields and macadamia groves of Hawaii, dreamed of someday traveling to
the moon. Being an Eagle Scout, he said, had helped him soar to the impressive
achievements of his career.

''We remember Ronald McNair, who said he learned perseverance in the cotton
fields of South Carolina. His dream was to live aboard the space station,
performing experiments and playing his saxophone in the weightlessness of space.
Ron, we will miss your saxophone, and we will build your space station.''

Mr. Reagan also recalled Gregory Jarvis as carrying ''with him a flag of his
university in Buffalo, N.Y., a small token, he said, to the people who unlocked
his future.''

He added: ''We remember Christa McAuliffe, who captured the imagination of the
entire nation, inspiring us with her pluck, her restless spirit of discovery; a
teacher, not just to her students, but to an entire people, instilling us all
with the excitement of this journey we ride into the future.''

A Family of Astronauts

The invocation at the service was given by the Rev. Bernard R. Hawley of the
First Presbyterian Church in Salina, Kan. His son is Steven A. Hawley, an
astronaut, and his daughter-in-law is Sally Ride, another astronaut who was the
first American woman in space.

Mr. Reagan also struck a religious chord in his speech. Of the astronauts who
died, Mr. Reagan said:

''For those who knew you well and loved you, the pain will be deep and enduring.
A nation, too, will long feel the loss of her seven sons and daughters, her
seven good friends. We can find only consolation in faith, for we know in our
hearts that you who flew so high and so proud now make your home beyond the
stars, safe in God's promise of eternal life.''

After the speech, Mr. and Mrs. Reagan slowly shook hands with the relatives of
the Challenger crew. Darien L. S. Onizuka, 11-year-old daughter of Colonel
Onizuka, took a step back and cried. The President stepped forward, and embraced
her.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of President Reagan and his wife, Nancy, with relatives of the
Challenger crew during memorial services in Houston (UPI;NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 1, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
The Vietnam Honor Roll

BYLINE: By Wayne King and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 125 words


The Vietnam Veterans Memorial, one of the most popular tourist spots in
Washington, will soon add 96 more names to its roll of honor of those who died
or disappeared in the conflict there.

Jan C. Scruggs, president of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, has announced
that the Ford Motor Company will underwrite the cost of inscribing the names of
these veterans, who died outside the official combat zone but were directly
involved in combat missions. For example, an Air Force lieutenant beginning a
bomber mission to North Vietnam, whose plane crashed on takeoff at Guam, was not
among the names originally supplied by the Defense Department. Work on the
additions will begin in April and are expected to be completed in time for
Memorial Day.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 1, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRESIDENT'S EULOGY FOR THE SEVEN CHALLENGER ASTRONAUTS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words


Following is a transcript of President Reagan's eulogy at a memorial service for
the seven Challenger astronauts at the Johnson Space Center in Houston
yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times:

Following is a transcript of President Reagan's eulogy at a memorial service for
the seven Challenger astronauts at the Johnson Space Center in Houston
yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times:

We come together today to mourn the loss of seven brave Americans, to share the
grief that we all feel and, perhaps in that sharing, to find the strength to
bear our sorrow and the courage to look for the seeds of hope.

Our nation's loss is first a profound personal loss to the family, and the
friends and loved ones of our shuttle astronauts. To those they have left behind
- the mothers, the fathers, the husbands and wives, brothers and sisters - yes
and especially the children - all of America stands beside you in your time of
sorrow.

What we say today is only an inadequate expression of what we carry in our
hearts. Words pale in the shadow of grief; they seem insufficient even to
measure the brave sacrifice of those you loved and we so admired. Their truest
testimony will not be in the words we speak but in the way they led their lives
and in the way they lost their lives - with dedication, honor and an
unquenchable desire to explore this mysterious and beautiful universe.

The best we can do is remember our seven astronauts - our Challenger Seven -
remember them as they lived, bringing life and love and joy to those who knew
them and pride to a nation.

They came from all parts of this great country - from South Carolina to
Washington State; Ohio to Mohawk, N.Y.; Hawaii to North Carolina to Concord,
N.H. They were so different, yet in their mission, their quest, they held so
much in common.

We remember Dick Scobee, the commander who spoke the last words we heard from
the space shuttle Challenger. He served as a fighter pilot in Vietnam, earning
many medals for bravery; later as a test pilot of advanced aircraft, before
joining the space program. Danger was a familiar companion to Commander Scobee.

A Nation Remembers

We remember Michael Smith, who earned enough medals as a combat pilot to cover
his chest, including the Navy Distinguished Flying Cross, three Air Medals and
the Vietnamese Cross of Gallantry with Silver Star, in gratitude from a nation
he fought to keep free.

We remember Judith Resnik, known as J. R. to her friends, always smiling, always
eager to make a contribution, finding beauty in the music she played on her
piano in her off-hours.

We remember Ellison Onizuka, who, as a child running barefoot through the coffee
fields and macadamia groves of Hawaii, dreamed of someday traveling to the moon.
Being an Eagle Scout, he said, had helped him soar to the impressive
achievements of his career.

We remember Ronald McNair, who said that he learned perseverance in the cotton
fields of South Carolina. His dream was to live aboard the space station,
performing experiments and playing his saxophone in the weightlessness of space.
Well, Ron, we will miss your saxophone; and we will build your space station.

We remember Gregory Jarvis. On that ill-fated flight he was carrying with him a
flag of his university in Buffalo, N.Y. - a small token, he said, to the people
who unlocked his future.

We remember Christa McAuliffe, who captured the imagination of the entire
nation, inspiring us with her pluck, her restless spirit of discovery; a
teacher, not just to her students but to an entire people, instilling us all
with the excitement of this journey we ride into the future.

We will always remember them, these skilled professionals, scientists and
adventurers, these artists and teachers and family men and women, and we will
cherish each of their stories - stories of triumph and bravery, stories of true
American heroes.

Sadness and Pride

On the day of the disaster, our nation held a vigil by our television sets. In
one cruel moment, our exhilaration turned to horror; we waited and watched and
tried to make sense of what we had seen. That night, I listened to a call-in
program on the radio. People of every age spoke of their sadness and the pride
they felt in ''our astronauts.'' Across America, we are reaching out, holding
hands and finding comfort in one another.

The sacrifice of your loved ones has stirred the soul of our nation and, through
the pain, our hearts have been opened to a profound truth: the future is not
free, the story of all human progress is one of a struggle against all odds. We
learned again that this America, which Abraham Lincoln called the last best hope
of man on Earth, was built on heroism and noble sacrifice. It was built by men
and women like our seven star voyagers, who answered a call beyond duty, who
gave more than was expected or required, and who gave it with little thought to
worldly reward.

We think back to the pioneers of an earlier century, the sturdy souls who took
their families and their belongings and set out into the frontier of the
American West. Often, they met with terrible hardship. Along the Oregon Trail
you can still see the grave markers of those who fell on the way. But grief only
steeled them to the journey ahead.

Today, the frontier is space and the boundaries of human knowledge. Sometimes,
when we reach for the stars, we fall short. But we must pick ourselves up again
and press on despite the pain. Our nation is indeed fortunate that we can still
draw on immense reservoirs of courage, character and fortitude - that we are
still blessed with heroes like those of the space shuttle Challenger.

Program Will Go On

Dick Scobee knew that every launching of a space shuttle is a technological
miracle. And he said, if something ever does go wrong, I hope that doesn't mean
the end to the space shuttle program. Every family member I talked to asked
specifically that we continue the program, that that is what their departed
loved one would want above all else. We will not disappoint them.

Today, we promise Dick Scobee and his crew that their dream lives on; that the
future they worked so hard to build will become reality. The dedicated men and
women of NASA have lost seven members of their family. Still, they, too, must
forge ahead with a space program that is effective, safe and efficient but bold
and committed.

Man will continue his conquest of space, to reach out for new goals and ever
greater achievements. That is the way we shall commemorate our seven Challenger
heroes.

Dick, Mike, Judy, El, Ron, Greg and Christa, your families and your country
mourn your passing. We bid you goodbye. We will never forget you. For those who
knew you well and loved you, the pain will be deep and enduring. The nation,
too, will long feel the loss of her seven sons and daughters, her seven good
friends. We can find consolation only in faith for we know in our hearts that
you who flew so high and so proud now make your home beyond the stars, safe in
God's promise of eternal life.

May God bless you all and give you comfort in this difficult time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lorna L.Y. Onizuka, wife of Lieut. Col. Ellison S. Onizuka, as
she was comforted by her husband's brother, Claude, at memorial sevice in
Houston (UPI)

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 1, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

'TODAY' SHOW ON NBC ENJOYING A RESURGENCE

BYLINE: By PETER J. BOYER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 54, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 683 words


Thursday was a good day for Steve Friedman, the executive producer of NBC's
''Today'' show. Thursdays usually are. In the morning, the weekly ratings
arrive, and for seven weeks running, Mr. Friedman's ''Today'' has beaten the
competition. Last week's ratings showed the largest margin in seven years.

And in the evening, NBC's high-rated Thursday programs go on the air. That's
good for Mr. Friedman too, because three times in the course of the evening, the
network runs promotions for ''Today,'' selling the show to the largest
television audience available.

What is happening to the ''Today'' show demonstrates how the rich can make
themselves richer in network television. In NBC's case, it's done by exploiting
the success of one area of the network, prime-time entertainment, to bolster a
weaker area, news.

After struggling since 1980, when ABC's ''Good Morning America'' took a lead in
the fierce morning competition, ''Today'' has moved briskly into first place in
the morning. Last week, ''Today'' had a rating of 5.8, compared with a 4.6 for
''Good Morning America'' and a 3.2 for CBS's ''Morning News.'' (Each rating
point represents approximately 850,000 households.) Carry-Over Viewers Helped
The success of NBC's prime-time programs helps ''Today'' not only through
promotional spots, but also with audience carry-over - viewers watching
''Today'' because they watched NBC programs the night before.

Higher ratings mean higher advertising revenues - NBC is charging $13,000 for
30-second commercials in ''Today,'' roughly double what it charged two years
ago. Increased revenues allow ''Today'' to stage expensive promotional ploys,
such as a trip next week to Rio de Janiero and Buenos Aires - a trip that has
the competition at ABC, where money is tight these days, complaining about NBC
driving the cost of morning television out of control.

At ABC, in contrast, there is not only less money for trips but also less time
available for prime-time promotions. ABC's entertainment programs, rated last
among the three networks, demand most of the on-air promotional spots.

And, just as ''Today'' is helped by the success of NBC's prime time, ''Good
Morning America'' is hurt by the weakness of its evening entertainment shows.
''There is a fair amount of frustration,'' said Phyllis McGrady, executive
producer of ''Good Morning America.''

'Crime Solving' for ABC

When the ''Today'' show is cavorting in Rio next month, ''Good Morning America''
will be staying in New York, making do with a less costly, though innovative,
promotional effort - running a weeklong murder mystery on the show, with the
crime being solved on Friday.

Mr. Friedman acknowledges that ''it certainly helps to be on the hot network,''
but he maintains that his show was ready when the audience decided to sample the
show.

He joined the program in 1980, dark days at NBC, when the prime-time schedule
was soundly beaten and ''Good Morning America'' edged ''Today'' out of its
perennial first-place position. ''Today'' fought back to even terms for awhile,
but when the host Tom Brokaw left the show in late 1981, the show, with the
co-hosts Bryant Gumble and Jane Pauley, began a slide that lasted for 3 1/2
years.

But NBC stayed with the personnel it had on ''Today,'' an uncommon approach in
network television, and the show slowly began to jell. The program traveled to
Moscow in late 1984, where Mr. Gumbel earned critical praise for his handling of
his anchor chores.

A Visit From the Pope

The success of that trip led to others, including a highly promoted journey to
Rome last year, where ''Today'' landed a visit from the Pope. ''Today'' then
traveled to Vietnam and Geneva, and after the South American tour, will take a
boat trip to the South.

Timothy Russert, vice president of NBC News, said there will be more such trips
for ''Today.'' That worries Miss McGrady of ''Good Morning America.''

''If that's the wave of the future, we're all going to have to step back and
take a look,'' said Miss McGrady. ''We can't continue to buy the publicity that
those shows get.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 1, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Youthful Point of View

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David Bird

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 198 words


The prospectus for a magazine starts out with engaging immodesty: ''This may be
the most exciting, provocative, entertaining and important magazine to ever hit
the newsstands.''

It is called Mediamix, and it is being started by a group of juniors at the
Riverdale Country School in the Bronx.

But it is not just another school publication, according to its 16-year-old
publisher-editor, Andrew Schmertz. ''The magazine sets out to cover the
entertainment industry from a totally new angle - the one from teen-agers,'' he
said.

The target readership is between 14 and 22 years old, ''but anyone can read this
magazine,'' said Mr. Schmertz, whose father is Eric J. Schmertz, dean of the
Hofstra Law School.

''We have no adult help of any sort,'' he added. ''Myself, as publisher, put up
the money for the prototype. And the whole staff is made up of teens.''

The prototype issue has articles on Hollywood's winning the Vietnam War at the
box office, the return of psychedelic rock, pornography and the young, and
Howard Cosell.

Right now, the staff is out trying to hustle advertising. ''Should we get the
ads,'' Mr. Schmertz said, ''our first issue will be released in April.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A KENNEDY'S RIVALS FACE BIG PROBLEM

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 887 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Feb. 1


With eight months to go before the Democratic primary, most of the candidates
for the Congressional seat to be vacated by Representative Thomas P. O'Neill Jr.
face a common problem: how to overcome the celebrity status of a rival, Joseph
P. Kennedy 2d.

In a district once represented in Congress by the 33-year-old Mr. Kennedy's
uncle, John F. Kennedy, the Kennedy name commands instant recognition from
voters. Equally important, it has provided Mr. Kennedy, the eldest son of Robert
F. Kennedy, with extra attention in the press and on television.

This situation has made Mr. Kennedy, a Democrat, the front-runner, according to
virtually all political analysts here. It has also led the nine other candidates
to criticize the press for what they say is focusing on Mr. Kennedy, and it has
forced each to try and depict himself as the second leading contender.

'Make Ourselves the Other Guy'

''Our strategy is clear,'' said Thomas J. Vallely, a State Representative from
Boston's Back Bay section. ''We have to clear the field and make ourselves the
other guy.''

Indeed, Mr. Vallely, a liberal Democrat like Mr. Kennedy, has begun running a
series of advertisements in local newspapers describing himself as ''the other
guy.''

Mr. Vallely, a decorated Marine infantryman in Vietnam who holds a master's
degree from Harvard University, was annoyed recently when he received a call
from CBS News in New York asking him to talk about the next generation of
Kennedy politicians.

''I said, 'Fine, call Joe Kennedy. I'm the other guy. See you later.' ''

Representative Barney Frank, a Democrat who represents an adjacent district,
said: ''I feel sad about what's happening. That race has got a better set of
candidates than you have in some whole states. There are half a dozen really
first-rate people.''

Liberal Candidates Abound

Among the other well-respected challengers for the Eighth District seat now held
by the Speaker of the House are George Bachrach, a State Senator; James
Roosevelt Jr., a Boston lawyer and grandson of Franklin D. Roosevelt; Thomas M.
Gallagher, a State Representative, and Melvin H. King, the losing candidate in
the 1983 Boston mayoral race. Mr. King, the only black in the contest, announced
his candidacy today.

All are regarded as liberals, and Mr. Frank said, ''The differences between how
any of them or Joe Kennedy would vote in Congress are miniscule.''

On the Republican side, the only candidate so far is Clark C. Abt, a Cambridge
consultant who this week began an $80,000 television campaign to enhance his
public recognition.

The candidates already have raised three-quarters of a million dollars and spent
most of that, according to campaign finance reports filed Friday. Surprisingly,
Mr. Bachrach, who is among the least wealthy contenders, raised the most,
$134,723.

The district, which includes parts of Boston and Cambridge as well as the
suburbs of Belmont, Arlington, Watertown and Waltham, is one of the most
Democratic in the country.

Republicans Comprise 9%

About 62 percent of its 522,000 registered voters are Democrats, with only 9
percent Republicans. In 1984 the district gave President Reagan only 36 percent
of its vote.

The area includes a diverse mixture of working-class Irish-Americans and
Italian-Americans, along with affluent professionals and a large number of
students from Harvard, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston
University and Brandeis University.

One key issue that some politicians initially thought might hurt Mr. Kennedy
does not appear to be a serious factor: Until December he lived outside the
district in the South Shore town of Marshfield. The reason the carpetbagger
issue has not arisen, Mr. Frank believes, is that the district has an unusually
high number of newcomers itself.

Figures published recently in The National Journal, from Census Bureau data,
showed that where 65 percent of the voters in Mr. Frank's district were born
there, and as many as 80 percent in some other districts in Massachusetts, only
37 percent of the voters in the Eighth District were natives.

'A Two-Edged Sword'

Not all Mr. Kennedy's opponents believe his extra attention by newspapers and
television will automatically help him. ''My sense is it's a two-edged sword,''
said Mr. Bachrach, who is counting on his own superior local organization to
emerge as the strong second candidate.

''The upside is, Joe gets a lot of exposure,'' Mr. Bachrach said. ''The downside
is, Joe gets a lot of exposure. People will expect more from him.''

In fact, The Boston Herald, a tabloid that has run a number of front page
articles exclusively on Mr. Kennedy, carried one lengthy report on stock
holdings Mr. Kennedy and his wife had through family trust funds in companies
with investments in South Africa.

The problem the local press faces in covering the race was underscored in an
article last Monday in The Boston Globe. Its headline read, ''Kennedy Coverage
at Issue in the 8th.'' But it did not mention any of the other candidates until
the third paragraph.

''We are caught in a bind,'' said Michael Janeway, the editor of The Globe.
''It's a classic case of the pull between trying to be absolutely fair, giving
everyone equal space, and what happens when a guy with this name comes into a
race.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE REFUGEES, FEARING PIRATES, AVOID THAI WATERS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 408 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE


Vietnamese boat people, fearing pirate attacks in Thai waters, say they are
increasingly trying to sail their small vessels to Indonesia, Malaysia or the
international shipping lanes leading to Singapore.

So regular are the crossings of the South China Sea that Indonesian officials
are beginning to fear that a trade in human cargo is springing up among
Vietnamese boat owners.

In 1985, diplomats and refugee officials said, 3,332 Vietnamese reached Thailand
by boat. In the same year, 7,394 Vietnamese arrived in Malaysia, 6,239 in
Indonesia and 891 in Singapore.

Officials say boats heading south from Vietnam are largely safe from piracy.
They are never turned away from Indonesia, and rarely from Malaysia. Both
countries have received tens of thousands of boat people over the last decade.

Singapore, an island nation at the tip of peninsular Malaysia, refuses to allow
refugee boats to land, but shelters Vietnamese rescued at sea by other ships.

The refugees say they take these routes not only for safety but also because
they have heard that resettlement in third countries is quicker outside
Thailand. Thai officials acknowledge they have slowed interview procedures as a
deterrent to boat people. No Southeast Asian nation allows the Vietnamese to
settle permanently.

In Indonesia, officials say some Vietnamese boat owners appear to be making
''shuttle'' trips to offshore oil rigs or small Indonesian islands in the Natuna
and Anamba chains east of Singapore.

Some refugees are fortunate to drift into shipping lanes and be picked up by
merchant vessels, officials say. Under an agreement with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, captains who rescue boat people are now guaranteed
that the agency will assume responsibility for the exiles.

Refugees brought to Singapore are housed for three months in comfortable if
spartan houses. After that, they are go to resettlement countries.

Those Vietnamese who do sail into the Gulf of Thailand, particularly poor
fishing families from Vietnam's southwest coast, appear to be trying to stay
close to the Cambodian shore, hoping to land in Thailand's Trat Province, where
piracy attacks are infrequent.

Refugee officials say up to 10 percent of the boats report attacks in the
eastern gulf. In the south around the Thai port of Songkhla, 75 percent of
arrivals say they have been assaulted. There are no reliable estimates of how
many are killed in the attacks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

YEVTUSHENKO: A SOVIET POET TURNS TO MOVIE MAKING

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1769 words

DATELINE: PEREDELKINO, U.S.S.R.


Yevgeny Yevtushenko describes his work as a kind of borscht, the Russian beet
soup in which any ingredient goes - as long as it tastes right in the end.

It is the principle, he says, on which he writes his poetry, his novels, and
which he used for his autobiographical film, ''Kindergarten.'' Mr. Yevtushenko,
who wrote, directed and appears in ''Kindergarten,'' will be on hand in New York
when it opens a two-week run Feb. 12 at the Film Forum.

''Kindergarten,'' Mr. Yevtushenko's first - and so far only - film, is about his
evacuation as a boy of 9 from wartime Moscow to Siberia. En route he encounters
noble thieves, evil speculators, death, love and a host of formative adventures.

''Kindergarten,'' which first opened in the Soviet Union in 1983, has had mixed
reviews, for the same reason Mr. Yevtushenko often gets mixed reviews: it is a
borscht made from a broad variety of ingredients, ranging from a starkly
realistic Siberian to a surrealistic parade through Red Square by thousands of
youths carrying goldfish in bowls.

But even its critics do not deny that Mr. Yevtushenko's first stab at cinema -
like his poetry, and like himself -has an undeniable and compelling energy.

Mr. Yevtushenko is now 52, his tousled hair is thinner, but his blue-gray eyes
and enthusiasm still recall the brash young poet who electrified audiences in
the early 1960's with his defiant verse and dynamic delivery. Fame has been
fickle; Mr. Yevtushenko's reputation and image have had their ups and downs over
the past two decades.

He has been stung by the suggestions that he has moved from defiance to
conformity, as some of his critics have charged. He argues that he has pursued
the same themes throughout his career, and that he has not been given credit for
unpublicized actions on behalf of writers at odds with the authorities or
campaigns such as the one to preserve Boris Pasternak's house in Peredelkino as
a memorial. In recent years, Mr. Yevtushenko has produced some of his most
substantive works, including the novel in prose and verse, ''Wild Berries,'' and
the long poem ''Fuku,'' dealing with the evil wrought by great men and published
last fall in the journal Novyi Mir.

Last December, Mr. Yevtushenko was once again at the literary barricades with a
bold speech to a conference of Russian writers in Moscow in which he demanded
that Soviet literature stop skirting the time-honored Soviet taboos - the
distortions of past history, Stalinism, privilege, censorship, shortages. The
speech seemed to challenge the new leadership under Mikhail S. Gorbachev to
practice the openness it preaches, but when it was published in the literary
gazette the text was was heavily and clumsily censored.

Recently, Mr. Yevtushenko talked of his film, his style, his plans and the
vagaries of fame in an interview at his home among the tall fir trees of
Peredelkino, the writers' colony outside Moscow.

Question: ''Kindergarten'' was your first film. Why did you make it? What
brought you to the cinema, why did you decide to make a film?

Yevtushenko: I have been a professional poet since I was 15 years old. I have
published (according to ''Yevtushenkologists'') more than 100,000 lines of
poetry. A man, in my view, cannot spend his entire life making bicycles. He can
modify them, he can make bicycles with two wheels, three wheels, four wheels,
one wheel, underwater bicycles, flying bicycles. But at some point he wants to
make something different - say, an airplane.

Besides, I always liked the cinema. In a sense the cinema made me as a writer -
Italian cinema. After the war, our Soviet cinematography was dominated by
pompous blockbusters. Our countryside was starving, but our movie screens were
showing vaudevilles of happy collective farmers holding banquets for thousands
at some gigantic power station.

Then there appeared those remarkable Italian neorealists, films like ''The
Bicycle Thief,'' ''Rome at 11 O'clock,'' ''Open City'' and many others of a
hard, unadorned realism. These films simply turned my soul upside down.

And not only mine. I believe that this Italian neorealism, appearing in the
Stalinist time of pomposity, of laquered reality, spiritually shaped our entire
generation, the generation of the 60's. We all turned to realism, to the
metaphorical, to unadorned realism, and thus to metaphorical realism.

When I made my film ''Kindergarten,'' I was helped precisely by the art of the
Italian neorealists. I set as my goal to resurrect my childhood. This was my
main task, to tell it as it really was. This film is my autobiography - hardly
anything is invented. But at the same time it is the autobiography of our
generation.

In effect, when I was writing the screenplay and shooting the film, I was
already making a film of a film that existed in my memory. I didn't behave like
a professional director. I selected each face for crowd scenes. I searched for
them in stores, in streets, in kindergartens, at work, at factories, in the
fields, wherever. I immodestly believe that I managed to show the real face of
the real Russian people. Not a tidied-up, touched-up, thought-up face.

To act my grandmother, for example, I chose a woman who sells tickets at Lenin
Stadium, Galina Stakhanova. I chose a student, Svetlana Estratova, for the
female lead, as the mistress of the thief. I needed to create a sense of
authenticity, almost documentality. A metaphorical documentality, to be sure.

My favorite scene is that one in which Siberian peasants, sitting at the table
at the wedding, sing the folk song of the runaway convict with their bad,
cracked voices. Some critics reproached me for the bad quality of singing,
saying why could I not have chosen one of our beautiful choirs. From my point of
view, beauty is in the ordinary. Sometimes a bad, breaking voice says more than
a fine actor's voice.

Q: Do you feel that you succeeded with the film?

A: Of course, this film has those weaknesses that are inevitable for a first
movie. There's too much i wanted to say in it, too much.

But in general, in poetry and literature, I am among those people who believe
that too much is indispensable. I, for example, do not like poems that resemble
hay compressed into a geometrically perfect cube. I like it when the hay,
unkempt, uncombed, with dry berries mixed in it, thrown together gaily and
freely, bounces along atop some truck - and more, if there are some lovely and
healthy lasses atop the hay - and better yet if branches catch at the hay, and
some of it tumbles to the road. That's why I like Thomas Wolfe.

The people who like my poems liked this film a lot, because it is like my poems.
I write poetry, prose, and everything I do, I do on the principle of Russian
borscht. You can throw everything into it - beets, carrots, cabbage, onions,
everything you want. What's important is the result, the taste of the borscht.

Q: Can I ask you a personal question: When the West first made your acquaintance
in the early 1960's, you had the reputation of a rebel, having written poems
like ''Babi Yar'' (about anti-Semitism) or ''Stalin's Heirs'' (warning against a
revival of Stalinism). But in later years your image changed, at least in some
Western eyes, to that of an establishment poet. How do you explain this? Do you
think this fair? A: I think my reputation changed only in some Western
newspapers, and not in the opinion of my readers.

I have never believed that the ''focus of global evil'' can be in one country.
The dark sides of human life, the worst sides of human psychology are dispersed
in various countries.

But at the same time, as I said in my speech to the writers' congress, a writer
has the right to write about other countries - the cruel and unpleasant truth -
only if he writes the truth about his own country. Had I not written ''Babi
Yar'' or ''Stalin's Heirs,'' I would not have had the right to write poems
condemning the Vietnam War.

I think the turning point in my reputation, in some eyes, was when I went to
Vietnam and America in 1972. I wrote a series of poems condemning the Vietnam
War, and when I came to the United States I read some of them. But because my
poetry coincided with the official position of the Soviet Government, they made
out that I came to America as the megaphone of the Soviet establishment.

The fact is that some journalists, especially some professional Sovietologists,
cannot understand that the same person can oppose international anti-Semitism,
and his own country's bureaucracy, and Stalinists, and at the same time oppose
the war in Vietnam.

I am a man of socialist convictions, I come from a revolutionary family. Both my
grandfathers were Bolsheviks. They were both arrested in Stalinist times. When
critics accuse me of ''socialist convictions,'' trying here to find a point of
support for their thesis that I am a poet of the establishment, that's very
stupid.

Q: If we can turn to your work today. What are your next plans? Do you have any
new films planned, or any other projects?

A: The most important thing I've written is the long poem ''Fuku.'' It is made
according to the borscht principle I described. This is a poem of an
anti-tyrannical direction - I wrote ''Fuku'' somewhat idealistically, urging
that we not glorify those historical figures who brought grief to their own or
to other peoples.

The poem has a chapter about Stalinist camps in Kolyma. About the 19-year-old
truck driver driving along the road built on the bones of farmers, who has hung
a portrait of Stalin in his cab. The poem has very important lines: ''He who
forgets the victims of yesterday, may become the victim of tomorrow.''

That which I said at the writers' union was basically just a summing up of what
I have said, most recently in my novel ''Wild Berries'' and in ''Fuku.'' The
speech was simply a digest, so to speak, of thoughts that had been scattered
through my last poems, and not some sort of declaration totally isolated from my
writing of recent years. This alone shatters the thesis of establishment poet.

As for new works, my main project now is the film ''The End of the Musketeers.''
I wrote the screenplay based on the last part of Dumas's saga, ''Le Vicomte de
Bragelonne.'' My next dream is to make a film of Bulgakov's ''Master and
Margarita.''

Thank God, I have my literary profession, and I can shoot only those pictures
for which I feel an internal need. Right now I'm writing poems. Totally
different ones. I might write a long poem about love. Nobody knows this. A theme
like love falls suddenly, like an icicle on your head while you're walking down
the street.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Yevgeny Yevtushenko

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NEED TO CROSS THAT LAST FRONTIER

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 858 words


IT began on April 9, 1959, the day the Mercury astronauts were introduced to the
public - seven men who were willing, in Tom Wolfe's memorable phrase, ''to sit
up on top of an enormous Roman candle, such as a Redstone, Atlas, Titan or
Saturn rocket, and wait for someone to light the fuse.'' Overnight, before they
had climbed onto a rocket, before they had started their training, before they
had even got to know each other, the seven became national heroes.

They were admired, of course, for their daring, for their courage. But there was
more to it than that, much more, and it helps to explain the extraordinary
outpouring of national grief that followed the deaths of seven latter-day space
voyagers last week when the Challenger shuttle disintegrated in an awful
fireball over Florida. Few Americans will forget it as long as they live,
because what happened off Cape Canaveral happened, in a real sense, to every
American.

Alan Shepherd, John Glenn, their comrades and their successors were, after all,
the people on whom the United States counted to restore the natural order of
things. They would show - they had to show - that American know-how had not
disappeared, that the country that produced Thomas Edison and Henry Ford and the
Wright brothers still led the world in technological genius.

The Race Was On

There were those who doubted it. Only 18 months before, on Oct. 4, 1957, the
Soviet Union had launched the first artificial satellite, Sputnik. In the weeks
that followed, the ''space race'' came to symbolize the contest between East and
West, not only in scientific but also in strategic and political and even moral
terms. Unless the United States could catch up, old John McCormack of
Massachusetts told his colleagues in the House of Representatives, it faced
''national extinction.''

The country quickly sensed, too, that space was the new frontier, and
politicians from John F. Kennedy to Ronald Reagan made sure it was not
forgotten. Mr. Reagan had planned to build his State of the Union message,
scheduled for the evening of the very day Challenger came to grief, around this
notion of the ''new frontier.'' And if there was such a frontier, who but
Americans should explore it?

Whitman sounded the battle-cry: For we cannot tarry here, We must march, my
darlings, we must bear the brunt of danger, We the youthful sinewy races, all
the rest on us depend, Pioneers! O pioneers!

If the old countries take military men as their heroes, worship at the graves of
Nelson and Wellington, of Napoleon, of Garibaldi, this new country has glorified
its pioneers. It is the men and women of the Mayflower, the men and women who
traveled west in their Conestoga wagons whom we teach our children to admire. It
is the frontier sheriff dispensing rough justice whom we celebrate in the
Western movie, perhaps the most self-revealing of our native art forms.

Frederick Jackson Turner thought the pioneer epoch the most important and most
lasting of our national experiences. It formed a new composite nationality, he
argued, stimulated a rugged and often uncontrolled individualism and promoted
democracy. We had tamed a continent; was there anything the American people
could not do?

To outsiders, there was a touch of hubris in the idea of inevitable triumph, but
to Americans, it seemed preordained that we should be Number One in whatever we
tried. For generations, American parents told their children that the United
States won its wars because it was right.

But in the last two and a half decades life has become more complicated. The
rise of the Soviet Union, defeat in Vietnam, humiliation in Iran, the seeming
inability of the United States even to protect its citizens from terror and
murder abroad - such events have led Americans to question whether their country
really was Number One. Even President Reagan has not been able to erase the
doubts entirely. In a recent New York Times/CBS News poll, 25 percent of the
respondents said the United States is more respected now than it was when he
took office pledged to restore its standing in the world, but 37 percent said
just the opposite.

Through those 25 difficult years, the space program was a continuing talisman of
primacy, all the more valuable because people remembered that the Russians had
stood on this frontier first. When Neil Armstrong stepped onto the surface of
the moon on July 20, 1969, American self-confidence was miraculously refreshed.
And if ordinary folk, to say nothing of the newspapers and television networks,
became a bit bored by the metronomic success of the shuttle, it was reassuring
to know that it was something the Russians could not match.

The shock to the national psyche Tuesday owed something to the fact that it took
place on live television, something to the fact that a particularly winsome
schoolteacher was among those lost. But the calamity cut deeper than anyone had
anticipated because it constituted a failure where we considered it our Manifest
Destiny to succeed, and Mr. Reagan's simple declaration that ''nothing ends
here'' meant so much to so many because it suggested that we might still.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE PHILIPPINE MIDDLE CLASS: TURNING AGAINST MARCOS

BYLINE: By Seth Mydans; Seth Mydans is chief of The Times's bureau in Manila.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 19, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5683 words


BY PHILIPPINE STANDARDS, BING ROXAS and her family have done well for
themselves. With her husband Sixto, an investment banker from whom she is now
separated, Bing has raised six children, and the family has enjoyed relative
financial success, together with the satisfaction of being involved in the
mainstream of Philippine society. Bing, who is 58 years old, has been chairman
of several cultural and civic organizations, and she and her husband were at one
time frequent guests of President and Mrs. Ferdinand Marcos at Malacanang
Palace. Like so many members of the Philippine establishment, Bing also has
strong ties to the United States: she was educated at Barnard College in New
York, and her ideas and manner of speech seem almost those of a native American.

Yet recently, Mrs. Roxas stood with thousands of other Filipinos in front of the
American Embassy in Manila, her fist raised in defiance as she chanted angry
slogans and protested continued American support for the Marcos Government. Like
many other men and women who stood beside her - members of what is known here as
the burgis, or bourgeois, establishment - Bing and her family have traveled a
path from conformity to dissent.

Increasingly disillusioned by the arrogance and corruption of the Marcos regime,
Mrs. Roxas was shocked into protest and activism in August 1983, when the
country's most popular opposition leader, Benigno S. Aquino Jr., was murdered
upon his return from self-imposed exile in the United States. Since then, her
radicalism, like that of many of her contemporaries, has moved almost faster
than she could control.

For Bing Roxas, as for many other Filipinos, the Presidential elections
scheduled for this Friday thus mark not only a national turning point, but a
personal one as well - the culmination of a long journey through the ironies and
tragedies of recent Philippine history. Her opposition to the 20-year regime of
President Ferdinand E. Marcos and her desperate hope for change under his
chal-lenger, Benigno Aquino's widow, Corazon, have become deeply personal.

In a country as diverse as the Philippines, no one family can be viewed as
typical. And the Roxas family is, in social if not political terms, closer to
the ruling elite of the Marcos regime than most Philippine families of similar
means. But the path followed by Bing and her family is a familiar one,
reflecting the conflicts and changes that are taking place within what might
best be called the Philippine middle class - the broad group of middle- and
high-income Filipinos, whose education and affluence set them apart from the
country's landless peasant majority. More than one in four Filipinos, its is
estimated, fall into this group. Located primarily in the country's urban areas,
the middle class enjoys a relatively high standard of living - including a
wealth of goods purchased at American-style shopping centers - and their support
has played a crucial role in perpetuating Marcos's rule.

From conversations with the various members of the Roxas family, with their
friends, and with other Filipinos who know nothing about the Roxases, it is
clear their concerns and reactions to events point the direction toward which
this important segment of Philippine society seems to be shifting. It is a shift
toward social awareness and engagement, a sign of growing frustration with the
long Marcos years. And, for lack of other available options, it involves a new
openness toward the ideas of the country's growing left wing - often without a
clear view of where those ideas may lead. It is a shift that may transcend the
politics of the moment, and which, once it reaches a critical mass, could tip
the balance of public consensus beyond the reach of politicians.

It is a shift, furthermore, that reflects the changing relationship between the
Philippines and its former colonial master, the United States. The long, close
relationship between the two countries has left the United States with important
interests in the Philippines. American firms maintain heavy economic investments
in the country, and two United States military installations there, Clark Air
Base and Subic Bay Naval Station, play an essential role in American strategies
for defending East Asia.

Many Americans also retain a large emotional stake in a country to which the
United States bequeathed its democratic principles. And the Philippines is a
nation where love of America is as open and unabashed as anywhere in the world.
Yet popular resentment of American support for the Marcos Government seems
likely to pose increasing risks for United States interests as the country slips
toward crisis.

BING'S EARLIEST IMPRESSIONS OF HER NA-tion and its relationship with America
were shaped not by anger and dissent, but by devotion and common purpose. In the
early days of World War II, her father, a journalist, and her mother, a young
Filipino socialite and founder of the nation's Girl Scout movement, witnessed
the last days of the Bataan death march as the survivors were led to prison
north of Manila. The scene of the exhausted and starving American and Filipino
prisoners, more than 15,000 of whom died on the monthlong forced march, so
affected the couple that they joined the Philippine underground and smuggled
food, clothing, medicine and information to the prisoners. The couple was
discovered and captured by the Japanese as American troops closed in on Manila
in 1945. ''Obviously, my parents were both executed,'' says Bing, ''but we never
found their graves.''

Bing, whose proper name is Maria Theresa, hid in the village of Santa Ana
outside Manila, and there, at the age of 17, she witnessed the liberation of the
capital by the Americans in a battle that destroyed much of the city. ''When
they came, this tall, sunburned American came to me and said, 'Now don't forget,
it was the First Cavalry from Texas that liberated this area,' '' she recalls.
''So I never forgot it.''

After the war, Bing was brought by American friends of her parents to the United
States, where she later met Sixto Roxas, a young Filipino who was studying at
Fordham University. A brilliant economic planner and banker, Sixto, along with
his new wife, returned to the Philippines, where he helped write the country's
first comprehensive land-reform act and headed economic planning for President
Diosdado Macapagal, who preceded Mr. Marcos in the early 1960's.

When Marcos took power in 1965, Sixto Roxas declined to join the new Cabinet,
and instead founded the country's first investment bank, Bancom Development
Corporation. Still, the Roxases remained close to the center of power, and were
frequent visitors at Malacanang Palace.

Mrs. Roxas, for her part, become a socialite and activist - chairman of the
board of the Ballet Philippines, an organizer of the Madrigal Singers of the
Philippines, a leader in architectural restoration. For a time, she was invited
to join Mrs. Marcos almost every week to work on projects such as the
establishment of the ballet company and the restoration of the old walled city
of Intramuros.

When President Marcos, his statutory term of office nearing an end, imposed
martial law in 1972, Bing and Sixto were vocal in their support of it, hoping,
as Bing now says, that ''maybe things would get done. Maybe this is what the
Philippines needs, a benevolent dictator.''

The Roxas family was in the mainstream of the middle class in its initial
support for martial law, which came at a time of growing economic turmoil and
violent student protests. ''Things went well at first,'' said Bing. ''Crime went
down. Fire-arms were confiscated. I was even sorry when they lifted the curfew
and I had to start worrying about where my children were at night.''

But Bing's disillusionment with martial law set in quickly as she saw the
President taking on the increasingly autocratic power he was to exercise through
nine years of military rule and in the years that have followed. One of his
early acts under martial law was to scrap the country's Constitution and
substitute one that allowed him to rule by decree when the decisions of
democratic institutions did not suit him. ''I remember the shock of hearing that
a new Constitution had been ratified by a show of hands,'' says Bing.

As the decade passed, the economy began to falter, and in 1981, Bancom failed.
In the midst of these problems, Sixto left the family - and the Philippines -
and now lives in the United States. He continues to help support the family, but
they now rent out their home, and Bing lives with her two youngest children in a
more modest one-story house in the affluent Makati area of Manila. She has
turned one of the rooms into a showroom for a small handicraft business in which
she employs nine people.

The country's worsening economic situation compounded existing dissatisfaction
with the Marcos regime, and the corruption of Marcos and his close friends -
known as the ''cronies'' - became a source of increasingly deep frustration to
families such as the Roxases.

THE TURNING POINT in Bing's political evolution, and that of many of her
countrymen, was the killing of Benigno Aquino Jr. at Manila International
Airport in August 1983. Just as witnessing the Bataan death march had jolted her
parents into action during World War II, Aquino's death served as a catalyst for
Bing's active involvement against the Marcos Government. Aquino, whom President
Marcos had jailed and released during martial law, was returning to the
Philippines to re-enter politics after three years in the United States, and
many Filipinos believe that Mr. Marcos was involved in his murder.

''When Aquino was murdered, it was just all of a sudden a little too much,''
says Bing. ''People were demonstrating, and I was saying, 'Oh, good, good,
good.' It seemed natural for me to join them. That was when the middle class
just sort of erupted, all these traditional people. Business people who are
traditionally very ambivalent about the issues were really beginning to come
out.''

Until that moment, Bing says, she had suppressed her growing feelings of
discontent and distaste for the autocratic rule of Mr. Marcos and the
extravagance and insensitivity of his wife, Imelda. ''When Ninoy was killed,''
she says, using the nickname by which Benigno Aquino is known, ''it was like
something exploding inside a lot of people - in me, too -and it was such a
relief. You don't realize how bottled up you are.''

It is a sentiment echoed today by countless other Filipinos. ''Before 1983,
people could say, 'It's none of my business,' '' said Jaime Ongpin, the
president of Benguet Corporation and an opposition activist in the current
campaign. ''But not any more.'' For Serge Montinola Jr., son of a
sugar-plantation owner on the island of Negros, the assassination brought home
the pain of Mr. Marcos's economic favoritism. ''We've lost 60 to 70 percent of
our holdings to Marcos takeovers, bad loans and bad debts,'' he said. ''People
had been just giving it a chance, trying to play both sides. After the
assassination, that's when it snapped.''

A supervisor at the bank that employs one of Bing's sons says he believes that
the shock Aquino's death produced on the middle class may be decisive for the
country's future. ''To me, what is critical is basically the middle class,''
said the supervisor, Alexis C. San Juan, an assistant vice president at the Far
East Bank and Trust Company.

''Many of the rural folk are malnourished, but they are used to this and they
are not so critical. This is the first time I've seen the middle class, even
rich people, going out of their way, joining rallies, becoming active. If you
look at events in other countries, when the middle class starts acting up,
you've got problems. A lot of people are citing Nicaragua, another Catholic
country where the middle class started looking at communism.''

For many Filipinos, the Communist insurgency, or New People's Army, main-tains
something of a Robin Hood image, despite its growing record of violence against
Government officials and other perceived enemies. The New People's Army is
widely perceived as combatting corrupt or abusive officials who are otherwise
left unchecked, particularly in rural areas. But its programs remain unclear in
the minds of many people, and the N.P.A. itself seems divided between committed
Communists and others who simply seek to redress grievances against the Marcos
Government.

Bing Roxas says the growth of Communism in the Philippines worries her, but she
describes herself nevertheless as ''perhaps a little bit more left of center
than most of the middle class. I don't think I've changed my mind on the basic
things. I can see the reasonableness of some of the issues the left is pushing,
of poverty, of inequality of wealth, of injustice. It's something I can
understand, why people join the radical left - thinking people, intelligent
people - because they're so frustrated and they have nowhere else to go.''

The Roman Catholic Church, one of the anchors of the Philippines' establishment,
has also been shifting toward activism. The liberation theology that has led
many Latin American priests to join radical causes has captured the imagination
of many young Philippine priests and nuns. In the countryside, the church has
become the strongest defender of human rights and in many places has become, in
effect, the opposition to the Marcos Government. Two of Manila's exclusive
convent schools have in the last few years become socially committed, and now
often send their students - the daughters of middle-class women like Mrs. Roxas
- to sit-ins and strikes instead of ballet class.

''There are many of us who are willing to have conversations with the radical
left,'' says Bing. ''I feel that, if you'll excuse my saying so, we have fallen
for the American paranoia about the left. This is one of the things that bothers
me about American policy.''

Through nearly a half-century in which the Philippines was an American colony,
and even more so in the postwar years of independence after American troops
saved the country from the Japanese, the American image, as one of Bing's
friends put it, ''has been associated with democracy, freedom, the good things
in life.'' It is all the more sad, therefore, the friend said, to see the
growing disenchantment with American policy that has led people like Bing to
demonstrate at the embassy.

''The United States in Vietnam did not realize the valid nationalist aspirations
of the people,'' says Bing, ''and I think that is happening here. They only
think in terms of power politics, and we are being squeezed. If we are pushed to
the wall and something happens here, I hope the Americans will understand and
not create another Nicaragua situation.''

It was 40 years after her encounter in Santa Ana with the sunburned American
that Bing stood with 5,000 other demonstrators in front of the American Embassy,
fist raised above her, singing the words of a leftist hymn of defiance:
''Beloved Philippines, nest of tears and misery, my dream is to see you free.''

''I had never done that in my life,'' she said later. ''But I felt that there
were certain valid reasons to go there. It was really a hair-raising thing,
chanting together with the others. I really got high. What I was feeling there
in front of the embassy was: now I understand why the left is always talking
about a U.S.-Marcos dictatorship. It may be that it's not just Marcos that is
pushing the Communists to grow. It may be the Americans as well.''

Now when she marches in demonstrations, she said, ''I see people sitting in
buses looking down at us and I say to them, 'Join. Join now. Don't wait for the
bullets. Don't wait for the guns.' ''

Bing's daughters have begun to fear for her safety. ''I worry always, always,''
said Maria Theresa, known as Ming, who now lives in New York. ''When I see a
rally on television, I know that at least my mother and Ditchay are there,'' she
said, using the nickname for Maria Mercedes, another of Bing's daughters. ''When
I hear of violence, of shots being fired, I wonder if somebody was hurt.''
Ditchay, an activist like her mother, worries about what will happen if the
country slips further into turmoil, or if President Marcos reimposes martial
law. ''I would prefer that my mother leave,'' she says, ''but I don't think she
will.''

Bing's activism now ranges far beyond culture and the arts, though she is still
busily engaged in fund-raising for the ballet. Like her mother during the
Japanese occupation, she also brings food and gifts to prisoners - the political
detainees held by the Marcos Government, some of them Communist rebels. ''I
don't care if they're opposition or what,'' she says. ''To me, they are human
beings who are not being treated right.''

Most recently, Bing's energy has been directed into the National Movement for
Free Elections, or NAMFREL, a citizens' watchdog group that plans to monitor
polling stations to guard against official fraud or vote-rigging in the coming
election. She is also leader of the activist group Concerned Women of the
Philippines, lends her name to the board of a radical women's group called
Gabriela, and takes part in a half-dozen other politically active associations.
''She's involved in everything,'' says Ditchay. ''Sometimes she doesn't even
know which meeting she's going to.''

Other middle-class friends have become even more deeply involved than Bing in
opposing Marcos. One 40-year-old teacher with six children, who dropped by
Bing's house for coffee the other day, actually went into the mountains with
leftist guerrillas after the Aquino assassination and trained with an M-16
assault rifle before deciding that her political education had progressed ''much
too fast for my own good.''

Laughing, she said ''a lot of us would like to be Nora Astorga if we could,''
referring to the Nicaraguan revolutionary, and now Nicaragua's
ambassador-designate to the United Nations, who seduced and assassinated a
Nicaraguan National Guard officer. ''Of course, the part we liked best was that
she got to sleep with all those generals.''

During her months of activism, she said, ''my children asked me point-blank if I
was a Communist. I denied it point-blank. I could have been arrested.''

Today, like so many of her friends, the would-be Nora Astorga is working
wholeheartedly for Corazon Aquino and the UNIDO-Laban Party coalition that she
leads. Mrs. Aquino symbolizes the one overriding issue that is uniting millions
of her countrymen: a wish to end the rule of President Marcos. And, for the
moment, the balance in the Philippines seems to have tipped away from extremism
and toward the middle, as many Filipinos place their hopes in her candidacy.

In her political campaign, Mrs. Aquino has accepted the possibility of Communist
support, and has included the far left among the anti-Marcos elements she hopes
to unite. But middle-class Filipinos also see in her many of their own values. A
relatively conservative woman from a wealthy landowning family, Mrs. Aquino grew
up in comfort. (Like Queen Victoria, Mrs. Roxas jokes, Mrs. Aquino never had to
look behind her when she sat down, knowing a chair would always be there.) Mrs.
Aquino, indeed, is a friend of Mrs. Roxas's. A few years apart, both attended
the same exclusive girls' school in Manila, and both studied in New York after
World War II.

THE OTHER MEM-bers of Bing's family have responded in their own ways to this
moment in the Philippines' history, some of them moving apart not only in
philosophy but in geography. Like many middle-class Filipinos, including some
who have returned to campaign for Corazon Aquino, two of Bing's daughters live
abroad. Her husband took up residence in the United States. Through Ming Roxas's
American citizenship, Bing herself has obtained an American residence permit,
the ''green card'' that is coveted by many Filipinos as a last resort if their
country descends into chaos.

This year's Christmas gathering was the first for the family in 10 years, and
they discovered the differences that had grown up among them in that time. They
are differences that, often in more extreme form, have torn many Filipino
families. For example, Corazon Aquino's own cousin, Eduardo Cojuangco, is one of
the nation's wealthiest and most powerful men. Sometimes referred to as the
''chief crony'' of President Marcos, Eduardo Cojuangco is said to have been
bitterly disappointed not to have been chosen as Mr. Marcos's vice-presidential
running mate, and to be working hard for Mrs. Aquino's defeat.

While Jaime Ongpin campaigns for Mrs. Aquino, his own brother, Roberto, is
firmly in the Marcos establishment as Minister of Trade and Industry. Mr.
Montinola's cousin, a friend of the Marcos children and occasional visitor at
the palace, was miffed recently when her mother offered her house as a campaign
office for Mrs. Aquino. One of the most dramatic splits is in the family of
Antonio Zumel, a ranking officer of the Communist-led National Democratic Front.
His brother is an officer in the presidential security command.

In many cases, family relationships have transcended political differences. But
as the sense of a political watershed has grown, many Filipinos say, family ties
have sometimes stretched and broken. A sense of mutual respect has bound the
Roxas family as its different members have sought their own responses to the
country's crisis.

Ming, at the age of 31, is the oldest child, and holds American citizenship
because she was born in New York a year after her parents met and married there.
She now works at the New York office of the Pittsburgh public broadcasting
station WQED, and works two evenings a week at Bloomingdale's.

''I'm glad to have come home,'' Ming said, ''but I'm afraid that in a sense this
was a bad time to come.'' Ming said she and her sister Susan, who lives in
Paris, had ''expected attention to be focused on the fact that the family is
together, but I see that we are infringing on their activities. They're
different people now. I can sense that there are certain things we could never
talk about.''

Of Bing's children, her son Manuel Antonio, 30, whose nickname is Manoling, is
the one who is perhaps most torn by the political crisis in the country. A
student radical of the late 1960's, Manoling was expelled from high school for
taking part in violent antigovernment rallies. He has since followed his father
into banking, and, as a married man with two children, now says his priorities
are: ''First, personal considerations for my family; second, to build capital,
and then to align myself with some political group when the time comes. And I
suppose I'll have to cross that bridge when I come to it.''

For Manoling, the premartial-law school years - until he was expelled and sent
to study in Belgium - were a heady time of teach-ins, protests and drugs when
youngsters tried ''another path to growing up.'' He and his high-school friends,
he says, ''were the ones in the back throwing rocks'' while the older students
stormed government buildings in a wave of demonstrations that came to be known
as the First-Quarter Storm.

The issues then, he says, were much the same as those today: ''Imperialism, U.S.
intervention, Marcos being a puppet of the United States.'' Campus rhetoric was
more radical, he recalls, with Maoism and Leninism in vogue, but the protesters
were taken less seriously, and dismissed as ''renegades and vagabonds.''

The difference today, Manoling says, is that protest has moved into the
mainstream. The issues are discussed more seriously and ''you've got the middle
class involved.''

Of the radical students he knew, seven have fled to the hills and since been
killed, he says. ''I have the clippings.'' Some others who tried to change the
system from within have given up and gone abroad. For the others when they get
together, their youthful protests have become what Manoling calls ''coffee-table
talk. 'Hey, do you remember those times,' etc. ''My plans after graduation were
to look for a job in the States,'' says Manoling, as he sits in his small Manila
office with a threadbare rug and an electric fan that flaps the pages of the
computer printouts stacked on his desk. ''But when things started to happen
here, I decided to change my priorities and come back here and see what I could
do. I found that I did not want to align myself with any leftist groups and
decided to work through the business community, like a lot of my classmates.''

But when he came back, he says, ''I looked at the situation, at my family
situation, at how I would be earning a living, and I found out that if I became
completely involved in political activities, I didn't have a source of income. I
lost some big investments that I thought I could use, and I sought some more
investments to support my family so that I could slowly move into more political
activity.''

During this election campaign, he has joined NAMFREL as a poll watcher, but he
concedes, ''I've always wanted to be apolitical. I'm not a born politician. I
like to stay away from politics.''

Rosario Josefa, or Ching, who is 28, is described by her family as the calmest
and most rational of the Roxas sisters, and has joined a financial consulting
firm run by her father, keeping her distance from politics. ''Ching just says,
'Yeah, big deal, it's just another sham election,' '' says Ditchay.

Susan, 27, whose full name is Maria Angela Susana, always a romantic who loved
books and entered into the worlds of the stories she read, met and married a
Frenchman who works in his father's chemical business in Paris. Until the
holiday reunion this year, Susan had not been home from France for four years.
She said she sees her sister Ditchay, with whom she had always been close, as
''fighting for something that totally contradicts the way she was brought up.''

Bing's 24-year-old daughter, Ditchay, is the most radical activist in the
family. An actress who attended high school and college in the United States,
Ditchay has set aside hopes of a career to join a radical group that is strongly
influenced by the Communists, and now performs hit-and-run propaganda skits at
political rallies, with the police one step behind her.

''It just happens that my mother is a socialite and my father is a banker,'' she
says self-mockingly. ''Now I am a member of the urban poor.'' But in her
conversation and in the skits she performs, she ac-knowledges the difficulty she
faces in reconciling her privileged life with her activism.

''How do I live with it? Not easily,'' says Ditchay, a striking woman with black
eyes and long, carefully manicured red fingernails. ''I learned how to ride the
jeepney, how to take the bus. I never use the air-conditioner. You go through
this whole guilt trip. Sometimes I wish I were born just the daughter of a
farmer. But if I was born the daughter of a farmer, I couldn't do what I'm doing
now,'' she laughs suddenly, ''Could I? I would have to be tilling the fields.''

Chain-smoking, Ditchay told of her own decision to become politically involved.
''I was in my first year at Colby College and I used to go to all these
antinuclear rallies, and I heard that there was a nuclear plant here in the
Philippines with all the same issues,'' she said.

''I felt funny fighting the American involvement in El Salvador when the
Americans are even more involved here. I went to a slide show about El Salvador.
They're brown, as brown as us. You see all these bodies lying in the street,
blood all around, and it was quite shocking for me. There I was, a Filipina, a
little brown American. And I felt, no, this is crazy. One day I woke up and I
said, what the hell. I went to my adviser and I told him, 'I don't belong here.
I have to go home.'''

She said she told the adviser, ''Look, I'm a Filipina. I don't know my people. I
don't know my roots. I don't even speak the language.'' Like her mother and
sisters, like Corazon Aquino herself, Ditchay had studied in Manila at the
Assumption convent school where all the instruction was in English and only one
class was taught in the dominant Philippine language of Tagalog. ''You were
fined if you spoke Tagalog outside,'' she said. ''All my friends, we only
communicated in English. You only spoke Tagalog to your maids.''

When she first came home from New York in 1981, Ditchay said, ''I was totally
punked out. Hair on one side. People thought I came from Mars. Then I went to
the other extreme, cut off all my hair, wore jeans and a T-shirt, cut my nails
short.''

She joined an activist theater group, the Philippines Educational Theater
Association, or PETA, which travels the country performing politically oriented
plays and providing skits for political rallies. And she joined the Manila
chapter of Bayan, a radical umbrella group that is closely connected to the
Communist Party of the Philippines. ''I am not closed to the Communists,'' she
says. ''Within our family, we argue a lot, but basically the common thing is we
are against Marcos, which I guess in Communist terms makes you antifascist and
antidictatorship.''

In PETA, she said, ''we went on exposure trips. I spent a night in a little hut
as big as this rug. The people told us about their working conditions. They
worked for American companies with Filipino partners, and when I heard the names
of these partners I thought, 'My god, some of these are friends of my parents.'
''

Ditchay's sense of outrage is mixed with a feel for the ironies of her family's
situation. Throughout the Christmas season she performed, in a PETA production,
a 20-minute monologue that sati-rized the activism of middle-class women like
herself and her mother.

On stage, Ditchay's eyes flash and her hands draw the audience to her. She is a
well-to-do matron dressed in pink silk, selecting her outfit for a political
rally and telling of her fears and doubts, and of her distance from the masses
she feels she must support. Desperately trying one pair of shoes after another
to match her outfit, she relives an earlier rally in which the men in uniform
turned water hoses on her and charged with truncheons.

When she first joined Bayan and began to go to demonstrations, she says, ''my
mother used to worry. She used to call around and ask, ''Where is Ditchay? Is
she with her Communist friends?'' But then, she says, after the Aquino
assassination, her mother became active as well. ''We started to go to the same
rallies, in different groups, and we'd see each other and wave - 'Hi, mom.' ''

The youngest, and the family enigma, is 23-year-old Butch, whose full name is
Sixto Carlos and who plays lead guitar for a struggling rock band called Modern
Times. Butch has avoided the youthful rebellion of his brother Manoling, and
seems sometimes to be farther removed from his country's time of turmoil than
even his expatriate sisters, Ming and Susan. ''He's basically a musician, art
for art's sake,'' says Ditchay. ''He's steeped in his music,'' says his mother.
''He plays with his band. That's his life. He's not political at all. He went to
one of our rallies and said, 'Oh, Mommy, I'm bored.

I'm going home.' ''

Is Butch at all politically concerned? ''You can't help it; it's all around
you,'' he said one morning, sleepy-eyed and hoarse after a gig at the Dungeon
Bar at the Camelot Hotel. ''I've been to a couple of rallies. All I saw was a
bunch of old ladies trying to be in the scene, with their umbrellas and their
Ninoy T-shirts that look like designer clothes, and their maids carrying thermos
bottles with fruit juice. If they really want change, why don't they quit
fooling around and just blow up Malacanang Palace?''

For him, he said, rallies feel fake. ''I find it hard to go out into the streets
like my mother and sister. I really look up to them for that.'' His own
contribution, he said, is writing protest songs that he has not yet performed
before the public, but that he sometimes plays for the family.  The morning
after his late night at the Dungeon Bar was one of those times. Susan and her
in-laws had returned to Paris. Ditchay and a local Bayan official were mapping
out a schedule of future protests, and Bing, the holiday over, was resuming her
full load of election work. ''Sing for me, Butch,'' Bing said, placing her arms
on a table, and her head in her hands. ''It will make me feel better about going
out and fighting with these groups to join NAMFREL.''

Butch, strumming a guitar, sang a song about blood, tears and shootings of
children, and another that contained the line, ''for the government's gone
mad.''

B ING HEADED THAT day for Santa Ana, the village where, in 1945, she had
sheltered from the Japanese during the battle of Manila. Santa Ana is now part
of Manila's southern outskirts, and Bing, who heads one of the five NAMFREL
chapters in the capital, was going to help organize what safeguards she could
against electoral cheating by the Marcos regime. Much has changed in the
Philippines since the days when Santa Ana served as a rural refuge from the
battles of World War II. In the last four decades, the country has moved from
the optimism of a newly independent nation to the turmoil of a land where
democracy is in crisis. And Santa Ana is now a battlefield in the fight for the
urban votes of Manila.

Bing Roxas and others like her say that Mr. Marcos holds in his hands the
machinery of victory. Out of a total of 90,000 registered voters in the Santa
Ana area, a local organizer told Mrs. Roxas, President Marcos's New Society
Movement has already padded the election rolls with 17,000 fraudulent names.

The election campaign has focused the disaffection and resentment that has
pushed the middle class to activism. In conversations late at night, Bing and
her friends agree that their struggle for fair elections and for a change of
government is a desperately long shot. But they say they have no choice except
to try. And few seem to know where they will turn if they fail.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of UNIDO-Laban party rally (Susan Meiselas/Magnum); Photo of Bing
roxas (Panorama/Bulletin Today); Photo Corazon C. Aquino campaigning on island
of Negros (Andy Hernandez/Sygma) (Page 20); Photo of President Marcos attending
citizens' military training (Melvyn Calderon/J.B. Pictures) (Page 21); Photo of
Ditchay Roxas rehearsing political play (Susan Meiselas/Magnum) (Page 22); Photo
of

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHO'S IN CHARGE HERE?

BYLINE: By Kathleen J. Turner; Kathleen J. Turner, an associate professor of
communication at the University of Tulsa, is the author of ''Lyndon Johnson's
Dual War: Vietnam and the Press.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 816 words


UNTENDED GATES The Mismanaged Press. By Norman E. Isaacs. 258 pp. New York:
Columbia University Press. $20.

THE majority of libel suits might never have been filed had the aggrieved
parties had the chance to discuss their complaints with a sympathetic member of
the offending institution of the media. This finding by three professors at the
University of Iowa is illustrated by the opening story in ''Untended Gates'': at
great personal cost, a successful young journalist quits newspapers to attend a
graduate school of journalism because he has grown tired of everyone who phoned
a protest to the newsroom being termed a ''crazy.'' For Norman E. Isaacs, a
former editorial director of The Indianapolis Times and a former editor with The
St. Louis Star-Times, The Louisville Times and The Louisville Courier-Journal,
this newsroom attitude reveals ''journalism's greatest weakness'' -''newsroom
mismanagement'' by the editors, or ''gatekeepers,'' in power.

In an argument that seems to combine institutional analysis with the Peter
Principle, Mr. Isaacs contends that the editors and publishers of newspapers and
the news chiefs of television stations are both the problem and the solution for
journalism's ailments. The complaints are familiar - the rush to publish
sacrifices accuracy; conflicts of interest destroy objectivity; pressures for
profitability mean news standards are ignored; newsroom procedures encourage
sloppy reporting. Mr. Isaacs' explanation: the news media are sandbagged by
''good, idealistic editors . . . trapped in a bureaucratic system'' and by
gatekeepers who are ''technicians without intellectual breadth, sense of public
service, or grasp of professional purpose.'' Some journalists may harbor biases,
but most cannot or will not recognize that ''the unprofessional gatekeeper
system'' is ''one of the root causes for the steady decline of public confidence
in journalism.''

This inability or refusal to acknowledge the weaknesses of the system bothers
Mr. Isaacs more than the weaknesses themselves. One telling chapter recounts the
controversy surrounding the National News Council, the watchdog organization
formed by the Twentieth Century Fund and several journalists. According to Mr.
Isaacs, who served as chairman of the council for six years, most journalists
disdained the organization for challenging ''the most sacred cow in journalism's
holy credo - its self-proclaimed right to reject any type of examination of its
performance.'' Mr. Isaacs hails the few who have accepted scrutiny, including
those newspapers that have instituted ombudsmen. Yet most receive his scorn for
their arrogance.

Anecdotes, examples, studies and historical recountings enliven the author's
points. Yet the book falls short of its promise to deliver a convincing
in-dictment of and rehabilitation program for the news media's ills. ''The
dysfunctional nature of the management of journalism'' serves as a unifying
refrain for an array of illustrations, including some genuine horror stories.
Yet its repetition is no substitute for a coherent, specific analysis of how
news gatekeepers are mismanaging the media and what can be done to rectify the
situation.

For example, Mr. Isaacs' opening salvo on ''untended gates'' equivocates - most
editors are ''well meaning'' but ill trained, and yet most journalists exhibit
''an arrogance that seems to place journalism's rights above everything else in
the society.'' His choices for the top newspapers and television stations in the
country are unencumbered by ''wholly subjective'' criteria, despite the insight
they would provide into the author's vision of what journalism should be.
Similarly, the chapter entitled ''How Do You Make an Editor?'' offers only the
sketchiest of guidelines for assessing editorial excellence, and yet it details
Mr. Isaacs' hypothesis that ''editors who have acquiesced in eliminating
courtesy titles [such as Miss, Mrs. and Mr.] have stripped millions of citizens
of a sense of dignity'' and have ''contributed materially to the steady fall in
journalism's credibility'' in the process. Four chapters separate the discussion
of editorial training and responsibility from the analysis of journalism
education, thus scattering concepts of problem and solution throughout the text.

The frustration of ''Untended Gates'' then is that Mr. Isaacs makes a number of
telling points, tantalizing the reader with a potentially challenging assessment
of the current state of journalism. Yet the development of his argument falls
short. In the end one returns to Mr. Isaacs' opening account and the journalism
class's reaction to the young reporter's story of the ''crazies'' who phoned in
protests. It is an account that seems ironically applicable to ''Untended
Gates'': ''What followed was excited, passionate discussion, a lot of it missing
the real import, but that was to be expected.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Norman E. Isaacs

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EAST vs. WEST IN LITHUANIA: RISING TEMPERS AT A WRITERS' MEETING

BYLINE: By William H. Gass; William H. Gass, a professor of philosophy at
Washington University, St. Louis, is the author of ''Habitations of the Word.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3389 words


DURING the three weeks I was in the Soviet Union, three different Americans told
me the following joke, although each of them altered details in order to
individualize it. In the unlikely event a Russian had related it, I doubt he
would have taken the trouble. According to the common kernel of the story, a
Russian is showing an American visitor the Moscow subway, of which the city is
quite justifiably proud. ''Look at the spacious main corridors,'' he says,
''experience the swiftness of the escalators, note the many differences in
decoration when you change stations, the painted glass inserts in the columns,
the mosaics in the small domes that vary and enliven the concourse ceilings, the
cleanliness of every floor and stairway, the quality of workmanship and
materials, the statues of Lenin and other notables that enrich the way - for
nothing is too good for the workers.''

''Everything you mention is indeed excellent,'' the American says, after
inspecting his surroundings and being duly impressed, ''but we've been standing
here 20 minutes and there's been no train.''

''So . . . well,'' the Russian replies heatedly, ''and what about your murder of
the Red Indians?''

The joke (which can refer as easily to blacks, migrant workers or massacres in
Vietnam) slanders the subway, for during rush hour trains arrive and depart as
frequently as three a minute. By comparison, descending into the New York subway
is like being swallowed by a worm. There, painted glass would last less than
half an hour by a fast watch. And almost any Russian would take that fact to be
a sign of the superiority of his culture. Nor do I think this is entirely wrong.
Nevertheless, the story sums up Soviet-American relations so well, and
specifically the exchanges I witnessed between Soviet and American writers last
November in Vilnius, Lithuania, I soon understood why I heard it so often.

Led by Norman Cousins, these meetings - an offshoot of a series of
Soviet-American exchanges between academics and writers sponsored by Dartmouth
College and inaugurated under President Eisenhower - began in 1976. Some of the
participants - like Nikolai Fedorenko, the secretary of the Writers Union board,
who led the Soviet delegation; Harrison E. Salisbury, who served for some years
as a New York Times correspondent in the Soviet Union; David Kugultinov, a poet
from the Kalmyk Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic; the playwright Jerome
Lawrence; and M. Norvel Young, the emeritus chancellor of Pepperdine University,
in Malibu, Calif., which acted as host for the Soviet group in 1984 and
organized the American participation in last year's meeting - were veterans of
these peculiar ceremonial tournaments. Others of us, at least William Gaddis,
Louis Auchincloss, Charles Fuller, Sylvie Drake and myself, were neophytes and
amateurs, while Arthur Miller and Allen Ginsberg, as I think of them, were old
hands at everything.

The decision to hold the seventh meeting between the writers of the two nations
in Lithuania's capital was a surprise to most participants. Lithuania is not a
place citizens of other republics in the Soviet Union can visit readily, and
quite a few members of the Soviet delegation were as much tourists in the
territory as we were. The Lithuanian language is very ancient, its alphabet is
like ours, its roots resemble Sanskrit; and the people who speak it are
passionately alive to their tongue and proud of their rich graphic and musical
culture. It was clear from the outset that they intended to be warmly generous
hosts, and they certainly succeeded, although not a few Americans felt, after a
while, as stuffed with good things as a Christmas goose.

The theme of the conference was ''The Role of the Writer in Furthering Human
Values,'' a subject vague enough as to seem no subject at all, but as
noble-sounding as a trumpet. To the Soviet contingent it mostly meant: ''How can
the writers of the two countries promote the cause of peace?'' whereas to the
Americans (who tended to take the shared problem of peace for granted) it meant:
''How can we further the cause of freedom for all people, especially writers?''
In an impressive palace where Napoleon had stabled his horse - if not lodged
himself - for a night, we gathered around a long U-shaped assemblage of tables,
trying to alternate nationalities the way, at home, we feel obliged to separate
husbands and wives at dinner parties.

It was suggested that we begin by talking about our own work, moving clockwise
around the table, a procedure designed by the Soviet organizers to produce a
maximum of flatulent vanity and eat up our hours without seriously touching on
the topic (for two days we went from tick to tock in this fashion). Fortunately,
it didn't quite work. Harrison Salisbury began, for instance, by mentioning that
he had grown up in a region of the United States where many Jews from Lithuania
and Belorussia had fled to avoid persecution, and he went on to discuss his new
book on the Chinese Communists' Long March, comparing one of his aims in it (to
celebrate human struggle and heroism) with his history of the siege of
Leningrad, ''The 900 Days.'' Our Soviet counterparts were perhaps no more
pleased to remember the plight of the Jews than they were to hear about the
courage of the Chinese. Nor did they relish, I suspect, being reminded of the
history of their own epic battle through a book banned by them since 1969
because, while it spoke well of the people, it did not sufficiently flatter
Stalin and the Communist Party.

Louis Auchincloss's brief but elegant description of the problematic center of
his new novel, ''Honorable Men,'' involved the critical distinction between
legal rights and moral obligations, a distinction the Soviet spokesmen
consistently refused to recognize. How was it possible, he wonders in his novel,
for reasonably responsible and decent people to support and prosecute our war in
Vietnam? Was a negative Puritanism still alive in this age of unbelief? Had we
lost our faith in virtue and salvation, but none of our grim certainties about
sin and damnation? My own wonderment was what the Communist authors made of
these observations, for didn't a similar situation exist in both of our
countries - the realization of our national aspirations surely despaired of by
now, even if we still feared their failure? Weren't continued discipline and
obedience the last reflexive spasms of such great dreams as both peoples had
dreamed? In every utopia, it turns out, nightmare is the very stuff of life.

William Gaddis spoke warmly of his artistic debt to 19th-century Russian
literature (this honestly positive note was struck several times, especially by
the theater critic Sylvie Drake and Jerome Lawrence), and he suggested that,
since self-serving political corruption can go anywhere and arrive with its
luggage in any era, the comic and satiric side of his work was attempting to
save his version of his country as the earlier Russian writers had endeavored to
redeem theirs. Mr. Gaddis's good news was that there is much more stupidity than
malice in the world, but the bad news was that stupidity is such a hard habit to
break.

I don't know whether the Soviet people feel any tenderness toward stupidity, but
everywhere Allen Ginsberg walked he seemed to elicit an ''ouch.'' He began by
reading a moving poem by one of the Vilnius group of Yiddish poets whose voices
were stilled, of course, when the ghetto there was destroyed during World War
II. He went on to outline the aims of the Beat poets with whom he had been so
closely associated in the 1950's, but in such a way that there could be no doubt
of the immediate relevance of his remarks: What is the difference between public
pronouncement and private speech, he asked, and if private speech is eloquent
and public speech is constricted, what is the remedy? It isn't necessary to be
right all the time - infallibility is a tyrant's tune - but we must be open and
frank and honest with one another. Homosexuality was sometimes on his mind, and
so he unashamedly spoke of it. The shame would have been not to. But it was
generally the ideals associated most closely with Whitman that he supported -
those of frankness, liberality and freedom for all people, not simply people who
were homosexual.

What the Soviet representatives said tended to be translated for us in
unqualified phrases, shattered pieces of telegraphese, especially when speakers
talked rapidly, and I suppose our statements received the same treatment; thus
it was either out of willfulness or because the translation was faulty that the
''other side,'' as they had increasingly become, decided that Mr. Ginsberg had
claimed the individual was more important than society. This interpretation was
embraced with such satisfied self-righteousness that I was provoked to reply
that the individual was ''certainly more important than this society.'' My
childish outcry was tactfully not translated, if it was heard, and I repeat it
here only to report my state of mind, which was one of increasing irritation.

In a country and at a time of year when the only things black were the
silhouettes of coats and hats against the snow, Charles Fuller, the author of
''A Soldier's Story,'' walked through the streets of Soviet cities in a perhaps
sacred but uncomfortable circle of stares, and I think he may have longed for a
little of that despised invisibility associated with Ralph Ellison, whom he
began his brief presentation by quoting. All people ought to have the right to
define themselves in their culture and in their nation, he said. From the
beginning he hoped his own playwriting would help put an end to the denigration
of blacks in American literature. During the 1960's, anger and resentment begot
confrontation and the work of that period tended to produce new stereotypes,
presenting blacks as violent, reactionary people unable to reason or pursue
anything abstract or intellectual. Now he believed that black writing could best
help the people it most immediately represented by no longer insisting so
fanatically on speaking only for them, but by moving confidently into the
mainstream of American society and its literature. Blacks don't have to stay
inside the confines of a color. They can speak - as well as anyone - for
anybody.

If the Soviet authors still held to their views of a few years ago, then Charles
Fuller's opinion was another example of what they call ''abstract humanism,'' an
evaluation that took on an uglier meaning for me as the conference progressed.
For them, it designates work that avoids a particular Soviet reality in favor of
less committed generalizations. If I meanly thought of Chairman Fedorenko as a
rather uncomically menacing W. C. Fields, Mikhail Sagatelyan, a journalist and
graduate of the Moscow Institute of International Relations, was ''moonface'' to
me, not simply because his face was quite round, but because you never knew what
phase he might be in. He was often full - beaming and benevolent - at other
times harvest red, or largely dark. As he spoke, really warming to his topic,
his voice taking courage from its own rising tone, and as I sorted out his
sentences into some point of view, I realized that here was someone who was
really speaking at least part of his mind, and that mind was distressingly
familiar: Mr. Sagatelyan was a member of the Moral Majority.

When Clark Gable uttered his ''I don't give a damn'' in ''Gone With the Wind,''
Mr. Sagatelyan said, there was an outcry from concerned citizens in the United
States. But what has happened since? Nothing but sex and violence of the most
depraved kind everywhere. All the barriers are down. American literature has
lost its influence; it has lost its moral grandeur. And like a source of
infection, this libertinage is spreading rapidly all over the world.

What Mr. Sagatelyan would not admit straight out was his readiness to sacrifice
his own freedom of expression in order to prevent others from having theirs. The
freedoms of others are no doubt disagreeable; they do such damnable things with
them (hell is other people, as Sartre's play says), but they must be suffered,
if one is to continue, justly, to enjoy one's own.

I think it is fair to say that Americans characteristically come to such
conferences prepared to be critical of their own country. It is, of course, a
tradition with us, a part of our way of being, and never implies an absence of
loyalty or commitment; but we customarily receive for our self-flagellations a
few more licks from the other guys. From them, however, no similar
self-criticism is ever forthcoming. By the time our visit was over, many of us
were quite fed up with the absolute absence of other people's problems.

Mr. Ginsberg, who tried to distinguish among kinds of pornography and to point
out the criminal sources of some of the worst of it, was immediately chastised
by Chairman Fedorenko, in a tone suitable for addressing small boys, as a
''well-known sidetracker'' - we were being led away from the purely literary
subject of our meeting. This moment was for me, as they say of games, a turning
point in our discussions, for the real and profound differences between us were
emerging in ways it would prove increasingly difficult to cover over or patch
up, although efforts to do so were certainly made. IF their sidetracks were our
mainlines, our mainlines were their stonewalls, as the Soviet response to Arthur
Miller's painfully pertinent remarks made plain. What Mr. Miller said, in sum,
was: we have writers who write pornography (an activity we deplore), and you
have writers you have put in prison (an activity you refuse to acknowledge). The
United States, he said, had been spared the hierarchies and subordinations of
feudalism. It is a country where everybody, in principle, has a chance to make
money, not just a few, though it may turn out that only a few do it.
Pornography, in his view, was the exploitation of sex for commercial purposes,
and was something of which he disapproved, but censorship was not a satisfactory
solution. At this point he brought up the allegations by PEN International
concerning writers punished in the Soviet Union for their work.

''You have said America was saved from feudalism,'' Chairman Fedorenko
responded. ''What about the slave trade?''

''The bulk of the body of American law was and is antifeudalistic,'' Arthur
Miller replied. ''What about the American Indians?'' How unamusing the subway
joke seemed now. We all knew, of course, that to be recognized as a writer in
the Soviet Union you had to be a member of the Union of Soviet Writers. The
imprisoned writers were not members of the writers' union, hence not writers.
Nor could you continue to publish unless you were a member of the writer's
union, so it became difficult to make any mark on anything but the wall of your
cell. The matter seemed to the Soviet delegates entirely internal and we were
merely meddling. They did not recognize, let alone honor, the distinction
between legal and moral obligations Louis Auchincloss had introduced earlier.

Furthermore, both sides know who some of these ''unknown'' writers are, and some
of the Americans, at least, have read them. One writer, also a physicist, is a
woman, Irina Ratushinskaya, who on March 5, 1983, was sentenced to seven years'
hard labor, to be followed by five years of internal exile, for writing and
circulating poems with the purpose, the court said, ''of subverting or weakening
the Soviet regime.'' The fall 1985 issue of Formations magazine contains two of
her poems (adapted by Frances Padorr Brent and translated by Carol Avins). One
is dated December 1983 and is about the snow that whitely covers the tracks of
our lives. But we must, the poet says, go on, even if that going feels ''like an
epilogue.'' But leaving the stamp of stubborn footprints to rise on frozen steps
-just to the executioner's block. But the severe cold of a clean shirt falls
like comfort on weak shoulders.

The final moments of the conference were chaotic. Members of the press were
suddenly allowed in a half hour before it had been ruled they would be. At
precisely that moment, whether by design or by accident I don't know, the
Americans raised the problem of the imprisoned writers once more. The Soviet
representatives reacted very strongly to what they believed (not without reason)
was a breach of promise. Chairman Fedorenko said that of course we could go on
past our scheduled time, but our Lithuanian hosts had prepared an entertainment
for us, and there were many young people waiting outside. He said again that he
resented the way the Americans were attempting to meddle in the internal affairs
of the Soviet Union. Norman Cousins replied that writers all over the world had
a common bond, and that if something like the imprisonment of writers were to
happen in the United States, he felt that we would welcome the Soviet writers'
comradely concern.

It was agreed to conclude and enjoy the entertainment. Chairman Fedorenko then
closed the conference by saying the Soviets would be ready to continue such
conversations in the future provided further meetings met the highest needs of
the nation and of peace. These struck me as two rather large provisos.

In a moment there was folk dancing and folk singing, and young women and men
were whirling us around. The grand room contained a gaiety that suited it, and
my ire ebbed as I tried to keep up.

Away from the table and its U-turn, we were in nearly another world. During two
of the evenings of the conference, for instance, we attended plays put on at the
Young People's Theater in Vilnius. The first of these was an epic adaptation of
''The Day That Lasted a Hundred Years'' by Chingiz Aitmatov and I was, frankly,
prepared to be bored, not thunderstruck. The latter half of the play, staged by
a prize-winning director of the theater, V. Korostyliovas, with unflagging and
intense inventiveness, was some of the finest theater I have ever seen. The
second play, ''Pirosmani, Pirosmani . . .,'' imagining the last day of the life
of Nikolai Pirosmani, the fabulous late-19th-century folk painter from Georgia
(who did not die so much as disappear, like Ambrose Bierce), was even more
impressive, if that is possible. The play consisted of a set of short monologues
framed and highlighted by gestural mimes, acts and acrobatics, by tableaux and
icons - pictographs so visually immediate, original and emotionally charged that
they came alive, enlarged the list of actors and literally became the play. It
was as if a style of painting had been performed, and it was a remarkable
achievement. When the cultural exchange promised at the Reagan-Gorbachev summit
begins, I should be ready to give up several suburbs of St. Louis for another
glimpse of the art of V. Korostyliovas and his gifted troupe. MOMENTS such as
these warrant a million meetings, and there were many in the days that followed,
if few were quite so inspiring as the Vilnius plays. We attended concerts, a
circus, the ballet -all superb. We saw works of art and architectural wonders;
we visited war memorials more impressive than I would have thought possible; we
were lavishly dined if not wined and had fine, less formal meetings and
conversations with students, teachers and other writers, in Vilnius, Kaunas,
Minsk, Moscow and Leningrad.

The events of the days immediately following our return (the refusal and
subsequent approval of Allen Ginsberg's request for a visa extension; the
galvanizing speech of Yevgeny Yevtushenko on censorship and related topics at
the Soviet Union's own Writers Conference and Nikolai Fedorenko's reported
approval of its contents): these features form a happier face, and perhaps
Chairman Fedorenko is not one of the bad guys after all. Perhaps Yevgeny
Yevtushenko was speaking his own mind, perhaps he was turning with a new wind;
perhaps these are signs of an increasing Soviet self-confidence and candor,
perhaps the ''liberals'' are being flushed into the open for an easier shot. One
only wishes that the curtain of concealment could be lifted and private speech
become comfortably public. Like many, many others, I have my hands apart, ready
to applaud. But first we have to have some sense of what is really going on.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Israel and the Trading States

SECTION: Section 7; Page 33, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 223 words


To the Editor:

Paul Kennedy, in his review of Richard Rosecrance's ''Rise of the Trading
State'' (Jan. 5), puts Israel in some pretty strange company - ''Libya, Syria,
Israel, Cuba, Vietnam, Iran, Iraq.'' None of these, he asserts, share ''the
desire that international relations reflect the ideas of the merchant and not
the warrior.'' Does he really think that Israel would not prefer to compete with
its neighbors economically rather than militarily if they would only let
it?NATHAN GLAZER Cambridge, Mass. Paul Kennedy replies: This brief response
cannot discuss the merits of Israel's policy toward its Arab neighbors, but that
is not central to the issue of the economic consequences of military
top-heaviness. Although many individual Israelis are remarkable traders and
entrepreneurs, the nation itself sacrifices so great a proportion of its gross
national product to military spending that, were it not for continual private
and public American aid, its economy would have collapsed long ago. It was in
this sense, of the general problem of reconciling high military expenditures
with sustained commercial prosperity, that I wrote in my review that there is
''hardly any recommendation to follow their sense of priorities.'' I understand,
however, Nathan Glazer's discomfort at seeing Israel lumped in with such
company.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Memorial Will Add Names of 96 More Veterans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 95 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 2


The names of 96 more combat veterans will be inscribed on the walls of the
Vietnam Memorial by Memorial Day, Jan C. Scruggs, founder of the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial Fund, announced today.

The names of the 96 veterans had been omitted because they were killed while on
combat missions outside the officially designated war zone.

The veterans fund asked the Defense Department for a search for such names after
learning of the the case of Larry Broadhead, an Air Force lieutenant from
Edmond, Okla, who died in 1969 when his B-52 bomber crashed on takeoff from
Guam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE SHUTTLE INQUIRY: NATIONAL MOURNING CONTINUES;
NEW YORK HONORS THE CHALLENGER'S 7

BYLINE: By CRYSTAL NIX

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1183 words


Seven cannon rounds, one for each of the Challenger astronauts, were fired into
the overcast above Central Park yesterday at a memorial service for the victims
of the space shuttle explosion. About 500 people, some on skateboards and
bicycles, watched solemnly.

Spaced one minute apart, the shots above the park's Belvedere Castle were
followed by a brief nonsectarian prayer from Mayor Koch.

''Oh Lord, we pray that you may receive the souls of these your servants,' he
said. ''They died in service of their country and in service of all mankind. We
shall remember them always.'' After the service, one of many around the country
in honor of the seven astronauts, Henry J. Stern, Parks and Recreation
Commissioner, told reporters that 122nd Street between Third Avenue and
Lexington would be renamed McNair Place, in memory of Dr. Ronald E. McNair, the
mission specialist whose father once owned an automobile repair shop there.

With the American flag flying at half-staff at the service, seven black balloons
were released into the air and taps was sounded by the Veteran Corps of
Artillery of the State of New York, which sponsored the service ''We decided
this was the appropriate thing to do,'' said John E. Connelly, a general in the
corps, one of about 40 members of the unit at the service. ''We decided this was
our way to do it.'' For many of those in attendance, the 15-minute service was a
chance to show their appreciation for the astronauts and express sorrow over
their fate.

Joanie Gardiner of the Bronx said she wanted to thank the astronauts for their
courage.

''The whole situation is very sad,'' Miss Gardiner said. ''I wanted to come and
be a part of it. It was just as sad as when President Kennedy was shot or the
wars, any of the happenings.''

Several residents strolling through the park watched wistfully as the
artillerymen packed up their equipment several minutes after the ceremony had
ended.

''We would have come if we had known,'' Becky Koppelman said of the memorial
service. ''Why wasn't it publicized? It affected me a lot. It would have been
nice to come here to a service out in the open rather than to just watch it on
television.'' ---- Service for Shuttle Pilot By THOMAS J. KNUDSON BEAUFORT,
N.C., Feb. 2 - Comdr. Michael J. Smith, pilot of the Challenger, was a ''heroic
pioneer'' who knew the profound risk of great achievement, Gov. James G. Martin
said at a memorial service here today.

The Governor said Commander Smith ''knew he had acquired skills and gifts that
few can match.''

''So, too, he knew deeply the calling imposed upon one with such talents,'' he
said.

Commander Smith grew up on a small farm just outside this seaside community and
was graduated from Beaufort High School in 1963 before attending the United
States Naval Academy in Annapolis, Md.

Many of those who crowded the Beaufort Elementary School auditorium for the
memorial service knew the astronaut and some had traveled to Florida Tuesday to
view the launching of the space shuttle.

''For this community, the loss seems overwhelming because Mike Smith was one of
us,'' said Carl L. Tilghman, vice-chairman of the Board of County Commissioners
of Carteret County.

''When Mike died, a little part of us died with him,'' Mr. Tilghman said. ''We
all shared his life and we all mourn his death.''

Family at the Service

Commander Smith's wife, Jane, attended the service with her three children,
Michael, 17 years old, Alison, 14, and Erin, 8. Mrs. Smith held hands with her
son while her daughter Erin clutched a small brown teddy bear.

Commander Smith's brothers, Pat and Tony, and his sister, Ellen Leonard, were
also in attendence.

Comdr. Hugh Wolcott of the Navy, who knew Commander Smith for 23 years, said:
''Great challenges require great risks. Great advances must almost unavoidably
spring from setbacks.

''Mike knew this and lived quietly with it each day. He knew that to whom much
is given, much is required.''

Commmander Wolcott praised the astronaut as a ''fine engineer, great pilot and
superb naval officer.''

''There is comfort in knowing that he lived more, loved more, experienced more,
touched more and gave more in his 40 years than most will in twice that time,''
Commander Wolcott said.

After the service, a flight of A-6 Navy attack planes, the type of plane
Commander Smith flew in Vietnam, roared over the school in the missing man
formation.

Signs of mourning were visible throughout this community near the southern end
of North Carolina's Outer Banks. ''The Smith Family - Our Prayers Are With
You,'' said one sign posted outside a business.

Near the edge of town, a poster tacked to a makeshift flag post said: ''Mike is
a success. He lived well, laughed often and loved everything. He accomplished
his task, and left this world a better place than he found it.'' ---- 400 Honor
Dr. McNair LAKE CITY, S.C., Feb. 2 (UPI) -Gov. Richard W. Riley and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson gathered with family and friends in Dr. McNair's hometown today to
honor the scientist who died ''reaching for the heavens.''

''This person was a good man, a compassionate person, a person who taught
excellence and took his time to serve as a model for us all,'' Governor Riley
told about 400 people crowded into Wesley United Methodist Church. ''Ronald
McNair was reaching for the heavens when he gave his life for us.''

Mr. Riley said Dr. McNair, the second black American to journey into space,
overcame segregation to become a hero to white and black South Carolinians
alike.

Carl McNair, the physicist's brother, said Dr. McNair intended to return to
South Carolina when his career ended.

Concern for Racial Progress

''Ronald had gotten hundreds of honors around the world,'' Carl McNair said. ''I
don't think there was anything that meant more to him than the black and white
people working together in South Carolina to honor him, a black man who picked
cotton, cucumbers and tobacco.''

Four astronauts, Vance D. Brand, Robert L. Gibson, Bruce C. McCandless 2d and
Robert L. Stewart, were joined at the service by a host of political figures,
including Senators Strom Thurmond and Ernest F. Hollings.

Mr. Jackson, a classmate of Dr. McNair's at North Carolina Agricultural and
Technical State University, said the fatal shuttle mission was an example of
Americans exploring together and dying together.

''On this journey there were two women, a Jew, a black, an Asian, white males
and an A&T graduate from one of the endangered black schools of our country,''
Mr. Jackson said. ''It was a rainbow in the sky.''

Billie Fleming, president of the Clarendon County chapter of the N.A.A.C.P.,
said Dr. McNair provided an inspiration for children around Lake City, a town of
about 5,600 whose main street is called Ron McNair Boulevard, and told the
crowd:

''Ron McNair knew that as a little black boy from Lake City, South Carolina, God
had touched him and given him certain talents and abilities and that he would
not let race, creed or color be an obstacle and that he would go on to
accomplish what God intended him to do.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of military salute; photo of Piner family

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS AS 'A FRIEND' TO VOTERS IN PHILLIPINES

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 31


When Filipinos vote in presidential elections Friday, they will do so under an
unusual degree of scrutiny from the United States Congress, reflecting its
growing concern with the political processes of friendly developing countries.

Such scrutiny has often been left primarily to the State Department, the Central
Intelligence Agency or other parts of the executive branch.

Senator Richard G. Lugar, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, said
Congress was not meddling or interfering, but rather showing support for the
''common people'' of the Philippines. They are looking to the United States, he
said, ''to be a friend.''

Mr. Lugar leads the official bipartisan United States observer delegation
leaving for the Philippines on Tuesday. He acknowledges that because fraud is
considered likely the outcome of Friday's voting as well as the delegation's
activities is likely to be criticized. Some members of his committee, he said in
an interview, are not enthusiastic about Congress's role. But he said he thought
the situation would be worse if he and his colleagues had chosen ''not to dirty
our hands.''

'Hope That Somebody Cares'

That course would not be ''very satisfying,'' he said, for Filipinos ''with a
passion for democracy and with the hope that somebody cares enough.''

He suggested that however the elections turn out, tough questions are almost
certain to persist for American policy makers.

The Senator said the Reagan Administration had made no attempt to cover up the
failings of President Ferdinand E. Marcos's Government, nor had it tried to tell
Congress to stay out of the matter. Therefore, he said, Congress cannot simply
leave the burden of policy questions solely to the Administration.

''There've been any number of people asking what did we do wrong with the Shah,
what went wrong with Somoza and our handling of that -people who have fallen
from power -and sad results have come from it,'' he said, referring to Shah
Mohammed Riza Pahlevi of Iran and President Anastasio Somoza Debayle of
Nicaragua.

'Building of Procedures'

''I'm not sure this is going to work,'' he said of the election observation,
''but I just came to the conclusion that there is something we can do about it.
What really is at stake here is the building of democratic institutions, the
building of procedures, and the confidence that this country has in democracy.''

A Congressional overseeing role in foreign elections that are considered crucial
for American foreign policy is not entirely new. In 1967 President Johnson
loaded up Air Force One with senators, representatives, archbishops, mayors,
governors, American Legionnaires, political scientists and others and sent the
plane to the presidential elections in South Vietnam. Led by Henry Cabot Lodge,
the group fanned out in helicopters, jeeps and other vehicles to report on what
it saw.

The turmoil in Central America brought a revival of the practice. Senator Nancy
Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas, led a delegation to observe the 1982
elections for a constituent assembly in El Salvador. Two years later another
delegation was at hand when Jose Napoleon Duarte became El Salvador's first
elected civilian President in half a century.

With the Guatemalan elections late last year and now the Philippine elections,
however, Congress has begun to play a more active role not only on the day of
voting but also in events beforehand.

Lessons in Guatemala

Senator Lugar, for instance, went to Guatemala last summer, met with military
leaders and publicly stated the United States' backing for the scheduled
elections there. Congressional observers were at hand for both the November
voting and the runoff in December in which Marco Vinicio Cerezo Arevalo, a
Christian Democrat, was elected President.

Senator Lugar said he had been deeply moved by what he had seen in Guatemala. He
said that with American assistance, the Guatemalan elections commission had set
up an electoral system that ''worked perfectly.''

It was the Guatemalan experience that convinced him that Congress should take a
role in the Philippine elections.

In Guatemala, he explained, ''there was a genuine passion for democracy on the
part of the small people of the country, who found in the act of voting and
participation a sense of individual worth and dignity.''''

A Sign of 'Friendship'

''Our coming was not seen as an imperialistic intrusion or something that was a
gross interference,'' he said. ''It was seen as something that showed the
friendship of our country, the strength of our convictions.''

Recalling his conversations with illiterate Indians who had traveled in the
backs of trucks and a variety of other conveyances to reach polling places in
the Highlands, he said they thought ''Guatemala was on the line, that this was
sort of a last chance.''

He said he had ''much that same feeling with regard to the dynamics occurring in
the Philippines now.''

Before deciding to proceed with sending a delegation to the Philippine
elections, Senator Lugar put the Foreign Relations Committee through what he
called ''going to school'' on the question of electoral procedures. At his
request, the Center for Democracy of Boston University send a bipartisan team of
electoral experts to the Philippines to study the planned procedures, look for
possible areas of fraud, and report back to the committee with recommendations
for improvements.

Some of the recommendations were accepted by the Philippine authorities and some
were not. The Congressional delegation, Senator Lugar said, will be alert to
such things as whether the totals from the polling places they visit are
accurately reported to the convassing centers and whether the vote count is
interrupted, which he said would mean ''trouble with a capital T.''

He said ''I have some idea,'' from his experience in politics, about ''what you
look for, whether it is fraud in Indiana or fraud in Manila.''

The important thing, he says, is ''to bring back first-hand information because
the election is likely to be fought all over again back here, and to the extent
that there are some credible witnesses, that may make the debate more
enlightened in the weeks that follow.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Bob Packwood

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Election in Philippines Gets Educator's Priority

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 136 words


When David J. Steinberg took over as president of Long Island University last
June, he vowed he would not give up teaching because, he said, he wanted to keep
in touch with the students on a ''nonconfrontational basis'' and to remind
himself that the ''central purpose of the institution is teaching.''

Dr. Steinberg is an authority on the Philippines and he scheduled a course
called ''America in the Philippines and Vietnam'' that he would teach at the
Brooklyn campus. The first class was to be today, but it had to be canceled
because Dr. Steinberg would have been absent - he is in the Philippines, part of
a team of obervers checking on the Feb. 7 election there.

He will rush back after the Friday election in time to make the Feb. 10 class.
''I have a pressing obligation to the students,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STRANGE SEASON PUZZLES OLSON

BYLINE: By FRANK LITSKY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1952 words


AS Billy Olson put it, it has been ''a pretty unusual year.''

Unusual, indeed. In his first three track meets this winter, he set world indoor
bests for the pole vault of 19 feet 2 3/4 inches, 19-3 1/2 and 19-3 3/4. In his
next two meets - Friday and Saturday nights - he could not clear his opening
heights. Adding aggravation to aggravation, he learned that Joe Dial had
bettered his world indoor bests Saturday afternoon.

In pole vaulting, where a slight imperfection can translate into disaster,
disaster struck Olson Friday night in Toronto. He failed to clear his opening
height of 18 feet 8 1/4 inches.

On Saturday afternoon, Olson was back home in Dallas when a friend called and
told him Dial had just vaulted 19 feet 4 3/4 inches in Columbia, Mo. Olson
thought the caller was kidding. The caller assured him he was serious.

In that case, Olson said he would have to vault 19 feet 5 inches in Dallas,
where he now lives. He had 60 relatives and close friends in the stands cheering
him on, and to play it safe he started vaulting at 18 feet 1/2 inch. He missed
all three attempts.

Until this weekend, his optimism knew no bounds. The left wrist, left hamstring
and left foot that betrayed him in the past have been sound enough, though he is
not sure if they will hold up for the remaining month of his indoor season. He
does not know if they will act up in the outdoor season, as they have so often
before. But until Toronto and Dallas, he was reveling in a dream world. That
world will come to the metropolitan New York area three times this month. He
will vault in the three Mobil Grand Prix meets here -the Vitalis/U.S. Olympic
Invitational Saturday night at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena; the Wanamaker
Millrose Games Feb. 14 in Madison Square Garden, and the USA/Mobil national
indoor championships Feb. 28 in the Garden.

Dial will oppose him at Millrose and perhaps in the nationals. As of now, Dial
is planning to pass up the Olympic Invitational and vault instead Saturday night
in Oklahoma City.

Before Olson's bad weekend, he was ecstatic about his indoor season.

''I'm psyched up,'' he said. ''It's pretty hard not to be, especially when I was
as lousy as I was as long as I was. The only thing that kept me going was that I
saw a few bright spots last year. In a couple of meets, I saw that things were
coming around. But mostly, I was injured.'' The most recent of his major
injuries came as the 1984 outdoor season began. He tore ligaments in his takeoff
foot and finished seventh in the United States Olympic trials. Only the first
three finishers made the Olympic team.

''I went to the trials hoping to pull a jump out of the hat,'' he said. ''I
pulled my foot out of the hat.''

Many people had anticipated Olson's failure. Though he won the American title
outdoors in 1981 and though he tied for the title and was ranked first in the
world outdoors in 1982, he had a reputation as a world beater indoors and an
also-ran outdoors.

''Not true,'' said Olson, with his soft Texas accent and his self-deprecating
sense of humor. ''In 1976, I set a Texas high school record of 15-10. That was
probably my last good outdoor season.''

Like Eamonn Coghlan today and such stars as Martin McGrady, John Borican and
Glenn Cunningham in the past, Olson loves the excitement of indoor track - the
circus atmosphere, the noise, the interaction with a crowd sitting only a few
feet from the pole vault runway. But the main reason for his outdoor letdowns
was physical.

His left hamstring, the long muscle behind the thigh, has troubled him since he
tore it sprinting in college. Every year, he competed so often indoors that he
never gave it enough rest. For years, he did not compete without first taping
the hamstring tightly.

His left wrist became a problem when he broke many bones in it during a 1980
gymnmastics workout. Some of the bones did not heal properly, and arthritis is
setting in. He tapes the wrist thickly and tightly for competition and practice,
and that has helped.

''It's cut down on the pain,'' said Olson. ''The pain is one reason my plant has
always been bad.''

In generations past, vaulting poles were made of bamboo and then aluminum.
Vaulters needed strong shoulders and backs to absorb the shock of racing down
the runway at full speed and planting the pole in the vaulting box. Though the
modern fiberglass poles are lighter and bend so much, there is still shock.

At 6 feet 2 inches and 172 pounds, Olson is strong. He brings sprinter's speed
to an event in which horizontal speed is translated into vertical lift. His
glasses and an ever-retreating hair line give him a bookish look. And at age 27,
he is still willing to find new ways to achieve.

He had lived all his life in Abilene, Tex., and was graduated from Abilene
Christian University in 1982. Last September, he moved to Dallas for three
reasons.

First, he said, Brad Pursley, his training partner and former college teammate,
had moved there to become the vaulting coach at Southern Methodist. Second,
Janet Price, his steady companion, was attending dental school there. And third,
the Southland Corporation, whose businesses include the 7-Eleven food stores,
offered him a job as an employment tax coordinator.

From 8 A.M. to 2 or 2:30 P.M., in his first real job, he helps his company gain
tax benefits for hiring and training the handicapped, low-income workers,
Vietnam veterans, former convicts and minorities. From 3 to 6:30 or 7:30 P.M.,
he trains.

This season, that training started spectacularly. In the past, he had never
vaulted higher than 18 feet in practice. When he cleared 18-6 in December, he
decided to vault Dec. 28 in the Saskatchewan Knights of Columbus Games in
Saskatoon, the traditional opener of the indoor season. He was hoping to clear
18 feet 9 inches or 18-10. Instead, he did 19-2 3/4, his eighth world indoor
best in four years but his first in almost three years.

Enter Sergei Bubka of the Soviet Union. Last summer, Bubka became the first
vaulter to clear 6 meters when he made a stunning vault of 19-8 1/4 outdoors.
Now, 18 days after Olson's record vault, Bubka bettered it in Yomiuri, Japan, by
clearing 19-3. Then Bubka told Dial, a competitor in that Japanese meet, ''Tell
Billy Olson to take that.''

Four days later, Olson had a present for Bubka. Olson vaulted 19-3 1/2 in Los
Angeles and had the record back.

That Los Angeles record lasted only a week until Olson raised it in Albuquerque
to 19-3 3/4. Next on his schedule was Toronto, where he wanted to clear 19-4
1/4. His plan was to try only three heights - 18-8 1/4, 19-0 1/4 and 19-4 1/4,
but he never made the first height.

''It was a sad and sickening feeling,'' he said. ''I'm very disappointed. I
thought I was ready, but I just didn't have my speed.''

He said he had ''no explanation, no excuses.'' But he also indicated that he was
allowing himself to become distracted by pressure from meet directors trying to
get him for their meets and by unending demands from the news media.

''I've got to stop letting myself get caught up in all this junk,'' he said. ''I
can't set records every weekend.''

The next night, in Dallas, more problems: three attempts, three misses.

''I'm more than frustrated now,'' he said. ''I'm sick. I have no excuse. I felt
great. It was not the track, not the pit, not the crossbar, just me.''

Olson may have had Dial on his mind. They are not friends, and last summer they
engaged in a shoving incident. Olson has contended that Dial avoids competing
against the best vaulters.

Meanwhile, Olson's goals are simple - to jump higher and stay healthy. He does
not have any height goals ''because I don't know how high I can jump.'' But he
says he knows what he has to do to jump higher. He has to hold the pole higher.

For years, Olson had been using a pole 16 feet 5 inches long and holding it 15
feet 10 inches high. Then Bubka started using a pole measuring 17 feet 5 inches
and holding it at 16 feet 10 inches to 17 feet.

The most important factor in Bubka's success was not the longer pole nor higher
grip, but rather Bubka's extraordinary strength and ability. Given those assets,
the higher grip made the difference.

The higher a vaulter grips the pole, the higher he will be lifted toward the
bar. However, the higher he grips the pole, the more difficult it is to reach
the bar.

''Picture the back of the box where you plant the pole,'' said Olson. ''If I
hold at 15-10, then my takeoff point, the place where I am on the runway when I
plant the pole, is maybe 12 1/2 feet from the box. Now I have to move my body
forward those 12 1/2 feet to get to the bar and a foot more to get to the pit.

''Now I'm using a 16-6 pole and holding it at 16-5, an inch from the top. I
probably have to cover 14 feet to get to the bar and 15 feet to get to the pit.
It's getting tougher and tougher to get to the pit. I've got to run faster, and
I'm running fast already. I've got to plant better and be more solid with my
left arm, which is a problem for me because of the wrist. The pressure of the
pole comes down on the left wrist, and it hurts and it's getting worse.

''It's hard when you're 27 and you've been doing this so long. Your mind kind of
grooves your techniques, and my techniques aren't that good. The middle and the
top of my jumps are O.K., but I'm pretty shoddy at the takeoff.

''I'm at my peak now. That's all that matters. My self-esteem, how I perceive
everything - that's what counts.''

That self-esteem took a turn for the worse in Paris last July 13, the day Bubka
made his historic 6-meter jump. Olson finished fourth at 18-4 1/2.

''He beat me by a foot and almost 4 inches,'' said Olson. ''It was pretty
humbling and humiliating. Brad Pursley and I watched him looking at the bar at 6
meters, and I said to Brad, 'Let's go to the golf course.' I was wondering what
I was doing there.

''I had struggled so much to make 18-4 1/2 that it felt like 19 feet. And
there's Bubka not even jumping until the bar is at 18-8 1/4 and he makes it on
the first jump. When I saw the bar at that height, I thought, 'I can't do that.'

''Then he made it, and I felt I had just been taken out of my sport. I remember
when I was a senior in high school and Earl Bell set a world record of 18-7 1/4
and I thought, 'I can do that some day.' Every record I've been around, and I've
been around a bunch, I was right in the thick of the competition. But this one,
I thought, 'That's it for me. I can't do that.'

''I thought of quitting, but I wanted to jump indoors this year. I decided to
give it one more good shot. I wanted to go out with a little more style than
that and not go from the best in the world to very, very average. I showed
myself I've still got it, that I'm still as good as anybody or better. It's a
good feeling when you've been so lousy so long.''

That Paris performance was Bubka at his best. Bubka was scheduled to vault in
five American meets this winter until the Russians canceled his appearances in
the first four. His only indoor appearance here will come Feb. 28 in the
national championships.

''He should have been here a couple of weeks ago,'' said Olson. ''I would have
bet everything I had that he couldn't beat me. But we're going to have many
meets down the road. I think he knows now there are some guys who can beat him.
I think some can.''

In Billy Olson's mind, the leading candidate is Billy Olson, assuming he regains
his form of recent weeks.

''I'm surprised,'' he said. ''I was looking forward to a good season and I
thought I would jump high, but not this high this easily. Until this weekend, at
least, I've been doing it right. I don't know what I was doing, but it must have
been right.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Billy Olson (NYT/Joe Traver)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 4, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

The Folly of Untested Weapons

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 495 words


Early in the Pacific war against Japan, American submarines failed repeatedly to
hit their targets because their torpedoes ran beneath them. In Europe, soldiers
died needlessly because their bazookas lacked the explosive power to disable
German tanks. In Vietnam, fire and explosion caused the loss of at least 60
percent of the 5,000 downed American aircraft. And in the 1973 Mideast war,
flammable hydraulic fluid killed Israeli tankers inside American M-60 tanks.

Realistic weapons tests are even more essential now, because ever more complex
weapons are increasingly likely to go wrong. American weapons, by avowed
Pentagon policy, need to be of the highest quality to offset the superior
numbers of the Warsaw Pact forces. Yet the Pentagon's weapons procurement
bureaucracies still resist realistic tests that would inconvenience favored
projects. Tests of both performance and survivability in combat often fall far
short of likely battlefield conditions.

To test survivability, American planes and vehicles need to be loaded with
combat munitions and shot at with live Soviet ammunition. Yet no such program
existed until Col. James Burton, an Air Force officer with the Office of the
Secretary of Defense, recently persuaded the Army and Air Force to subject their
major planes and vehicles to his Joint Live Fire Test Program. The Navy refuses
to let its ships be tested.

But even though the Army agreed to test its Bradley Fighting Vehicle, it does
not seem reconciled to the verdict. After tests last December, the Army refused
to release the results, contending that only minor modifications were necessary.
Yet Colonel Burton last week told a House subcommittee hearing - held at the
request of Representative Charles Bennett - that the atmosphere inside the
vehicle became ''simply intolerable'' after each hit - due to ammunition fires
or the triggering of the fire extinguisher.

Since the Army cannot want the Bradley evacuated whenever it comes under fire,
it will surely find useful Colonel Burton's conclusion that ''moving ammunition,
fuel and extinguishers out of the troop compartment would provide the greatest
combat casualty reductions.''

Not only survivability but also the performance of new weapons is often tested
under conditions that bear little resemblance to those on a battlefield. And
even then, as happened during testing of the Sergeant York gun, the results are
not always accurately represented. The Pentagon prefers to test parts of
vehicles, or run computer simulations. When the Army held a competition in 1982
to choose an anti-tank weapon, not a single round was fired against a tank.

Congress has made the Pentagon set up an independent office to test the weapons
produced by the three services. But having a staff of 17 monitor 140 major new
weapons is no sign of seriousness. If Congress does not want the flaws in
America's weapons to emerge in battle, it had better insure that they are
discovered beforehand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 4, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

On the Road To Oxford

BYLINE: By Charlotte Curtis

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 812 words


THE banker from Columbus, Ohio, was in a good mood.

''The co-captain of the football team won a Rhodes scholarship,'' he said. And
when the reaction wasn't properly appreciative (recognition of intellectual
accomplishment rarely is), he couldn't contain himself. ''We have a Rhodes
scholar!'' he exclaimed. ''Ohio State has a Rhodes scholar!''

Ohio State University does indeed have a Rhodes scholar, its first since 1931.
Though championship football is still more nearly what Columbus and the
university are all about (there are those who think a Rhodes scholarship has
something to do with former Gov. James A. Rhodes), the selection of Michael A.
Lanese 3d is further evidence that those Toynbee called the creative minority
are hard at work.

Since he arrived in 1981, Edward H. Jennings, Ohio State's energetic president,
has vowed to put the school on the map academically. Gov. Richard F. Celeste,
himself a Rhodes scholar, and the State Legislature have helped. Mr. Lanese's
triumph is a public symbol of these efforts.

Rhodes scholars, like athletic stars, don't just happen. Whether they represent
Princeton or Radcliffe (four winners each this year), Stanford (three) or Ohio
State, they were recruited, given scholarships if need be (Mr. Lanese did),
advised and encouraged. Mr. Lanese was quick to praise his counselors.

Six feet tall, 185 pounds, likable and open-minded, this 21-year-old wide
receiver finished the football season with 522 yards and 5 touchdowns. Another
vital statistic was his 3.76 average. And he has no illusions about his
achievements.

''I'm not any brighter today than I was yesterday,'' he told reporters when
names of the nation's 32 Rhodes scholars were announced.

Later, in the quiet of a student lounge, he said he'd always wanted to be a
doctor but his math and science weren't good enough. ''I've had two C's,'' he
said. ''One in 10th-grade geometry, the other in freshman math at Ohio State.''

He is an English and political science major with well-laid plans. After the
expenses-paid year at Oxford University, he'll go to Navy Officer Candidate
School (''Everybody who wants to be a leader should serve the nation, but it
could be the Peace Corps''). Then comes law school unless pro football proves
irresistible.

''I don't have to play,'' he said. ''I playbecause I like to.''

He's also thinking of politics. ''I was for Carter,'' he said. ''The more I
read, the more I think I'm closer to the center. If I had it to do again, I'd
vote for Reagan.''

President Reagan a centrist? ''Oh yes,'' he said. ''More in action than in
words.'' It is a typical Ohio perception.

He figures he's a product of the television age, having rarely missed
''Gilligan's Island'' and other programs accused of causing brain rot. He didn't
read much until Arthur Conan Doyle hooked him in the ninth grade. He's still not
much of a reader, though he re-read ''Heart of Darkness'' twice after seeing
''Apocalypse Now,'' the Vietnam antiwar film.

Yet he does follow the news, including the details of foreign affairs, and talks
intelligently about the absurdity of pursuing terrorists when you don't know who
they are. If some of the things he says seem superficial, banal or half-baked
(''The United States is the strongest nation in the world and the least capable
of influencing events''), he has at least attempted to grapple with the world as
it is.

And in an age in which good students are often silent goody goodies, fearful of
making mistakes that might jeopardize a career path, he just isn't afraid to say
what he thinks. ''I'm not impressed with students who never take chances,'' he
said. ''Part of learning is being wrong.'' He speaks lovingly of his
Italian-American family, a mother who is ''a housewife but she's not married to
the house,'' a truck-driver father and Teamster shop steward, the terrors an
immigrant grandfather faced before learning English and the ''withdrawal
symptoms'' he had freshman year without frequent helpings of his mother's
spaghetti.

Like most young people, he adores movies. At one point, he said, ''I'm not too
good at creative writing.'' At another, he was sure he could write a screen
play. And having lived mostly in jeans and sweaters, he has decided to sharpen
his image, and is secure enough to talk about it.

''I subscribe to a men's fashion magazine,'' he said matter of factly. ''If I
had the money I'd move into the Italian style: Armani and those. But I probably
should be more traditional - penny loafers, the preppy look. After all I'm going
to the capital of traditional clothing.''

Cecil Rhodes, the 19th-century British diamond king who set up the prestigious
international scholarships, would have understood such concerns. He wasn't much
for fancy clothes. But he made his fortune, then went to Oxford to become a
gentleman. Mr. Lanese is going for an education.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 5, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Generalizations About Vietnam Vets Err

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 361 words


To the Editor:

Your recent front-page article on addiction among Vietnam veterans (Dec. 26),
while it calls deserved attention to the effective counseling provided by the
Vet Centers, needs rectification in a number of areas.

* Reliable data on drug and alcohol abuse among Vietnam veterans are available
from two Government-funded national surveys. These studies indicate that neither
military service, exposure to the drug scene in Vietnam, nor combat have had any
lasting effects on current drug-use patterns of veterans, although Vietnam
veterans are somewhat more likely than others to drink heavily.

* Despite the current American revival of the German World War I ''civilian stab
in the back'' myth, a significant proportion of combat veterans would have
developed, and did develop, severe psychological problems independently of the
manner of their reception back in the U.S.

* Working-class men were, indeed, more likely to serve during the Vietnam
period. However, the majority of Vietnam servicemen were not poor and raised in
the slums.

* Contrary to the statement attributed to Dr. Charles Rohrs, considerable
research has been done on the role such factors as psychological adjustment
before Vietnam and experience in Vietnam play in current adjustment of Vietnam
veterans.

Although the findings are complex, it is not true that all or even most veterans
with problems today were ''maladaptive'' before going to Vietnam. The single
most significant factor in current problems among Vietnam veterans is the extent
and type of combat they experienced.

News reports that contain distortions of fact, however sympathetic to the cause
of Vietnam veterans, are no more than a sophisticated version of the stories
about ''crazy addicts who hold up gas stations,'' of which Assemblyman John L.
Behan complains. Vietnam veterans need and deserve all the help we can give;
their cause is not served by adding insult to injury. CHARLES KADUSHIN GHISLAINE
BOULANGER New York, Jan. 7, 1986 The writers were investigators in ''The
Legacies of Vietnam,'' a Congressionally mandated study submitted in 1981 to the
House Committee on Veterans Affairs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 5, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

For NATO, a Period of Renewal

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 381 words


To the Editor:

Your front-page article (Jan. 19) on a trend toward conservatism among West
German youth is particularly important because of the United States
foreign-policy implications that it does not address. One of the prevalent
explanations for disagreements within the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is
that the passing of the original generation of Atlanticists has changed the
strategic landscape. The early intensity of the cold war and the suppression of
Eastern Europe are obviously not the common learning experiences of the emerging
generation of leaders in the United States and Europe.

People turn to this idea of generations and find it useful whenever there is a
time of troubles or political upheaval, and the European ''peace movements'' of
the early 1980's were largely attributed to such a loss of social memory.

As with so much else concerning NATO, the elaborate idea of a discordant
successor generation in Germany has been widely held but is unconvincing.
Instead, a period of renewal seems to be in store as this age cohort begins to
make its presence felt. It is skeptical of all ideologies and simple solutions.

Moreover, young elites in Germany and the Benelux countries are enrolling in the
sciences and technical institutions in far greater numbers than during the
1960's and 70's. Irrespective of politics, America is seen as the high-tech and
entrepreneurial frontier at the same time that a new European business idiom is
full of such catchwords as ''risk taking'' and ''venture capital.'' The Vietnam
-Watergate influences that once affected youthful political assessments have
faded amid a move away from Marxist and socialist models of development.

Although different perceptions of the Soviet threat, as well as rival national
economic interests, have been commonplace since NATO's inception, it is unlikely
that naive impressions of the East will flourish among a youth influenced by the
individual competitiveness of modern capitalism. Dispersive tendencies within
NATO are, in fact, no worse than before. America remains in a position of
leadership, and its task of managing the alliance, as Prof. Gregory Treverton of
Harvard writes, ''will be as in the past, grubby, detailed and plodding.''DEREK
LEEBAERT Washington, Jan. 24, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 6, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Indonesia-Hanoi Talks On War in Cambodia

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 121 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Feb. 5


Indonesia's Foreign Minister is preparing to open a new round of discussions
with Hanoi this month aimed at developing a formula for ending the fighting in
Cambodia.

The official, Foreign Minister Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, is to leave Thursday for a
''working visit'' to the United States to discuss the war and other issues with
American officials. He said in an interview today that he believes the Soviet
Union and China may be more disposed toward trying to find a realistic solution
for Cambodia. The war there between Vietnamese troops and Cambodian guerrillas
is in its eighth year.

Mr. Mochtar has long held the view that a ''better atmosphere'' between Vietnam
and Washington would help solve the Cambodia problem.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK FILIPINOS EAGERLY AWAIT OUTCOME

BYLINE: By MARVINE HOWE

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 633 words


Filipinos opposed to President Ferdinand E. Marcos gathered at St. Agnes Church
in midtown Manhattan yesterday to pray for ''a clean and honest election'' in
the Philippines. Then they began an election watch in the Ninoy Aquino
Movement's election center.

Partisans of Mr. Marcos have not set up an election center, but the Consulate
will open one today in its Philippine Center.

Filipinos make up one of the fastest growing ethnic groups in the Greater New
York area, numbering about 75,000. They are largely professionals - doctors,
nurses, lawyers and engineers.

Although they are dispersed and have not been politically active, they seem to
have been swept by a new mood of excitement and expectation.

''We are hopeful and buoyant but increasingly anxious because reports show
growing signs of systematic fraud, reinforced by terror,'' said Herherson
Alvarez, president of the Ninoy Aquino Movement.

The group is named for the opposition leader Benigno S. Aquino Jr., who came to
the United States in self-exile after President Marcos proclaimed martial law
and was slain on his return to the Philippines in 1983. Mr. Alvarez was recently
named spokesman for the united opposition by Corazon C. Aquino, Mr. Aquino's
widow and President Marcos's election opponent.

''For the first time it is clear that under the Marcos Government there has been
mismanagement, corruption and worsening economic and security situation,'' Mr.
Alvarez said. He expressed hope for a change in United States policy on the
basis of ''moral responsibility and good sense.''

Once generally indifferent to politics, the Filipino community ''has awakened''
since Mr. Aquino's assassination, according to Mr. Alvarez' wife, Cecile Guidote
Alvarez, director of the Third World Institute of Theater Arts Studies at La
Mama.

The Ninoy Aquino Movement has raised funds to support pollwatchers, organized
prayer vigils and urged Filipinos to cable President Reagan to demand ''a clean
and honest ballot.''

Most of the other opposition groups also support Mrs. Aquino's candidacy, even
the left-wing Coalition Against the Marcos Dictatorship.

A member of this group, Ding Pajaron, said its hope was ''tempered by the
knowledge of all the powers the President can use.''

The Philippines Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, while not openly calling for
an election boycott, has declared that ''it is not possible to hold fair and
honest elections in the Philippines under the present circumstances in view of
President Marcos's tremendous powers,'' according to its chairman, Romeo
Capulong.

He said that while this was the first serious challenge to the Marcos regime in
20 years, ''the opposition should not have any illusions because the stakes are
too high.''

''There is a mood of heightened expectation because this is a very important
election,'' a Filipino official said, requesting anonymity. ''People are all
glued to the television and calling their hometowns for news.''

The Manhattan weekly Filipino Reporter has given editorial support to the Marcos
campaign.

''Mrs. Aquino has not shown that she could solve the country's problems any
better than President Marcos,'' the publisher, Libertito Pelayo, declared. ''We
would rather have an experienced leader like Mr. Marcos.''

Traditionally, the Filipino-American community has been either conservative or
apolitical and strongly anti-Communist. Dr. Necisitas Kuo, director of community
medicine at Flushing Hospital, expressed concern that an opposition victory in
the Philippines would lead to a Communist takeover.

''It is a very serious election and people are seriously thinking of a change in
government, but where can you find a change from dictatorship improved the
situation?'' she said. ''Look at Iran, Cambodia, Vietnam, even China.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS: KENNETH CONBOY;
CITY'S NEW TOP INVESTIGATOR

BYLINE: By SELWYN RAAB

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 603 words


Kenneth Conboy was in his 14th-floor office, which overlooks City Hall, when a
telephone call came from Mayor Koch yesterday afternoon.

''Ken, I want you to do this,'' was how Mr. Conboy recalled the Mayor's words as
he asked him to become the city's Commissioner of Investigation.

''He said this was a difficult time for the city, that it was something I had to
do,'' Mr. Conboy said in an interview. Two hours after the brief telephone
conversation, Mr. Conboy's appointment to head the beleaguered Department of
Investigation was announced at City Hall by Mr. Koch.

Successor to McGinley

With a wide background in law enforcement, Mr. Conboy, who has been the city's
criminal-justice coordinator for two and a half years, said he had guessed that
he was under consideration for the post since the resignation last Friday of
Patrick W. McGinley.

Amid inquiries by Federal and local prosecutors into accusations of corruption
in city agencies, Mr. McGinley said he was stepping down because he, too, was
being investigated on the way his office had processed a possibly fraudulent
disability claim by one of its employees.

As the city's top watchdog agency, Mr. McGinley's office had come under fire
from Mayor Koch and other officials for its failure to uncover extortion in
contracts awarded by the Parking Violations Bureau. The investigation into the
operations of the parking bureau has now spread to at least seven other city
departments and the Democratic Party organizations in Queens and the Bronx.

In the past, critics asserted that some mayors used the Investigation Department
to minimize the scope of municipal problems and to head off investigations by
outside prosecutors.

''That certainly will not be the case with me,'' Mr. Conboy said.

''There is no doubt that very serious questions of public integrity have
surfaced,'' he continued. ''No one knows the full extent of the corruption, but
the problem must be attacked without favor to anyone, and that is what is going
to be done.''

Mr. Conboy officially assumes his post Feb. 22. But because of the numerous
corruption investigations, he said he would begin spending time today at the
Department of Investigation offices at 30 John Street in lower Manhattan.

There was a hint from Mr. Conboy that he might shake up the Investigation
Department, as well as the inspector general's offices that serve in all city
departments and report to the Investigation Department.

''What has happened clearly raises questions about the powers of the
Commissioner and the resources of the staff,'' Mr. Conboy said.

Criminal-Justice Work

Kenneth Conboy was born on June 3, 1938, in Manhattan and grew up in Sunnyside,
Queens. He was educated at Roman Catholic primary and secondary schools, and
graduated from Fordham College and the University of Virginia Law School. Later
he obtained a master's degree in American history from Columbia University.

In the Army during the mid-1960's, Mr. Conboy was stationed in South Vietnam and
was discharged with the rank of captain.

From 1966 to 1977, he was an assistant district attorney in Manhattan and also
headed the rackets bureau. He was a deputy police commissioner for legal matters
and counsel to the Police Department from 1977 to 1983, when Mayor Koch named
him criminal-justice coordinator.

Mr. Conboy, a bachelor, lives in the East 70's. His hobbies are bicycling three
miles every day in Central Park and sailing.

''He's a bloodhound for data and he handles each job like a criminal
investigation,'' the deputy criminal justice coordinator, Patrick G. Hoey, said
of Mr. Conboy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

YEAR OF TIGER, AND NOT JUST IN CHINATOWN

BYLINE: By ANDREW L. YARROW

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2502 words


THERE won't be a lighted apple descending in Times Square to mark this new year,
but there will be fireworks and parades, banquets and family celebrations Sunday
to herald the start of the Chinese New Year - the Year of the Tiger. While
cymbals crash and roving lion dancers spread good luck across Chinatown, the
occasion will also be observed throughout the city with concerts, dance
performances and exhibitions.

The holiday is not only a time of festivities for the city's more than 150,000
Chinese-Americans, it is also an excellent time to discover some of the cultural
riches of the city's Chinese community. The best place to start, of course, is
Chinatown.

The area is a grand bazaar of closely huddled restaurants, twisting streets,
edible exotica in teeming sidewalk markets and, always, people. Although
Chinatown has outgrown its nominal boundaries of the Bowery, Canal, Baxter and
Worth Streets, it remains the most sharply defined of Manhattan's many
worlds-in-miniature. Compact enough to be crossed in minutes, it is nevertheless
so full of things to see and places to eat and shop that there is always
something to discover.

Sights and smells begin as you emerge from the Canal Street BMT station, or
''Chinatown station,'' as it is identified by the calligraphy on the wall. On
the four blocks of Canal east of Baxter Street you'll find a vast array of
produce, fresh seafood, herbs, roots and poultry. Nearby streets like Mott, Pell
and Doyers, and the eastern side of Chatham Square - Division Street, East
Broadway and Catherine Street - is packed with restaurants, book and import
shops. Wind chimes, porcelain vases, cooking equipment and bric-a-brac bulge
from tiny curio shops.

It may be hard to squeeze into some of the shops and restaurants on Mott and
adjacent streets this weekend, because Mott is the main thoroughfare for
free-form parades of lion and dragon dancers and marching bands tomorrow night
and Sunday.

Dragons will be few in number, because their long, slithering bodies require
dozens of people to operate them, but lions will abound. Actually a form of
martial arts, lion-dancing requires one dancer to hold the papier-mache head and
another to operate the tail. A third dancer jumps up and down in front, teasing
and provoking the lions. Each team of dancers represents a local club or civic
organization.

While the lions dance in the streets of Chinatown, all manner of Asian
exhibitions and performances are on tap. An exhibition at the China Institute in
America, for example, offers a good overview of customs and meanings of the
Lunar New Year. Folk art and artifacts associated with the holiday, such as an
altar table with offerings for ancestors, children's games and woodblock prints
of household deities, as well as special foods, are on display through Feb. 23.

From Manhattan to Brooklyn

Many of those foods can be enjoyed at the China Institute banquet on Sunday at
6:30 P.M. at the Peking Park Restaurant, 100 Park Avenue, at 40th Street;
tickets are $50. The institute is at 125 East 65th Street, and its gallery is
open Sundays and weekdays from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. and Saturdays from 10 to 5. A $1
contribution is suggested. Information and banquet reservations: 744-8181.

The celebration reaches out to Brooklyn, too. Chen and Dancers, one of many
groups formed in the last decade or so, will perform today at 12:30 P.M. at
Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute, 333 Jay Street. The troupe will also perform
such traditional and contemporary works as ''Spring Song'' and ''Mott Street''
tomorrow at 7 P.M. in the Chinese Community Center auditorium at 62 Mott Street.
Admission to both performances is free. Information: 349-0126.

The Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association, Chinatown's oldest community
group, is sponsoring a variety of free concerts in the next few days at the
Chinese Community Center. Tomorrow at 2 P.M., there will be music by the Chinese
Dramatic Benevolent Association at the center. The center will also present free
concerts on the following three evenings at 7 o'clock. The New York Institute of
Cantonese Music will perform Sunday, the Chinese Music Club on Monday and the
Chinese Cultural and Recreation Association of New York will offer selections
from Chinese opera on Tuesday. Also on Monday at 2:30 P.M., the New York Chinese
School will be presenting a program of folk dance and songs. Information:
226-6280.

The huge Silver Palace restaurant in Chinatown will be a major center of
celebration. Activities begin with a rock-and-roll and dim-sum party,
co-sponsored by WNEW radio, today from 10 A.M. to 2 P.M. Tonight, a 10-course
banquet starts at 6 o'clock, followed by a screening of ''The Return of the
Phoenix,'' to benefit the Pan Asian Repertory. Tickets are $45; reservations,
505-5655. Benefits for the Chinatown Planning Council and Chinese-American Arts
Council will be Sunday at 7 P.M. and Wednesday at 6 P.M. Tickets are $50;
reservations: 431-7808.

Plays at Queens Library

In addition to substance, there are shadows. And shadows are the stars of four
brief plays being performed tomorrow at 2 P.M. at the Queens Borough Library's
Flushing branch, at Kissena Boulevard and Main Street. Two-dimensional animals
from Chinese folklore will be animated behind a backlit screen by the Yueh Lung
(Joyous Dragon) Shadow Theater. Information: (718) 990-0892.

Chinese folk dances, classical and regional folk music, operatic excerpts and a
modern performance-art work will be presented by the Asian-American Dance
Theater tomorrow at 8 P.M. The concert - one in a monthly series called ''D'Asia
Vu'' -will be held in the theater's second-floor studio at 26 Bowery; tickets
are $5. Information: 233-2154.

China Books and Periodicals, which deals in books from China, is holding a
reception featuring traditional Chinese music and refreshments tomorrow
afternoon from noon to 3. The store, at 125 Fifth Avenue, near 19th Street, is
open Monday through Saturday from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Sunday fron noon to 5.

On Sunday, the Young People's Chinese Cultural Center and Music From China are
presenting a concert of traditional music and dance at the Murry Bergtraum High
School at 411 Pearl Street. Zhou Taisen, a double-reed suona soloist from China,
and his countryman, the dancer Jiang Qi, are featured performers in a
wide-ranging program that includes a classical dance called ''Spring Over
Moonlit Rivers.'' Tickets are $7 ($5 in advance), and $3 for students and the
elderly. Information: 964-7903.

Peking Opera Stars

At the Asia Society, two stars of the Peking Opera, Ye Shao-lan and Xu Jia-bao,
will enact operatic scenes and discuss the history, costumes, acting and vocal
techniques and stories of the legendary Chinese opera. The program begins Sunday
at 2 P.M. at the society's building at 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street; tickets
are $10. As part of a monthlong series of Chinese films, the society is
screening the 1947 epic ''The Spring River Flows East'' tonight at 8 o'clock;
tickets $5. And Sunday at noon, arts and crafts displays and demonstrations
accompany a pay-for-what-you-eat luncheon banquet.

The society's permanent collection of Chinese artworks can be seen Tuesday
through Saturday from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. and Sundays from noon to 5. Admission is
$2. Reservations: 517-8508 or 517-2742.

Brightly colored embroidery, starting with the Ming Dynasty, is on display at
the Asian Arts Institute through Feb. 28. The second-floor gallery, at 26 Bowery
(233-2154), is open weekdays from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. and, this Sunday, from noon
to 5.

Red Silk Dancers

Citibank's Chatham Square branch, at 2 Mott Street, is displaying art by the
children of Chinatown, and will be host at a performance by Chinatown's Red Silk
Dancers on Feb. 13. The photo gallery of the Chinatown History Project at 70
Mulberry Street is open Fridays from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Sundays from noon to
5. The History Project also offers guided tours of Chinatown for $10.
Information: 619-4785.

Even the city's botanical gardens will be in the holiday spirit. Dr. Stephen Tim
will discuss China, its people and its foods in an illustrated lecture in the
Brooklyn Botanic Garden's auditorium, 1000 Washington Avenue, on Sunday at 2:30
P.M. Admission is $2; 50 cents for children and the elderly. Information: (718)
622-4433. And a Chinese dinner at the Queens Botanical Garden, 43-50 Main Street
in Flushing, next Tuesday will help finance its new ''Garden of the Orient.''
Tickets are $30; reservations: (718) 886-3800.

Uptown at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, nearly 1,000 years in the esthetic
life of the Middle Kingdom can be sampled in the museum's Douglas Dillon
Galleries. Monumental and brooding landscapes, intimate flower-and-bird
paintings and fine calligraphic brush works from the Sung, Yuan, Ming and Ch'ing
dynasties are among the collections.

The second-floor galleries surround the Astor Court, a pocket of serenity
modeled on a Ming scholar's garden in Suzhou. The museum is open Wednesdays
through Sundays from 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M., and Tuesdays from 9:30 till 8:45.
Admission is $4.50 for adults; $2.25 for students and the elderly. Information:
879-5500.

At the Hall of Asian Peoples at the American Museum of Natural History, puppets,
rare books, theatrical costumes, a lion mask and a sedan chair used to carry a
bride to her bridegroom's home are among hundreds of items giving a taste of
day-to-day life in old China. Museum hours are 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M. (till 9,
Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays). Admission is by donation. Information:
873-1300.

So, as the Year of the Ox gives way to the Year of the Tiger, the lunar
pandemonium will slowly subside. And the lions will begin preparing for a year
hence, when they will dance in the Year of the Rabbit.

THE MYTHS AND MORES OF AN ANCIENT HOLIDAY

The parading lion dancers, the firecrackers and the flurry of concerts and
banquets are only the most visible expressions of what is one of the world's
longest-running holiday celebrations. Lunar New Year - usually between late
January and late February - has been the most important day of the Chinese
calendar for more than 4,000 years and is the high point of a three-week holiday
season.

Chinese New Year is a family celebration, a time for concluding old business and
preparing for the future, with an array of rituals believed to promote good
fortune, according to Lily Chang of the China Institute in America. On New
Year's Eve a family's house is cleaned, offerings are made to ancestral spirits
and firecrackers are exploded to scare off evil spirits.

Several days before, the kitchen god is honored with sweets so that the family
is favorably judged when he reports to the other gods. In parts of China, doors
are sealed with red paper to prevent good luck from escaping.

''Since Chinese New Year is about beginnings and luck,'' said Mary Scherbatskoy
of Arts Inc., a Chinatown educational organization, special foods are served
that are considered lucky because of their names or appearances. Tangerines are
popular because the word for tangerine sounds like the Cantonese word for
''lucky.'' Similarly, eggskin dumplings and cellophane noodles are served
because they resemble gold ingots and silver chains. This predilection for
culinary punning reaches its most intricate level with a dish that includes red
dates, peanuts, dried longans and lotus seeds; the words for these ingredients
form a homonymous phrase meaning ''soon to give birth to a dear son.''

The color red symbolizes good luck. Ever conscious of auspicious omens,
traditional Chinese will wear red clothing and give red envelopes filled with
money to children and unmarried relatives. In Chinatown, this practice is used
to raise funds for community organizations, whose lion dancers are rewarded by
local merchants.

Custom dictates that the first two days of the new year be devoted to visiting
relatives. For many Chinese, the seventh day is a sort of universal birthday
celebration, and the 15th day heralds the Lantern Festival - the first full moon
of the year.

The Chinese are believed to have first marked time's passage by the cycles of
the moon in the Xia Dynasty, some four millenniums ago. Sunday is said to mark
the beginning of the 4684th year since the legendary first Chinese ruler, the
Yellow Emperor. However, many scholars say that numerical dating is a modern
invention, and that the Chinese have traditionally reckoned time only in terms
of overlapping 10- and 12-year cycles. based on the animals of the Chinese
zodiac, which repeat every 60 years.

A VITAL COMMUNITY WITH ITS OWN MELTING POT

The first Chinese to settle in New York are said to have arrived in the 1840's,
when a Cantonese junk docked in Manhattan. However, the city's Chinatown did not
begin to take form until a generation later.

Many Chinese who came to America to pan for gold in California or work on the
transcontinental railroad migrated eastward in the 1870's and 80's. Because the
Government virtually prohibited Chinese laborers from bringing families, New
York's Chinatown was a ''bachelor society,'' where in 1890 the ratio of men to
women was 27 to 1. The immigrants set up laundries and cigar-making shops near
Pell and Doyers Streets. From 1882 to 1965, immigration laws severely restricted
Chinese.

Since the abolition of national-origins quotas, the Chinese community has
changed radically. The country's Chinese population has doubled to more than a
million, with a quarter estimated to be living in New York. Although the 1980
Census counted 150,000 Chinese in the city, according to David S. Chen of the
Chinatown Planning Council, there may well be twice that number with newcomers
arriving at the rate of 10,000 to 15,000 a year. Some are now settled in
Woodside, Elmhurst, Flushing and elsewhere in Queens.

New York's Chinese community is far from homogeneous. Most early immigrants came
from southern China and primarily speak the Taisan dialect, according to Charles
Lai, co-founder of the Chinatown History Project. After 1965, Hong Kong and
Taiwan, where Cantonese and Mandarin dialects are spoken, became the major
source of immigrants. Then, in the 70's, after the Vietnam War ended and the
United States normalized relations with China, Southeast Asian Chinese and
mainland Chinese added new layers.

As the cultural divide among New York's Chinese has widened , there has also
been a shift in political and economic power to the recent, affluent
Mandarin-speaking entrepreneurs from Hong Kong and Taiwan.

''While New York's Chinese are pretty prosperous, there is poverty and disguised
unemployment in the form of people who work a little in family businesses and in
the garment shops,'' Mr. Chen said. ''In the last few years, a lot of people
have come from Hong Kong for political reasons -afraid of what happens when
Britain's lease expires in 1997. They have brought in a lot of money and are
mainly going to Queens.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 7, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Dining Out Guide: Saigon to Seoul

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 764 words


Following is a summary of reviews of restaurants that have appeared in The New
York Times. Stars are followed by the date of original publication. Prices are
current, and only weekend hours are given. CUISINE DE SAIGON, #154 West 13th
Street (255-6003) -

* (Dec. 6, 1985) The cooking of Vietnam is among the most delicate and refined
in Asia, but examples of it are not readily available in New York. The fare at
this Greenwich Village restaurant is straightforward and the Oriental ambiance
is somewhat faded. The kitchen's strong suit is broiling, not frying, and the
sweet dishes are extremely sweet. Recommended are the steamed dumplings, shrimp
roll, vegetarian roll, bass Vietnamese style, barbecue beef or pork skewer.
Entrees $8.50 to $13.50. Fridays and Saturdays, 5 to 11:30 P.M.; Sundays, 5 to
11. INDOCHINE, #430 Lafayette Street (505-5111) -

*

* (Dec. 14, 1984) The restaurant's name reflects the menu's mix of Vietnamese
and Cambodian food, and the decor is cheerful and smart, with palm leaves
decorating the walls and green banquettes. Sweet and sour shrimp soup with
perfectly cooked shrimp, slices of pineapple and chunks of tomato is a fine
dish; another good choice is sliced beef with rice noodles and onions, Chinese
cabbage and bean sprouts in broth. Other good choices include steamed shrimp or
squid with mint, red peppers and lemon grass; stuffed chicken wings, and fish
steamed in banana leaf with coconut milk and lemon grass. Entrees $7 to $14.25.
Fridays through Sundays, 6 P.M. to 12:30 A.M.

SALA THAI, #1718 Second Avenue, at 89th

Street (410-5557) -

* (Dec. 30, 1983) There is very little of Thailand in the glass-covered pink
tablecloths and napkins, but the dining room is pleasant and quiet, and service
is professional. Although some of the food may not be authentic, it is always
fresh, well cooked and attractively presented. The most successful dishes are
curry puffs and greaseless egg rolls, stuffed with shrimp, cabbage and pork;
squid salad; frogs legs or pork with chili and basil. Fish and seafood dishes
are also recommended, including Thai bouillabaisse and crab, shrimp, squid and
fish fillets steamed in aluminum foil. Entrees $7.95 to $12.95. Fridays through
Sundays, 4:30 to 11:45 P.M.

SIAM GRILL, #586 Ninth Avenue, near 42d

Street (307-1363) -

* (May 27, 1983) An unusual feature for a Thai restaurant is the big grill,
glassed off in the trim, attractive dining room. The chicken, marinated in spicy
sauce and then broiled, is one of the best specialties; and the tender beef
satay with sesame sauce is another well broiled dish.

Also recommended are soups, made with lime juice, lemon grass and green onion
and combined with chicken or shrimp or crabmeat and mushrooms. Shrimp sauteed
with onion, chili paste, lemon grass and lime juice is spicy; squid with onion,
lime juice and chili is satisfying, and a number of flounder dishes are
excellent. Entrees $7.95 to $11.25. Fridays, 11:30 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.;
Saturdays, 5 to 11:30; Sundays 4 to 11.

SIAM INN, #916 Eighth Avenue, near 55th

Street (489-5237) -

*

* (June 5, 1981) This cheerful, modern dining room with decorative Thai accents
offers some beguiling food skillfully prepared. The best appetizers are squid
salad with lime juice and chili paste; clear shrimp broth with straw mushrooms,
chili and lime juice, and chicken soup with coconut milk and ginger. Meaty frogs
legs with a glaze of garlic and pepper are excellent. Also recommended are whole
crispy fried fish, either with chili and garlic sauce or with garlic and pepper;
shrimp or chicken with green curry sauce, and sauteed beef, shrimp or pork with
hotly flavored basil and chilies. Entrees $7.95 to $14.95. Fridays, noon to 3
P.M. and 5 to 11:30; Saturdays, 5 to 11:30; Sundays, 5 to 11.

SUKHOTHAI, #149 Second Avenue, near

Ninth Street (460-5557) -

* (July 5, 1985) Brick walls, brass rails, a long wooden bar and high ceiling
create a publike backdrop for the hot and spicy Thai food. One good reason to
visit Sukhothai is the appetizer of deep-fried minced shrimp with Thai spices
wrapped in bean curd. Equally tasty and exotic are the kingfish dumplings, and
both of the satays, chicken and beef, are moist and delicious. Other recommended
dishes include hot and sour shrimp soup; grilled jumbo shrimp with onions, fish
sauce and lime; deep-fried whole sea bass with garlic, and a combination of
shrimp, squid, mussels and scallions in foil. Entrees $5.95 to $9.95. Fridays
and Saturdays, 5 P.M. to midnight; Sundays, 5 to 11. What the stars mean, page
C22.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 8, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Don't Disarm Diplomacy

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 259 words


Few Americans face greater dangers than the 4,100 members of our diplomatic
corps, their staffs and dependents. Five ambassadors and two chiefs of mission
have been killed by hostile action since 1968 - a total greater than the number
of generals killed in battle in Vietnam and Korea. In their present unsafe
condition, American embassies continue to tempt suicidal terrorists and scare
off foreigners with important business. In principle, everyone in Congress
agrees that something must be done.

But now comes the bill. The State Department has asked Congress to spent $2
billion to better protect 60 high-risk embassy buildings without turning them
into forbidding bunkers. It would buy concrete perimeter defenses and
sabotage-proof communications systems. The cost is high because the necessary
equipment and labor are often not locally available.

Upon hearing Secretary of State Shultz's request, House leaders piously lectured
him on the deficit and the Gramm-Rudman mandate for economies. They suggested he
bring jeopardized diplomats and dependents home instead.

A moment's thought would show that the posts most at risk are the ones at which
Americans are most urgently needed. Career officers supply three-fourths of the
raw intelligence gathered by all American agencies. Depleting this resource
would be a loss of face and vision.

Money for diplomats is money for national defense; the vulnerable embassy is the
front line in the war against terrorism. An America that cannot afford to defend
that line is poor indeed. In spirit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 8, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DE GUSTIBUS;
FOR COLDS AROUND THE WORLD, IT'S CHICKEN SOUP

BYLINE: By MARIAN BURROS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 52, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 875 words


''Jewish penicillin'' is made by the French, the Italians, the Greeks, the
Hungarians, the Vietnamese and people of countless other nationalities who know
that chicken soup has mystical therapeutic properties. Science has never been
able to isolate them, but not for lack of trying.

Three physicians at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Miami Beach performed an
experiment that is described by Joe Graedon, a pharmacologist, in a self-help
book called ''The People's Pharmacy II.'' He says in part:

''We decided to assess whether chicken soup might have a therapeutic rationale
other than its good taste. We measured nasal mucus velocity, since transport of
nasal secretions serves as a first line of host defense in removal of pathogens
(nasties like viruses). It was not possible to design a double-blind study
because the placebo could be distinguished by taste from the chicken soup, but
we did randomize the various treatments.

For Acute Rhinitis

''Drinking hot chicken soup either by sipping or by straw increased nasal mucus
velocity compared to the sham procedure. An increase in nasal mucus velocity
should be beneficial in acute rhinitis (stuffy nose) since the contact time of a
pathogen on the nasal mucosa would be shortened, thereby minimizing its
penetration and multiplication. Finally, the delayed suppression of nasal mucus
velocity 30 minutes after drinking cold water suggests that hot rather than cold
liquids might be preferable in the recommendations for fluid intake in patients
with upper respiratory tract infections (colds).''

In other words, chicken soup is good for colds.

In addition, the survey found that volunteers who drank hot water also showed an
increase in velocity, but not nearly so great as that experienced by the
chicken-soup imbibers. Could the difference be the aroma?  Not all chicken soup
is the same, of course. Mother's is best (although there are some families in
which grandmother's may be better). And every mother makes it differently.

What is striking is that broth, whether made with chicken or veal or beef, is
the medicine of choice for a cold or flu almost everywhere.

In Hungary it is called becsinalt leves, which roughly translates, according to
Paulette Fono, as a gemischt soup, which roughly translates to a soup with a lot
of different things. Mrs. Fono, a restaurateur in San Francisco who was born in
Hungary, says it is a ''vegetable soup done the same way as chicken soup.'' The
vegetables are sauteed with chicken wings or little pieces of veal, then are
dusted with flour, put in a pot with water and cooked. Mrs. Fono said that for
the really sick, the soup was made with the whole chicken.

For Greek children, the traditional chicken soup, made with carrots, celery,
onion and garlic, is further enriched with lemon juice and eggs, according to
Tessie Chrissotimos, who lives on Staten Island.

The French, however, do something slightly different, according to Marc
Sarrazen, owner of DeBragga & Spitler, a wholesale meat company. When he was a
child in France he got beef consomme with bits of very lean cooked hamburger in
it. But Mr. Sarrazen said his children were brought up in this country and ''we
gave them Jewish penicillin.''

Those used to European-style chicken soup would consider the Vietnamese version
quite exotic. And quite delicious. According to Germaine Swanson, who was born
in Vietnam, the chicken soup there is made with fresh ginger and an onion that
has been grilled over charcoal to give it a burnt flavor. After the fat is
skimmed off, the soup is seasoned with nuoc mam - fish sauce - and fresh
coriander, green onion, rice noodles and the meat of the chicken. ''It's also
good for hangovers,'' said Mrs. Swanson, who owns Germaine's, a restaurant in
Washington.

The Vietnamese and Italian variations are among the most interesting. Carole
Lalli, a senior editor at Simon & Schuster, remembers chicken broth made thick
with pastina.

The Canned Version

Just as this column was being written a can of Mount Sinai Medical Center Clear
Chicken Soup arrived in the mail! The literature that accompanied it reiterates
the researchers' earlier findings about the benefits of chicken soup. Packed for
the medical center by Manischewitz, and kosher for Passover, it can never
compete with mother's. For one thing, it contains monosodium glutamate.

The bottom line is that everyone loves soup when a cold strikes. It is so highly
regarded that a Jewish Penicillin Connoisseurs Association has sprung up.
According to a press release from the Stage Delicatessen on Seventh Avenue at
54th Street, the association is ''a consortium of Jewish mothers, grandmothers
and related perpetrators of 'old wives tales.' ''

And in this season of colds and flu, the Stage Deli is prepared to offer a bowl
of free chicken soup any Thursday this month from 11 A.M. until closing to
anyone, ''man or woman, who brings in proof of their spouse's status as a
doctor, in addition to proof of their own identity as husband or wife of the
doctor.''

The restaurant is doing this, they say, because the physicians in question have
to work overtime during the flu season and their loved ones may feel lonely and
neglected.

Chicken soup is good for that, too.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VETERANS' CONCERNS LEAD TO AID FOR NEEDIEST

BYLINE: By JOHN T. McQUISTON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 56, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 499 words


Vietnam veterans expressing concern about the growing number of homeless men in
the city's shelters are among the donors to the 74th annual appeal of The New
York Times Neediest Cases Fund.

Thomas Bird, director of the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theatre Company, sent a
check for $250 on behalf of the company and a letter, saying: ''I want to
contribute my salary for the week to the Neediest Cases Fund. Please target our
money, if you can, to homeless Vietnam veterans.''

He said that a variety show organized by his theater group had toured the
shelters in New York City during the last three years and that he had been
struck by the dramatic increase in the number of the homeless.

Other groups expressing concern for the homeless, ill and despairing have also
contributed to the fund, which was started in 1912 by Adolph S. Ochs, then the
publisher of The Times.

The New York Business Press Editors sent a check for $41, which was raised in a
raffle by the group.

Some donors contribute to the fund as a way to celebrate a special occasion or
in memory of a friend or loved one.

Sholom F. Steinhardt of Santa Monica, Calif., sent a gift of $5,000 in memory of
his father and mother, Max and Sophie Steinhardt, his brother, Bernard, and his
sister, Dorothy Siegel. He said he wanted the money ''to go to help the old and
helpless,'' noting that ''the feeling I receive in giving is priceless and
cannot be bought.''

Rita Silberman of Woodmere, L.I., sent a check for $50 in memory of her husband,
Jack. ''I would like it used to improve the condition of the homeless and the
hungry in New York,'' she said.

The funds are distributed throughout the year by eight private social-service
agencies to needy individuals and families in the metropolitan area. Recorded
yesterday$

*

*

* 1,000.00 Previously recorded

* 2,661,240.49 ------Total $2,662,240.49 HOW TO AID FUND Checks should be made
payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund and sent to P.O. Box 5193,
General Post Office, New York, N.Y. 10087, or to any of these organizations:

COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK, 105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y.
10010.

* FEDERATION OF JEWISH PHILANTHROPIES OF NEW YORK, 130 East 59th Street, New
York, N.Y. 10022.

* CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK, 1011 First Avenue, New
York, N.Y. 10022.

* FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES, 281 Park Avenue South, New York,
N.Y. 10010.

* CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY, 105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.

* BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE, 285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y.
11217.

* CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN, 191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y.
11201.

* STATEN ISLAND FAMILY SERVICE, 2205 Hylan Boulevard, Staten Island, N.Y. 10306.

* No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York
Times Neediest Cases Fund.

* Contributions to the fund are deductible on Federal, state and city income
taxes.

* To delay may mean to forget.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHY WRITE FOR THE THEATER? A ROUNDTABLE REPORT

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2809 words


How are playwrights affected by world events? Can art and politics coexist in
the theater? From what sources do playwrights draw their inspiration? What is
the future of a theater confronted by increasing economic pressures?

At the invitation of the Arts and Leisure section, four currently active
playwrights -Athol Fugard, David Mamet, Arthur Miller and Wallace Shawn -
recently met to discuss these and other questions. Although all agreed that
there is no strong public demand for plays dealing with political and social
issues, they were unanimous in feeling that this was their primary calling. A
common concern about the escalating cost of theatrical production was summarized
succinctly by Mr. Miller as ''the heart of the beast.'' Each also expressed his
anxieties and hopes as an artist trying to remain active in the theater today.

Three of the playwrights have been represented in New York this season - Mr.
Fugard on Broadway with the Yale Repertory Theater revival of ''Blood Knot,'' in
which he co-stars; Mr. Mamet with ''Prairie du Chien'' and ''The Shawl'' for the
Lincoln Center Theater Company; Mr. Shawn with ''Aunt Dan and Lemon,'' in which
he co-starred. With a new cast, the Shawn play will reopen soon at the Public
Theater. Mr. Miller has two new one-act plays scheduled to be presented by the
Lincoln Center Theater Company.

The following symposium was moderated by Mel Gussow, a drama critic of The New
York Times. The following is an edited and abbreviated transcript.

Question: To what degree is a playwright's art shaped by the country he lives
in?

Fugard: It's almost impossible to tell a South African story that doesn't have a
political resonance. I've ended up with some sort of tag as a political
playwright and whether it's justified or not I don't know. But I certainly have
done nothing on my side to try and work at that or to earn it. I have
consciously applied myself to telling the stories that I want to tell. I just
find that my motives for choosing a story vary enormously and change almost from
play to play. And sometimes I am very strongly motivated by an upfront political
anger about something. Then there are other occasions when I am motivated by
much more obscure personal matters. I can't disentangle them. I can't lay down a
formula for the events in my life.

You've said that a play gets written when the external specifics of a story run
parallel to a very private need to make a personal statement.

Fugard: Exactly. One of the things that I'm quietly doing is to prepare myself
psychologically for what I hope will be my next writing. One of the ways I can
prepare myself is to try to understand where I am and what I am about as a
person now.

Mr. Shawn, could you say what provokes you to sit down at your typewriter?

Shawn: Well, I would say that usually I'm looking at a kind of blank wall which
might represent what I feel, what I understand or what inspires me, which is
sort of the same thing. If I understand something, then I think, oh, how
wonderful it would be to write about it. But usually there's nothing in front of
me, just a blank space, and so that's why I don't write very much. Then,
occasionally, there's a little door that opens up in the wall, and a little bit
of light is glittering through the little door and I think, oh, this is a little
chink in the wall, a little door, something I slightly understand and how
exciting that is, how inspiring. And so I'll write about that.

There are many subjects that I find interesting, like the history of Marxist
thought, but I wouldn't necessarily know how to write a play about that. But
there's only one thing at a time for me, and the door only opens up once every
few years. That's about it. I think American writers don't write directly about
political issues, because we don't know how to.

Miller: Listening to you guys, I think that each one of these forays is true of
everybody, really. I'm sitting here thinking, what really sets it off is
probably some overflow of love, even if it's the love of a form. If you suddenly
see a form in front of you, a way of telling a story, or if I see an ending, I
can work backward. Sometimes you come upon a language accent which sets off a
kind of laughter. It's like the world is full of music but you can't follow the
tune and then suddenly, in all that chaos, you can hear a tune go by that you
can repeat. There's a lot of mimicry in it to me. If I can't hear it, then I
don't write it well.

Political Theater

But to come back to the political side, I've lived through more of this than any
of you. I've seen the political element rise and fall several times. For a
little while in the 30's, a play couldn't be thought of as being important if it
didn't refer in some way to the political logjam. Then for a moment in the 40's,
it was respectable for political themes. But soon if you said the word political
in relation to a play it meant it was not artistic, it was propaganda.

Fugard: I think it's almost impossible to have a piece of literature, of
meaningful literature, that does not involve some form of social criticism.

Miller: Look at ''Cat on a Hot Tin Roof.'' The struggle in that play is around
who is capable of carrying on this society. And without the power and politics,
that play can't exist.

Fugard: You take ''The Glass Menagerie.'' I mean, it's an exquisite analysis of
certain American myths and dreams.

Shawn: Isn't it just an ignorant illusion that there can be life that isn't
affected by politics? And we - particularly those of us who are younger
Americans - are among the few people who've ever lived who've been in the
position to ignore politics because it hasn't been crammed down our throats.
Speaking personally, the Vietnam war is the only political thing that
drastically changed my life in the sense that I picked up the newspapers and the
issues that were being discussed were also the things that I was grappling with
in trying to decide whether I would be a student, whether I would move to
Sweden, what I would do. But for most people, the political events are knocking
on the door every single day, people are shooting at you, or you're starving, or
you're carrying your money in a wheelbarrow.

Mamet: Implicit in most of the things you guys are saying is the notion that
somehow it's incumbent upon the theater to be political. But what I see is that
the purpose of the theater is something completely apart from the purpose of
literature, the job of which is to enlighten or to divert or to discuss.

To me, the traditional purpose of the theater is to celebrate. Which is to say
it comes closer to the job of the church than to the job of the publishing
house. I think that once we go into the theater, the absolutely basic,
immutable, human rules which govern the interaction have to do with the
exploration of a myth rather than the exploration of an idea. We go into the
theater as celebrants in the audience and on the stage.

Shawn: I agree with David totally. The contribution of theater is in the area of
understanding the unconscious aspect of the human being and his interactions.
Well, that isn't exactly what you said. You use your unconscious as a writer.
But this can conceivably also be a contribution to understanding some of the
same subjects that people try to understand with their reasoning powers. For
example, the insights that David may show in his mystical - or his mythical -
works can help people who are trying to understand what it is within us that
could lead to nuclear war or other political crimes.

Miller: The only argument I can see in all this is that we have had a kind of
prejudice in American culture which tells us that the world of power is somehow
separated from the rest of mankind's pursuits, instead of being perhaps its most
tragically dangerous expression.

Defining the Audience

But isn't it strange that politics has been moving more toward movies and
television? You could make a case for the theater becoming elitist.

Fugard: The fact that audiences in a city like New York are becoming elitist
might be a dilemma for the American writer. The variation on that dilemma for
myself, speaking as a South African playwright, is not so much in facing an
elitist audience but an already-converted audience. In South Africa I'm often
asked, don't you think that your plays are only being seen by people of
like-minded opinion, that you're, to use the old cliche, preaching to the
converted. My answer is that, starting with myself, there aren't any
significantly converted in South Africa as yet. I sometimes think I'm in the
business of playwriting in order to go through a process of educating myself. I
mean, it's the only demand for honesty in my life which is total and which I try
to meet totally. There is no personal relationship in which I am as totally
honest as I am with paper.

Shawn: Sometimes there's an individual writer who believes passionately that his
message of poetic insight could absolutely save society, but he can't get others
to agree. I myself have felt at certain moments, my God, I have received this
orphic, this profound, unconscious message that must be conveyed to the world
immediately. But somehow the electoral process has very savagely returned the
response, No, we don't want to hear the message.

Mamet: The question is about the will of the people and the will of the
individual. We've all had the experience of getting whacked on the head one
time, two times and saying, ''I don't care, I don't care, I'll go on and I will
be heard.'' Sometimes the will of the individual must be heard.

Miller: You know, to be a playwright you not only have to be a writer, you have
to be an alligator. A lot of writers are not alligators. I mean, in my lifetime
I've known 10 or 12 people who were really talented people but they couldn't
take the abuse. You know, a playwright lives in an occupied country. He's the
enemy. And if you can't live that way you don't stay. Why do you say alligator?
Fugard: His skin.

Miller: It's tough! He's got to be able to take a whack, and he's got to swallow
bicycles and digest them. [General laughter.] There is a repression, I think,
finally as a result of the prevailing taste, which is re-enforced by critics who
voice it. There has been a kind of an automatic admiration of the parodistic
idea. In other words, it's better that the emotion not be directly expressed.
The theater has eliminated a lot of pain. I remember a time when it was directly
the opposite, namely, that important work was thought to be work that never let
them off the hook.

Fugard: Can you quote an example?

Miller: Well, all the plays that I was trying to write, all the plays that
playwrights like O'Neill were trying to write, that Tennessee was writing, these
were plays that would grab an audience by the throat and not release them,
rather than presenting an emotion which you could observe and walk away from. I
know very responsible people who say, ''I don't want to go to the theater and
experience pain. I want two hours to go by where I have quote unquote
pleasure.''

Shawn: I do think there's something about the current period - and I don't
understand it - that makes it terribly, terribly hard for a writer to focus, in
a truthful way, on the suffering of an individual person. I do think it's the
most amazing thing in the world that there are millions of people living just
outside the windows of this room who are suffering the very disappointments and
personal tragedies that Willy Loman suffered, and it would be absolutely my
dream to be able to write a play about that suffering, and yet I'm unable to.

Miller: I absolutely agree with you. I don't really think a Blanche Dubois or a
Willy Loman would be forthcoming today. Certainly the critical fraternity would
say, well, it's a little too lush emotionally. Its coloration would be too
romantic.

Economic Pressures

Mr. Miller, you've said that the economics of the theater is really one of the
most boring subjects to speak about and yet in the end it is the most
consequential in terms of the continuing validity of today's theater. Miller: It
is the heart of the beast.  Is there any solution?

Fugard: If I was ever up against a wall again in South Africa in terms of a
play, I would just do it the way I did it 25 years ago with the ''Blood Knot.''
I'd beg, borrow and steal the bucks. I'd find a space, and I'd do it. Is that
not possible for you chaps?

Miller: It is. But all the levels are quite different. See, we have levels of
expense Off Broadway now that are simply breathtaking.

Mamet: I had a group of students I've been working with for about three years
now. They'd formed a theater company - and they suddenly decided as a group they
couldn't hack it here. As a group they moved to Chicago.

Fugard: Can I ask you a question, because I don't know how this system works?
You have written a new play, David, and it involves two actors. And we're sick
and tired of this whole economic scene; we're sick and tired of producers and
the whole machine, but we're going to try and survive in New York. You come to
Wally and to me and you say, ''Come on, chaps, let's do it.'' And we say . . .
Shawn: What a good idea!  Fugard: ''. . . let's find an attic. Let's put up some
lights and let's do it.'' Is there anything to stop us running?

Mamet: Actually, no. I mean, Actors Equity and the fire marshall and so forth
would get their hooks into you pretty soon. Fugard: How?  Mamet: Well, the first
thing they'll do is if I'm not paying you - or you're not paying yourselves -
Actors Equity will come and they'll say, you guys are working . . .

Fugard: All right. So we abandon Equity. We're not going into this as Equity
members. We say to Equity, you can have your card back.

Mamet: O.K. So Equity will then say to you, that's fine, but you'll never work
again. Fugard: O.K. We accept that.  Mamet: O.K. That's great. So then we open
up the thing and the fire marshall comes and says, you can't have 12 people here
unless . . . Fugard: O.K.  Mamet: So then you say, well, we'll just be a club.
Fugard: Yeah.  Mamet: You could do it.

Fugard: O.K. O.K. That's all I wanted to know.

Miller: Well, you could do it up to a point. Even if you're a club, and you've
got, say, 75 people coming into somebody's living room regularly -they'll get
there.

Fugard: Well, this is what I mean. I mean nobody's really bucking the system.
Mamet: Oh sure, people are. Sure.  Fugard: Are they?

Mamet: It's natural selection. It's the people who've got the strongest will;
people who desperately need to be heard get heard.

Miller: Then we have another problem. You and Wally are in this play.

Fugard: I like the sound of it more and more. Mamet: Me too.  Shawn: I'd love
it.

Miller: You and Wally are in this play, And it's an event, right? Wally is
simply fantastic - you're all right, but Wally is absolutely fantastic.

Fugard: [laughing] I don't like this story anymore now.

Miller: And three movie guys come in and say to Wally, ''We have a great film
that you would be marvelous in.'' And Wally says, ''No, I don't want to leave
this play.'' And they say, ''Well, it's $30,000 a week.'' And after about a
month, Wally's looking for his rent money and he says, ''If I did it for just
one week . . .''

So, my question is, why must we hide in a closet to do our work? It's a great
country, it's a big country. You mean that we aren't allowed as artists to head
a proper theater? You know I go to visit actors Off Broadway, and they're all
huddled in some toilet where all the clothes are hanging, and everybody says,
isn't it wonderful? What is so wonderful about this? I wouldn't put my dogs in
there! The water is rusty in the sink, the women can't find any place to change.
It's appalling! And uptown there are billionaires living in 46 rooms. I don't
get the joke there. Fugard: I love you, Arthur. Miller: I think we deserve
better than that. I don't mean we should all be treated like kings, but at least
not like bums.

Mr. Shawn, both you and Mr. Fugard are on stage every night. Do you know who's
out there in the dark watching the show?

Fugard: I'm terrified of trying to find out anything about who is on the
receiving end. Hopefully, I stay in touch with them but I don't actually
identify who's sitting there.

Shawn: I look out of the curtain before the play begins.

Fugard: My God, I would turn gray if I did that! You do? Shawn: Yes. Fugard: You
are a brave man!

And when he looks out and sees the three of you there - Miller: Well, you look
for a friendly face, I guess.

Shawn: I love to see a friendly face, it's thrilling. I'm hoping there'll be
someone out there that is either an actual friend or a potential friend.

Miller: Someone who looks friendly.

Shawn: Someone who looks friendly, yes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Arthur Miller; photo of Wallace Shawn; photo of David Mamet;
photo of Athol Fugard

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
 A TALE OF DOMESTIC TERROR WINDS UP IN A MUDDLE

BYLINE: By John Corry

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1194 words


''Under Siege'' is about domestic terrorism, and it's both chilling and muddled.
Americans get blown to bits; the Capitol is hit by rockets.

The principal terrorist says, ''My only goal is to teach - to educate America
what it is to suffer as so many third-world people suffered so many times
before.'' That's not the chilling part, however; what's chilling is that this is
a three-hour made-for-TV movie on a major network, and that at the end of the
movie we're meant to dislike not so much the terrorists as the United States
Government. What's muddled (or most muddled; a lot of muddle-headedness is on
hand) is the notion of where we can find recourse: A Washington newspaper will
print the truth and this will set us free. You thought radical chic was dead?
You're wrong. It's only moved over to television.

The movie, on NBC at 8 o'clock tonight, mixes fact and fiction: a little of
this, a little of that, and is the Secretary of State George P. Shultz or E. G.
Marshall? He looks like Mr. Marshall, but early in the movie, or at least until
he begins to get a little crazed, he sounds like Mr. Shultz. How do you deal
with terrorism? ''Retaliate swiftly, massively, immediately,'' Marshall-Shultz
prescribes. And who in the Cabinet will oppose him? Reasonably well-informed
viewers will get this immediately. Who else but the Secretary of Defense?

''We all know there's no military solution to terrorism,'' the Secretary of
Defense says gravely. ''Under Siege'' seems to be pulling a fast one here. This
Secretary of Defense may sound like Caspar W. Weinberger, but he's played by the
black actor Paul Winfield. Actually, the NBC production is falling back on an
old Hollywood convention. It is assumed there are not many roles for black
actors, and so in the roles there are, the black actors must play sympathetic
characters. The range for this, however, has always been limited in popular
melodrama, and, as a rule, the characters are allowed only to be wise or to be
victimized. ''Under Siege'' has two black actors in its large cast: Mr. Winfield
and Stan Shaw. Obviously, Mr. Winfield's Secretary of Defense is wise. Mr. Shaw
plays a swell guy who fought in Vietnam, joined the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, and loves his wife and baby daughter. The Central Intelligence
Agency shoots him dead.

And the President of the United States? He is Hal Holbrook, and although he does
not look like Ronald Reagan, he speaks, I think, the way the people who wrote
''Under Siege'' - there are four of them - imagine he speaks. Is Iran
responsible for the terrorism? President Holbrook is firm: ''If they've declared
war on us, that's what these bozos will get back.'' A little later, after the
rockets have hit the Capitol, sending up a plume of smoke and fire from the
dome, we hear President Holbrook at Camp David. He's terribly angry. ''They
bombed the Capitol, for crying out loud,'' he says. ''I don't like it.''

In fact, ''Under Siege,'' even though it's trying to be just as up-to-date as
can be, is really a 1960's movie. The references to the Ayatollah Khomeini,
Colonel Qaddafi, Jimmy Carter and the bombing of American servicemen in Beirut
are a facade. ''Under Siege,'' slick, glossy, with drumbeats punctuating its
score, knows who the enemy is: It's not the terrorists; it's us. The only real
departure from the 60's is the choice of a hero. He is the director of the
F.B.I., and, as played by Peter Strauss, he is a long way from J. Edgar Hoover.
He is strong on civil liberties, for one thing, and for another, he can run like
a deer. He chases a terrorist on foot. Up one street, down another; on a bus,
off a bus; chase, chase; pant, pant. Mr. Strauss catches up with the terrorist
on a railroad track, and when the terrorist blows himself up with a hand
grenade, Mr. Strauss is knocked off a trestle. Unscathed, he goes back to work.

Don't think for a moment, however, that ''Under Siege'' is only derring-do. It's
trying to make a statement. Terrorism is a complex act, and things aren't what
they seem. When a suicide bomber kills hundreds of soldiers at Fort Bladenburg,
Md., the Director of Central Intelligence (Fritz Weaver) blames Shiite Moslems
from Iran. Then three passenger planes are blown from the sky. The Joint Chiefs
want to act, and so does most of the country. Only F.B.I. Director Strauss
stands in the way. He demands proof that it's really the Shiites.

''He doesn't know how Washington works,'' the editor of Washington's most
important paper (George Grizzard) tells the F.B.I. Director's wife (Victoria
Tennant). Mr. Grizzard, an insider's insider, warns her that in Washington the
way to get along is to go along. If her husband doesn't agree to retaliation,
the Administration will hang him out to dry. Never mind here that a President
doesn't need F.B.I. consent for a foreign operation. A 60's mentality demands
hawks and doves, and outside of the Secretary of Defense, the F.B.I. Director is
the only dove around. Even Secretary Marshall-Shultz's wife (Beatrice Straight)
has a touch of right-wing nut. The bereaved mother of a slain soldier asks her
when the madness will end. ''When our honor is restored,'' she says fiercely.
You can bet she'd invade Nicaragua, too.

Drumbeats and explosions aside, much of this is just silly. That's O.K.
Silliness is not an indictable offense. At the same time, ''Under Siege'' is
unpleasant, too. The party chairman tells President Holbrook that unless he acts
decisively - bombs Teheran, presumably - the party's ''biggest contributor''
says he won't be nominated for a second term. So much for the democratic
process; the big contributor assumes it's only money that counts. In fact,
Teheran is not bombed, but the President does something else. It is clear we are
a nation of bullies.

''Under Siege'' nails down the point further. The Iranian Ambassador (David
Opatoshu) appears on a television program that is very much like ABC's
''Nightline'' with Ted Koppel. The Iranian Ambassador is civilized; the Southern
Senator who argues with him is a boob. Later, the Ambassador confronts the
principal terrorist (Thaao Penghlis). We get the impression they are both deeply
motivated. Indeed, we even find out why the terrorist murdered hundreds of
people: His son died in a bombing by the Shah's secret police. Two cheers now
for moral relativism. Barbarism is not to be condemned; it's something to be
understood. This is a vile idea, but there it is on prime-time television.

True to itself to the end, meanwhile, ''Under Siege'' winds down with the C.I.A.
breaking the law. This is followed by a massive Government cover-up. It seems
appropriate to mention here that two of the four people who wrote ''Under
Siege'' are Bob Woodward and Richard Harwood. Mr. Woodward shared a Pulitzer
Prize at The Washington Post for reporting on Watergate; Mr. Harwood is a Post
deputy managing editor. In the last scene of ''Under Siege,'' F.B.I. Director
Strauss drops an envelope on editor Grizzard's desk. ''You want a story -there
it is,'' he says, and goes off alone to the Washington Mall. We have the
terrible feeling that he's thinking about a television sequel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Peter Strauss and Hal Holbrook

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN IDEALISM WAS IN FLOWER

BYLINE: By Robert Shogan; Robert Shogan covers national politics in the
Washington bureau of The Los Angeles Times and served as a Peace Corps evaluator
in 1965-66.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 769 words


THE BOLD EXPERIMENT JFK's Peace Corps. By Gerard T. Rice. Illustrated. 349 pp.
Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press. $15.95. ''ASK what you can do for your
country,'' John Kennedy urged in what was probably the most oft-quoted phrase of
his oft-quoted inaugural. For the surprising number of Americans who did ask
that question, the clearest if not the only answer of the Kennedy Administration
was a brand-new Federal agency called the Peace Corps. Despite initial
misgivings, the idea touched a chord in the country and the Peace Corps went on
to become one of the few concrete successes of Kennedy's Presidency.

''The Bold Experiment,'' Gerard T. Rice's chronicle of the Peace Corps's early
years, is a reminder of an era when idealism was in fashion and could gain
public support. Indeed the Peace Corps's strong start gave it such continued
impetus that President Reagan, for all his deep mistrust of Government-sponsored
do-goodism, nevertheless felt obliged recently to mark the agency's
25th-anniversary year by officially reaffirming ''our nation's commitment to
helping people in the devloping world help themselves.''

But if the Peace Corps has become a sustaining American institution, it has not
been a particularly well-understood one. In part this is due to its early
success. After concluding that scandals would not destroy the Peace Corps, a
generally approving press, as the author notes, gave it only occasional
superficial glances and ''preferred its romantic, quaint and light-hearted
aspects to the more complex and realistic story.''

It is the complex, realistic and mostly untold side of the Peace Corps story
that Mr. Rice, a Scot who wrote an earlier book, ''Twenty Years of the Peace
Corps'' (which, of course, went well beyond the Kennedy years), addresses here
with scholarly diligence and notable fairmindedness. Mr. Rice's analysis of the
Peace Corps's origins, founding and early accomplishments helps to illuminate
the problems that underlie American efforts to win foreign hearts and minds. One
such problem juxtaposes what we like to think of as our natural American
idealism (for example, the Peace Corps volunteers dispatched abroad) against our
tendency to lapse into ''cultural imperialism,'' the certitude that, as Mr. Rice
puts it, ''the export of American values and traditions of themselves would be
of inestimable benefit to the rest of the world.''

Another related contradiction at times hampered the volunteers: that of the
United States Government's preoccupation with the cold war and the attitude in
most third-world countries that their own desperate needs took priority over the
East-West struggle. For while the volunteers were ostensibly agents of peace, it
was clear that in President Kennedy's view they also had roles to play in the
''long twilight struggle'' he heralded in his inaugural. Mr. Rice notes that
each Peace Corps trainee received a pamphlet entitled ''What You Must Know About
Communism.'' In seeking public and Congressional support, the Peace Corps's
first boss, R. Sargent Shriver, took pains to stress its role as a competitor
with the Soviet Union. ''Either we do these jobs or the Communists will,'' Mr.
Shriver declared. WELL aware that any links to American foreign policy stirred
suspicions abroad, Mr. Shriver sought to minimize that connection in dealing
with the the Peace Corps's host countries. He took advantage when he could of
the corps's institutional independence from the State Department and, in fact,
the Peace Corps maintained programs in some countries that had broken off formal
relations with the United States. But as Mr. Rice points out, ''the Peace Corps
could not escape the times into which it was born; whether it wanted to be or
not, it was caught in the Cold War complex.'' The problem came to a head with
the escalation of the United States military effort in Vietnam, which turned the
young Americans who made up the Peace Corps's manpower pool against their
Government and dramatically underlined the Peace Corps's inherent dilemmas.

Unfortunately, the critical impact of Vietnam on the Peace Corps is mentioned
here only briefly in the epilogue. One of the limitations of Mr. Rice's effort
is that he chose to conclude his examination with Kennedy's death, thus leaving
many questions unanswered about the Peace Corps's development and its remarkable
vitality. The Peace Corps has proven over the years that it can survive
overseas. The fundamental question that needs to be raised is the same one that
its 120,000 volunteers ask about their own service abroad: How much difference
did it make?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW JERSEY OPINION;
LINCOLN AS MYTH: BEYOND ANALYSIS BY HISTORIANS

BYLINE: By BARBARA BURNS PETRICK; Barbara Burns Petrick, who lives in Jersey
City, teaches English at Rutgers and is a graduate student in history.

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 28, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1846 words


IT MIGHT be said of Lincoln what Voltaire said of God: If there had been no
Lincoln, it would have been necessary to invent him.

The American hunger for a native hero has never been, and may never be, so fully
satisfied as it is by the Lincoln legend. Combining the folksy shrewdness of the
frontier and the nobility of the classic ideal, the Lincoln legend is probably
the most usable part of the American past.

So much is he a part of our folk culture, so secure is his hallowed place in our
national consciousness that his name, long invoked by every political party or
interest group seeking identification with his memory, can also be used as a
reference point for a much more lighthearted social commentary.

Russell Baker, in a wry look at the meaning of the word ''wimp'' on Oct. 14,
1984, explained that, although Lincoln was a milquetoast, he was not really a
wimp.

In America, the henpecked husband is acceptable, especially if, like Lincoln, he
has a tragically unfulfilled romance in his background and if his manliness has
been established in the public sphere.

Wimps are laughable, Mr. Baker said, and no one would dare laugh at Lincoln. He
is beyond ridicule, beyond debunking and beyond history; yet his life and career
are still the subject of an enormous body of study and endless interpretation.

There have been a number of attempts to subject the Lincoln legend to cool
historical analysis.

For example, Richard Current, in his book ''The Lincoln Nobody Knows,''
assembles the facts supporting and opposing the various titles conferred on
Lincoln: The Great Emancipator, The Great Peacemaker, The Master Politician, The
Military Genius.

The value of Mr. Current's approach would seem to be that, by presenting the
facts objectively and assessing the veracity and motives of the witnesses, one
may uncover a clear, unvarnished portrait of the man, which until now has been
tinted unrealistically by a public seeking only an ideal, not truth.

Occasionally, the verdict arrived at by this cool examination of the evidence
does seem to dim, ever so slightly, the lustre of Lincoln's reputation.

For example, Mr. Current believes that Lincoln could have avoided a long and
horrible war if he had openly championed a compromise on the territorial
expansion of slavery instead of secretly working against it, and if he had
publicly declared what he had privately confided: that he did not intend the
abolition of slavery in the South.

In evaluating Lincoln as ''The Friend of Freedom,'' Mr. Current shows there are
substantial reasons why he was a hero of Negro-baiters and white supremacists
such as James Vardaman of Mississippi.

However, most of the judgments that Mr. Current and other historians have
arrived at, after presenting the case for and against the ideal image of
Lincoln, are in Lincoln's favor.

Whenever the man and the myth seem to conflict, they point to Lincoln's growth
from the limitations of his environment to the greatness of spirit required by
the times.

Lincoln may not have favored the abolition of slavery, he may have been
ill-equipped to wage the kind of modern warfare that the Civil War prefigured
and he may have been utterly at sea as to what the best course of reconstruction
of the Union should be. But he grew in office, acquiring in the crucible of
experience the breadth of knowledge and farsighted judgment of a great
statesman.

A result of modern historical analysis is, in fact, a re-enforcement of the
legend. Even the less agreeable aspects of Lincoln's character enhance the
portrait. The devious pragmatism that won him the Presidency does not seem
inappropriate for a great statesman.

Americans admire political skill so long as its machinations are not too
obvious. Lincoln used his not merely to gain office, but also to wring from
stubborn partisans the snail-like progress that could never have been achieved
by a man of less-flexible principles. Lincoln's secrecy, passivity and
vacillation can be read as political genius.

Like the scholastics who used rational philosophy to underpin their faith in the
existence of God, Mr. Current's apparently detached historical analysis is
always headed in the ''right'' direction. This is not the Lincoln Nobody Knows,
but the Lincoln Everybody Knows.

Perhaps this is as it should be. The rules of historical evidence have only a
limited value in assessing a national hero such as Lincoln. So far as the truth
goes, the testimony of eyewitnesses and written records are only evidence that
something happened, evidence that can be reorganized in the pattern required by
the myth.

Not even our distance in time can guarantee objectivity when dealing with
legend.

The Lincoln legend is still subject to controversy and lends itself to
contradictory interpretation principally because this most eloquent of American
heroes was a reticent, ''shut-mouthed man.''

Even those who knew Lincoln best were not privy to his inmost thoughts. He kept
no diary, and the evidence of witnesses who rushed into print after his
assassination is conflicting and unreliable.

Such crucial issues as whether Lincoln chose Andrew Johnson to be Vice President
are still argued by historians, largely because Lincoln did not commit himself
explicitly or consistently. Ambiguity, in fact, was the keystone of Lincoln's
policy and the secret of his success. The historian David Donald has said that
''Lincoln possessed what John Keats called 'negative capability, that is when a
man is capable of being in uncertainties, mysteries, doubts, without any
irritable reaching after fact and reason.' ''

This ambiguity, however frustrating to historians, is useful for a culture
ceaselessly checking itself out in the mirror of legend. There is an aura about
Lincoln that holds exact definition at a distance. No school of thought, no
religion or party, can claim him exclusively. He belongs, as the legend has it,
to the ages.

Can an American President ever achieve the status of legend again? The sheer
weight of printed data by and about our Presidents seems to militate against it.

There are few undocumented facts about our public leaders, and one of them is
not the source of their deathless prose. The ringing phrases of John F.
Kennedy's inaugural speech, we cannot help but know, were written by Theodore
Sorenson.

The vast libraries, ponderous oral histories and tape-recorded conversations of
our Presidents limit their potential as symbolic heroes. Too much about them is
''on the record.''

Moreover, it seems unlikely that a ''shut-mouthed man'' could ever again be
elected. Politicians are not noted for their frankness. Lincoln avoided
reporters and parried questions with colorful anecdotes. President Reagan limits
the access of the media to ''photo opportunities'' and prepared statements.

Lincoln would have shunned the give-and-take of the televised press conference,
as Mr. Reagan often does, although perhaps for different reasons.

It is doubtful whether any leader who declares, as Lincoln did, ''My policy is
to have no policy,'' could survive the electoral process today.

America likes leaders who are forceful, who have a ''plan for the future'' and
who can verbalize a vision of society succinctly, preferably in phrases short
enough for bumper stickers or in messages that can be contained within a
30-second spot.

The fact that these messages are devoid of real content is irrelevant. The point
is: Our leaders must appear to be decisive, forthright, candid, honest.

''I will never tell a lie, never mislead,'' said Jimmy Carter.

Lincoln frequently misled and evaded. He got away with it because he was only on
the brink of an era when the admission of ignorance or error, a slip of the
tongue on a word (or the foot on a step), endlessly repeated and magnified by
the media, could destroy a President's image overnight.

The awesome power of electronic media to glorify or trash our leaders so quickly
makes it difficult for them to endure long enough to achieve the stature of
legend.

Legend-making, like everything else in the technological age, has been
accelerated by advertising and television, which constitute the new American
folk culture. The visual image, recognized as all-important since the televised
1960 debate between Kennedy and Richard M. Nixon, is more useful for legend than
words.

Language defines, qualifies and limits its subject. The cool medium of
television, according to Marshall McLuhan, allows us to fill in the blanks, to
create our own heroes instantly.

Occasionally, in the days before television, there were Presidents like Calvin
Coolidge whose public persona was so blank, so lacking in the articulation of
data, that reporters delighted in filling in the spaces.

Lincoln - were it not for the assassination, which clouded the facts with
mystery and myth - might have been destroyed as potential legend by the harsh
definition of his personality in the press. Even the dramatic assassination of
Kennedy in our time does not seem to have obscured the less attractive aspects
of his character.

Lincoln's visual image - he was one of the most photographed men of his time -
is much more familiar to the public mind than the reported ribaldry of his
informal speech. Lyndon B. Johnson, another President who liked to use earthy
humor, is not a likely candidate for legendary hero. But if he were (supposing
the war on poverty and Vietnam had gone better), the description, in Merle
Miller's oral history, of Johnson's getting an enema in bed while watching three
television sets and dictating memorandums to his staff might have been a little
hard to forget.

We know too much too soon, and with too much certainty, about our Presidents.
Their sex lives, tax returns, bathroom habits - all are facts sharp enough to
shatter an idol before its image is sturdy enough to be handled by politicians,
historians and comedians.

American mass culture facilitates the creation of national heroes, but also
hastens their destruction. The tendency of television to seize upon the
dramatic, the simple, the easily identifiable works against the durability of a
legend. Only the most careful management by media consultants can prevent widely
appealing, folksy images from being hackneyed, ''used up,'' by a mass consumer
society.

Bob Newhart, in one of his earliest comedy routines, played the part of a
public-relations man advising Lincoln:

''Keep the shawl up around the shoulders, Abe . . . That's it . . . No, Abe,
don't scribble the speech on the paper bag . . . We've done that to death . . .
Nobody'll believe it, Abe . . .''

We laughed at Newhart and the shallowness of the public-relations man, but we
weren't laughing at Lincoln. Nobody laughs at Lincoln.

The Lincoln legend is so safe and satisfying, so available and useful, that,
were there to be discovered a new cache of material revealing Lincoln's true
feelings on such matters as Ann Rutledge or racial justice, historians might
just as well ignore it.

Mr. Current was not really looking for the Lincoln Nobody Knows, and neither are
we.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Portrait of Lincoln

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER GUIDE

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 19, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 787 words


SKI-SNOWSHOE RACES ''We have two feet of snow right now and some of the best
snowshoeing and cross-country skiing in the region,'' said Halbe Brown,
executive director of the Frost Valley Environmental Education Center in Ulster
County. The center, in the heart of the Catskills at an elevation of about 3,500
feet, is surrounded by a quarter of a million acres of forest, ''and we are half
an hour closer to White Plains than Hunter Mountain,'' Mr. Brown said.

A traditional Winter Triathlon begins at 1 P.M. today and a ski-snowshoe touring
week is scheduled Monday through Friday. The Triathlon consists of a
five-kilometer ski race, a three-kilometer snowshoe race and one-kilometer
ice-skating race, followed by a chicken dinner, all for $7.50. Registration
begins at noon. The ski-snowshoe package costs $175 for four nights, including
meals.

About a two-hour drive from White Plains, the center is operated by the Y.M.C.A.
on 4,500 acres spread over two valleys containing 30 miles of ski trails. The
Castle, the former country home of the Forstmann woolens family, accommodates
400 people in a style ''a notch above most hotels,'' Mr. Brown said. The
original Forstmann furnishings and silver Tiffany chandelier have been
preserved.

In the other valley lies Gladys Guggenheim Strauss's country house, converted to
an inn, furnished with her antiques and able to take 25 guests. A deck running
the length of the front sits high over the Neversink River and a French chef
presides over the kitchen. Accommodations at both places cost $50 to $90 for a
weekend, including two nights lodging and five meals.

Cheaper than the Castle and the Inn are 45 log cabins for those who prefer
rusticity, or lean-to camps for barebones ruggedness. Seasonal programs in
horseback riding, hayrides, making maple syrup, boating, ice-skating,
cross-country skiing, and environmental studies conducted by a resident faculty,
are available year round.

To get there, take the Gov. Thomas E. Dewey Thruway to Harriman, Route 17
Quickway to Exit 100, left on Route 52, right on Route 55 East to the town of
Curry, then left to Claryville. Call 985-2291 or 985-7400 for reservations and
more information.

FOCUS ON PHILIPPINES

The many years she spent in Southeast Asia, since 1982 in the Philippines, are
the basis for a talk by Nadine Tierney, a Maryknoll sister, at 7:30 P.M.
Thursday in the Community Room of Ossining's Public Library, at 53 Croton
Avenue.

Her talk, titled ''The Philippines: Our Next Vietnam in the Making?'' is
sponsored by the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, a
70-year-old international organization with branches on five continents. Two of
its members, Jane Adams and Emily G. Balch, were awarded Nobel Peace Prizes
early in this century. Admission is free.

COUNTY CAMP FAIR

Children's camps that specialize in sailing the Caribbean, weight-watching,
skiing, bicycle touring, performing arts, hosteling, horseback riding,
parent-child trips, wilderness orienteering, travel camps for teen-agers, camps
for children with special skills or specific handicaps and even a Club Med for
kids, will be represented at the County Center in White Plains from noon to 4
P.M. today.

The occasion is the third yearly Westchester Camp Fair sponsored by Rena
Hadassah of Mount Vernon. Camps are invited to participate without regard to
religious affiliation.

Among the 75 day and sleepaway camps, some are run by the Y.M.C.A. or Y.W.C.A.
or the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts of America, most are operated privately. Last
year, more than 1,000 families browsed the booths, chatted with camp personnel
and took home the free directories that are distributed to visitors, containing
detailed information about all the camps at the fair. Admission is free.

SCHOMBURG EXHIBIT

One way in which Lehman College is observing Black History Month is with an art
exhibition from the Arthur Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture of the
New York City Public Library.

On view in the college art gallery, at Bedford Park Boulevard West in the Bronx,
are about 15 paintings, drawings, prints and woodcuts accompanied by rare
photographs of many of the 13 artists represented.

The Schomburg Collection is a treasury of the achievements of blacks in America
and worldwide. Born in Puerto Rico to a German father and black mother in 1874,
Mr. Schomburg came to the United States at the age of 17. Before he was 30 he
had begun his study and acquisition of art that provided a historical record of
Afro-American culture.

The exhibit is open free of charge until March 9 from noon to 6 Tuesdays, noon
to 5 Wednesdays through Fridays, 1 to 5 Sundays. Call (212) 960-8211 for more
information.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Albert Mobilio

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 256 words


FIREWATER POND. By Michael Kimball. (Putnam, $17.95.) As proprietor of Wind in
the Pines, a backwoods Maine campground, Carl Mason is a model of tolerance. He
benevolently presides over a lakeside circus and slum that's home to the
motliest of crews. There's Nighthawk, the Vietnam vet convinced he's an Indian;
Zippy, a washed-out flower child bent on space travel, and, for good measure,
the Mutants, a drug-dealing motorcycle gang. Not quite so open-minded is a local
politician, Rutus Sny. By raising Carl's taxes he hopes to foreclose on the camp
and build a moneymaking ''class'' resort. To the rescue comes Larry, Zippy's
huckster brother, who steals several pounds of Mutant cocaine, gains Carl's
trust while seducing his daughter, and haphazardly attempts to transform the
camp into a Disneylike sideshow. The stage is set for a three-way battle for the
deed to Wind in the Pines. Michael Kimball's first novel mixes farce and moral
fable, achieving uneven results. Carl's laconic down-home style is a predictable
foil to Sny and Larry's devious antics. The satiric turns on the wheeler-dealer
mentality are obvious - could a character named Rutus Sny be anything but nasty?
- and too often undercut by comic exaggeration. Yet this vaudevillian humor
gives the story its charge in scenes that feature a runaway Moosicorn (a moose
with an arrow stuck in its head, courtesy of Nighthawk) or a vengeful
dynamite-happy Mutant. The storytelling is energetic and the disaster-rich plot
has been orchestrated for maximum thrills.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SHUTTLE LAWSUITS: QUESTION IS WHEN

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1173 words


Experts in the law of space, defective products, and air disasters predict that
whatever the investigation into the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger
ultimately reveals, lawsuits by the families of those killed, seeking millions
of dollars in damages, will almost inevitably follow.

Perhaps the only deterrent to such suits, they say, is the attitude of the
potential plaintiffs themselves. Bound by feelings of loyalty to the space
agency and those associated with it, the surviving families may regard going to
court as unseemly, ungrateful, unpatriotic or even unnecessary.

For instance, it took Betty Grissom, whose husband, Col. Virgil I. Grissom, was
burned to death in the 1967 launching-pad fire on an Apollo capsule, nearly four
years to overcome her own resistance and sue North American Rockwell, makers of
the vehicle. She eventually settled that case for $350,000.

The widows of the other victims, Lieut. Col. Edward H. White 2d and Lieut. Roger
B. Chaffee, never filed suit. According to Mrs. Grissom's lawyer, they
nonetheless received $150,000 each from Rockwell.

Aside from compensation and survivors' benefits from the Government, there are
life insurance payouts, including $1 million due the family of Christa
McAuliffe, the schoolteacher from Concord, N.H., who was aboard the Challenger.
In addition, sponsors of a trust fund headed by Nancy Reagan say it could raise
$5 million for the 11 children of the shuttle astronauts.

Changing Law and Attitudes

In the 19 years since the Apollo fire, more than space technology has been
revolutionized. There has also been something of a legal revolution - both in
the substantive law of liability and the willingness of people, even those who
might have once looked askance at the idea, to use the courts.

Lawsuits, particularly against private contractors with insurance coverage, are
no longer considered so unpalatable. Nor are they as difficult to win since the
advent of the legal doctrine of strict liability, which requires only a showing
that a defect existed, not a finding of actual negligence.

Among product-liability and aviation lawyers, law professors and commentators,
then, the question being asked is not whether lawsuits can be expected but when
they will be filed, who will be named as defendants, whether the claims will be
based on improper design, maintenance or judgment, and how successful they may
be.

Contractors Likely Target

''Challenger Litigation Issues Eyed,'' ran the headline in The National Law
Journal, a weekly publication for the legal profession.

''Even if there was nothing further said about the cause of the accident, there
would be enough for lawyers to bring a cause of action,'' said Stephen Gorove of
the University of Mississippi Law School, founder of The Journal of Space Law.
''Whether such suits will be successful is another question.''

Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration say that none of
the seven Challenger astronauts signed waivers absolving the Government of
liability before taking the ill-fated flight. But any suits eventually filed
would probably be against contractors rather than NASA itself, since five of the
seven astronauts were Government employees barred from bringing suit.

''It's obvious that there will be litigation,'' said one lawyer with close ties
to the space program who asked not to be identified. ''It will originate with
some combination of the astronauts' families, and more likely be against the
private companies than against NASA.''

As NASA employees, three of the astronauts - Francis R. Scobee, Ronald E.
McNair, and Judith A. Resnick -were in effect civil servants, covered by the
Federal Employees Compensation Act. That law, which resembles workers'
compensation, provides the exclusive remedy against the Government for those
injured on the job.

Two Were Military Men

Two of their Challenger colleagues, Lieut. Col. Ellison S. Onizuka of the Air
Force and Comdr. Michael J. Smith of the Navy, were barred from suing the
Federal Government for injuries related to their military service.

That prohibition, known as the Feres Doctrine, was first articulated by the
Supreme Court in 1950 and has been invoked to bar claims by soldiers suffering
radiation damage from exposure to atomic testing in the 1950's and by Vietnam
veterans injured by the defoliant Agent Orange. With some exceptions, the
doctrine has also been applied to surviving family members.

Thus, regardless of whether or not NASA personnel themselves are adjudged to be
responsible for America's worst space disaster, it seems likely that only the
families of Mrs. McAuliffe and Gregory P. Jarvis, an engineer at the Hughes
Aircraft Company in Houston, could collect any damages from it.

None of these restrictions would apply to lawsuits against NASA's private
contractors, however. But since some of them, including North American Rockwell,
builders of the shuttle, and Lockheed, which services it, have indemification
agreements with NASA, the Government could end up paying any liability judgments
against them.

There is no such agreement with Morton Thiokol Inc., manufacturer of the
shuttle's much-studied solid fuel booster.

As a practical matter, not much is likely to happen on the legal front until the
Presidential commission named to investigate the explosion comes back with its
findings.

Report Could Provide Blueprint

Even the most equivocal report, however, would probably provide sufficient basis
for a lawsuit. And with video cameras recording every stage of the mishap, new
theories about the accident emerging almost daily, and NASA intent upon clearing
its name and getting on with its work, the report will in all likelihood be more
than equivocal.

Indeed, if it resembles the report issued after the 1967 Apollo disaster, it
will be a veritable blueprint for strong liability claims. That report concluded
that the fire resulted from ''many deficiencies in design and engineering,
manufacture and quality control.''

Lee S. Kreindler, a New York lawyer specializing in aviation cases. said, ''I
would expect the most exhaustive investigation in history, and I cannot conceive
of a report with so little information that lawyers will be discouraged from
proceeding.''

According to her lawyer, Ronald D. Krist of Houston, Mrs. Grissom initially
feared that litigation would adversely affect her children. She waited so long
to file suit, in fact, that her legal rights actually expired, and all that
remained to litigate were the rights of Colonel Grissom's estate to be
compensated for 17 seconds of pain and suffering he endured while dying. At the
time she went to court, those rights had only two more weeks to run.

''She wanted the grieving process to run its course, and to have her children
obtain a bit more security before undertaking what would be a highly publicized
lawsuit,'' Mr. Krist said. ''In so doing, she did irreparable harm to her case.
It should have been a multimillion-dollar recovery.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK FOUNDATION PLANNING PROGRAM FOR AGED

BYLINE: By KATHLEEN TELTSCH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 944 words


A $5 million program to assist older people who live alone is being developed by
the Commonwealth Fund of New York, which says the eight million Americans in
this group are ''significantly poorer, older and more disabled and discouraged
than the over-65 population as a whole.''

The Commonwealth Fund has set up a commission to develop model projects to help
older people cope with isolation and insure easier access for them to health and
long-term care services. Other projects will expand alternative living
arrangements, such as sharing homes, and opportunities for earning income.

The initiative reflects a widening interest in the philanthropic community in
focusing on the country's older population.

''It has become an 'in' topic and a lot of foundations are interested,'' said
David M. Nee, executive director of the Florence V. Burden Foundation, which was
a pioneer in developing programs for the aged in 1973 and still concentrates on
this field.

Even though the number of foundation grants for programs for the elderly is
increasing, he said, a survey being conducted by the Burden Foundation suggests
the amount of money allocated remains proportionately small -about 1.9 percent
of all foundation grants in 1982.

Dr. Robert N. Butler of the Mount Sinai Medical Center, who will be chairman of
the commission, was also recently named chairman of the new National Aging
Foundation established by a $6 million gift from an Arizona businessman, Robert
D. Gibson. The foundation will use its resources for research and education
about the aging process. A New Program In Asian Art Two foundations interested
in fostering greater understanding between Asia and the United States, have
agreed to collaborate on a fellowship program for American scholars, curators
and conservators of Asian art.

The joint undertaking will allow the Americans to visit museums, collections and
research centers in China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Singapore,
Thailand, Vietnam and the Philippines.

Announcing the collaboration, Richard S. Lanier, director of the Asian Cultural
Council, said the New York-based organization was accepting proposals from
candidates and would select a first group in May. The new program is being
co-sponsored by the Henry Luce Foundation, which provided a $225,000 grant.

''Although American institutions offer excellent training for scholars and
conservators specializing in Asian art,'' Mr. Lanier said, ''travel to Asia
where works can be studied in a context approaching their original physical and
cultural setting is also essential.'' Carnegie Names Head Of Third-World Program
Dr. Adetokunbo Lucas, a Nigerian specialist in tropical medicine, has been
appointed to direct the Carnegie Corporation's programs to strengthen human
resources in third-world countries. For the last 10 years, he has directed a
research and training program in tropical diseases for the World Health
Organization in Geneva that involved 2,400 projects in 100 countries.

At Carnegie, Dr. Lucas will direct the foundation's programs aimed at improving
the health, education and nutrition of the poor in Africa, the Caribbean region
and Mexico. The programs will focus particularly on mothers and children.

Dr. Lucas, who received his medical training in Britain and at Harvard
University, served as a faculty member in a number of African countries as well
as in India, Iran, Israel and Papua New Guinea.

Dr. Lucas said the worldwide response to the famines in Africa demonstrated
''the concern of citizens everywhere.'' But beyond that immediate help, he said,
''there is a need for sustained attention to the health of this vulnerable
group.'' Trust to Seek Ways To Increase Giving For 50 years, the charitable
contributions of individuals, corporations and foundations have been reported by
the American Association of Fund-Raising Counsel in ''Giving USA,'' a
publication that has become widely recognized as an authoritative handbook on
American philanthropy.

Now, the association has created a trust that will sponsor research and
educational projects aimed at making Americans more generous in their
philanthropy.

One of the ideas being considered, according to Charles E. Lawson, chairman of
the new Trust for Philanthropy, is lobbying for a new tax benefit for any
American taxpayer who increased his rate of charitable giving by 10 percent.

Mr. Lawson said heightened public interest in tax questions made this an
opportune time to push the idea. ''Now is the time to educate our government
representatives and society as a whole about the value of the unique system of
philanthropy we have evolved in this country, and the need to press for new
incentives to increase giving to our nonprofit institutions and agencies,'' he
said.

Sponsors of the program also want to introduce courses in philanthropy in
colleges. Bryn Mawr Group Gets New Quarters To mark its 100th anniversary, Bryn
Mawr College carried out a fund-raising campaign that raised $50 million
-surpassing the goal the Pennsylvania college for women set.

Now the college's fund-raising is being directed from new quarters: a Victorian
building on the campus renovated with money from an anonymous alumna.

In keeping with the college's tradition of Welsh names, the refurbished building
has been named Helfarian. The name was derived from two Welsh words that Bryn
Mawr officials say can be loosely translated to mean ''a hunting or chasing
place for money.''

The building's original name was Dolgelly,'' meaning ''meadow of monks' cells.''
The office's staff and volunteers considered retaining Dolgelly, very briefly,
then voted a resounding ''no.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 11, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

3 BOYS' DREAMS OF SPACE, 3 DEATHS IN THE SKY;
Dick Scobee

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1680 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Feb. 10


When Dick Scobee went home to Auburn, Wash., for a family reunion in October, he
told people that, with 109 astronauts in the shuttle program, his next flight
into space might be his last. An aunt who was present, Naomi Allen, recalls that
her nephew, who had never wanted to be anything but an airplane pilot, was
nonetheless content. ''He said he had acquired everything he wanted in life,''
she said.

Dick Scobee, the little boy who hung so many model airplanes from the ceiling of
his room that anyone entering would bump his head on them, died at the command
controls of the ultimate airplane, the shuttle Challenger.

That he should have risen to such prominence is a source of some marvel to many
who knew him when he was young. He was a good but not brilliant student who
worked hard. He was a slow football player, but if no one else showed up for
practice, Dick Scobee did. Without the privilege of going to the Air Force
Academy, he became a pilot and officer the hard way, starting as a enlisted man
repairing propeller engines.

''Perseverance is the key word,'' his wife, June Kent Scobee, said in an
interview last week. ''He used it over and over again.''

By all accounts, his own included, Dick Scobee was a man who made the most of a
modest background and modest talents. ''If I can do it, anybody can,'' he told a
student assembly at Auburn High School after his first shuttle flight in April
1984. He declined to ride in a town parade, and later complained to friends
about being asked. He was not, he said, a homecoming queen or a politician. A
'Real Plodder' Who Took Risks ''He was a real plodder, one foot in front of the
other,'' said Brig. Gen. John P. Schoeppner of the Air Force, who sat next to
him in flight school and can recall the days when Dick Scobee needed help from
other students in a dynamics course. ''That's why everybody liked him - he was
not one of those people who touch everything and it turns to gold.''

Still, he was an accomplished test pilot who knew he earned his living the risky
way. He seldom talked about those risks, but he had no illusions.

''When he became a test pilot, we discussed the possibility of dangers and
wrestled with those possibilities,'' said his wife, a teacher of gifted
children. ''And then we put that aside and began to live and to enjoy life. We
resolved that.'' He died at the age of 46, a new grandfather. Francis Richard
Scobee was born May 19, 1939, son of Francis W. Scobee, a trainmaster and
railroad engineer for the Northern Pacific, and his wife, Eddie. He grew up in
Auburn, a town between Seattle and Tacoma in the shadow of Mount Rainier. He
developed a fascination with airplanes, hanging his models of Spitfires and
P-38's. Even though he was a quiet and considerate youth, his aunt, Mrs. Allen,
said of the models: ''If you touched one, he had a fit.''

He was a lineman on the Auburn High School football team, the Trojans, and a
weightman on the track team. A coach, Forrest Wohlheuter, described him this
way: ''He was not outstanding in any way except maybe in his attitude, which was
real great. He did not excel in athletics - he was kind of a big, slow kid. It
would have been very easy to quit, but he never gave up.''

He was a late bloomer socially, apparently not dating in high school, hanging
out with his buddy Daryl R. McGlenn and other friends at the Rainbow Cafe or at
Imp's on Main Street in Auburn, sometimes consuming a whole bottle of ketchup
with french fries.

Most assumed he would follow his father into the railroad. Although he had
determination he did not seem to have much ambition, and he enlisted in the Air
Force right out of high school.

He was trained as a propeller mechanic in the Air Force, and was stationed for
six years at Kelly Air Force Base in San Antonio. There, in 1959, he met June
Kent at a Baptist church hayride. They were married a few months later; she was
16 years old and he 20.

Although some said he joined the Air Force because did not have the money to go
to college, she would later recall that he had really wanted to go the Air Force
Academy but had felt he did not have the political connections to get an
appointment.

At Kelly he began the plodding march that would make him the first enlisted man
to become an astronaut. By day he repaired engines on C-124 Globemaster cargo
planes. By night he attended college and eventually got into the Airman's
Education and Commissioning Program. He completed college at the University of
Arizona, leaving in 1965 with a bachelor's degree in aerospace engineering. He
was commissioned a second lieutenant on Sept. 28, 1965, and earned his pilot
wings the next year.

The Scobees spent the next five years at Charleston Air Force Base, S.C., where
Mrs. Scobee got her chance for an education, at Baptist College. ''We took turns
helping each other go to college,'' she said. She later took a doctorate in
education from Texas A&M University, and is now visiting assistant professor of
education at the University of Houston-Clear Lake, near the Johnson Space
Center.

Dick Scobee did a one-year tour of duty in Vietnam in 1968-69. President Reagan
and various press reports have mistakenly said he was a fighter pilot; he
actually flew the Caribou cargo jet for the 535th Tactical Airlift Squadron. He
was hit by enemy fire a number of times, and friends say he seldom talked about
that year.

He became a test pilot in 1972 after training at the Air Force Aerospace
Research Pilot School at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. In the years that
followed he learned to fly and train other pilots in almost every kind of craft,
including the F-111 transonic tactical bomber, the huge C-5 cargo jet, the
Boeing 747 and the X-24B, the wingless ''lifting body'' that was an experimental
predecessor of the space shuttle. He retired from the Air Force as a major when
he was selected as an astronaut candidate.

Fellow test pilots, like William H. Dana, a NASA pilot for 25 years, called Mr.
Scobee a ''smooth pilot,'' unlike some of the aggressive fighter pilots. ''He
would take care of his wingman or passenger,'' Mr. Dana said. A wingman is the
nearby pilot in a formation.

By the time of his death, he had logged more than 6,500 hours of flying time in
45 types of aircraft.

Mr. Scobee waited five years to fly into space. He was an assistant to the
director of the astronaut office for a while and also a ''cape crusader,''
helping to prepare the cockpit of the shuttle for other astronauts in the 48
hours before launching.

He got his chance April 6, 1984, as second in command of the weeklong Challenger
flight in which the crew retrieved and repaired the Solar Maximum Mission
satellite. General Shoeppner, his classmate at flight school, recalls witnessing
the landing at Edwards Air Force Base: ''He just went off to the side. He was
happy to just get the job done and let everybody else take the glory.''

Unlike some pilots, he welcomed the broadening of the range of people sent into
space. He told an interviewer before his last flight, ''My perception is that
the real significance is that it will get people in this country, especially
young people, expecting to fly in space.''

But he was cognizant of the hazards, said Thomas Stauffer, chancellor at the
University of Houston campus where his wife taught. Mr. Stauffer recalls a
conversation at the astronaut's home in Clear Lake City shortly after his return
from the 1984 flight: ''He had not a scintilla of doubt about the importance of
man in space. At the same time, he knew how the machinery worked, that it was
the most complicated machine ever put together, that he was sitting on volatile
fuel. He knew all that. He thought the odds were there would be a catastrophe
some day.''

Those fears, however, seldom seemed to affect the daily life of Mr. Scobee, who
at 6 foot 1 and 175 pounds was large for an astronaut. He lived a quiet,
suburban life with his wife and 17-year-old cat, Py, on Brookpoint Drive in
Clear Lake City, the residential development adjacent to the Houston space
center. The neat white house with gray trim behind a magnolia tree is furnished
in traditional style, and the wall decorations include Mr. Scobee's oil
paintings - of jet planes, of course.

Both he and his wife drove two-year-old Datsun 300Z sports cars. As if he did
not get enough time in the air on the job, he and a fellow astronaut, James D.
A. Van Hoften, owned a Starduster 2 stunt plane. On weekends Mr. Scobee took his
wife up in the open cockpit biplane for some somersaults, even letting her be
pilot sometimes even though she was not licensed. ''I loved it,'' Mrs. Scobee
said.

Friends and neighbors said the couple were exceptionally devoted and frequently
took walks hand-in-hand in the neighborhood.

There are two Scobee children, Kathie Krause, a married daughter who turned 25
two days after the explosion, and Richard, 21, a senior at the Air Force
Academy. Mr. Scobee's parents, now retired, live in Yakima, Wash.

His mother was not enthusiastic about her son's extraterrestial ambitions. ''She
didn't want him to go up in space,'' said Mrs. Allen, the aunt. ''She said the
day he goes up on the shuttle is the day I will die.'' The mother reluctantly
attended the first launching, in 1984, and could not bear to watch it go up. But
this time she was more enthusiastic. She witnessed the explosion along with her
husband and the rest of the Scobee family.

If Mr. Scobee had any pet peeves or if there was anybody who disliked him, it
would be difficult to find them. He was a quiet man who ''never stepped on
anybody's toes, never wanted to be the center of attention,'' in the words of
his only brother, James, a production worker at the Boeing Company. He told
friends that he found speaking tours for NASA more intimidating than space
flight, though high school friends were amazed that he had become so articulate.
He particularly seemed to like to talk to children and explain the wonders of
space flight to them.

His wife provided a fitting epitaph: ''He did his job, whatever it was.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: SEVEN LIVES/The Last Crew of the Challenger

GRAPHIC: photo of Dick Scobee in simulated training shuttle (NYT/Keith Meyers)
(page A22); photo of Dick Scobeewith brother, six years of age (page A22)

TYPE: SERIES

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 11, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

3 BOYS' DREAMS OF SPACE, 3 DEATHS IN THE SKY;
Michael Smith

BYLINE: By THOMAS J. KNUDSON

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1388 words

DATELINE: BEAUFORT, N.C.


This part of the country invites flight, with its warm, buoyant air currents and
table-flat fields ready-made for landing strips. The wide Atlantic sky is
speckled with motion, from the graceful dance of sea birds to the sharp, swift
flight of military aircraft.

As a North Carolina farm boy, Mike Smith learned to work the land, but grew to
love the sky.

He learned to fly as a teen-ager, soaring in a small plane over the sandy spits
and pine forests of the Outer Banks, not far from where the Wright Brothers
first took to the air.

''Flying is just something that came natural to Mike,'' said his brother
Patrick, 39 years old, himself a jet pilot. ''It didn't matter whether it was
small airplanes or a jet, he just really loved to fly.''

Once, as quarterback of the Beaufort Sea Dogs, he stopped a football game to
watch an airplane.

''Mike looked up, saw a big military plane and called time-out,'' said Tom
Hewitt, who coached the junior varsity team.

''He just had to take a look,'' Mr. Hewitt said. ''I can just imagine him
thinking, 'Boy, I'd love to be up in that thing.' ''

On his 16th birthday he completed his first solo flight, earning his student
pilot license before his automobile driver's license. Six days later, Alan B.
Shepard Jr. became America's first man in space.

Mike Smith was determined to follow him. In high school he began to chart his
career, marking each step like coordinates on a map, to lead him to his
destination: space.

He became a flight engineer and instructor, a military pilot in Vietnam, a Navy
test pilot, joined the astronaut corps and rose to the rank of commander. Those
who knew him called him professional, happy, impressive, exuberant, confident
and smooth.

He was thrilled when NASA gave him his first assignment in space:
second-in-command of the shuttle Challenger. The assignment was his last.

Michael John Smith was born April 30, 1945, and grew up on his parents' 13-acre
chicken farm, just across the road from the Beaufort-Morehead City Airport. When
he wasn't watching planes he was building them, model airplanes he flew with a
thin wire leader. And when he wasn't building planes he was reading about them,
taking home books from the school library on planes and pilots.

''I don't remember Mike ever wanting to do anything else but fly,'' said Mike
Smith's first flight instructor, Bob Burrows, a native of this town of 4,000
people.

Patrick Smith recalled his brother's dedication. ''He'd gotten biographies of
the astronauts,'' he said, ''and he'd found out that all of them were military
pilots and ex-test pilots and most of them had flown in combat. These facts
stuck with him.

''I remember Mike saying to me, 'One of these days I'm going to fly in space.'
Then, like everything else, you didn't hear any more about it. He just quietly
went about getting it done.''

His high school years were full. He was president of the Beaufort High School
student council in his senior year. He played football, baseball and basketball.
He was voted most outstanding student, best all-around student and the student
with the best physique, which his brother said came from slinging 100-pound bags
of chicken feed and fertilizer.

He graduated third in a senior class of about 60 students. ''Mike had a certain
concentration,'' said Curtis Lancaster, who taught and coached him. ''If
somebody wanted to go to a movie, and Mike needed to do some studying, he would
do the studying. But it never interfered with his personality. He was still
personable and social and had a lot of friends.'' Hard-Working Life In the Navy
Michael Smith was inducted into the United States Naval Academy in June 1963.
Four years later, on June 7, 1967, he graduated, 108th in a class of 893. Ten
days later, he married Jane Anne Jarrell of Charlotte, N.C.

''He worked hard every day, loved to work and never said, 'I can't do it,' ''
Mrs. Smith recalled. ''He awoke every day and looked forward to the challenge -
he never wasted a moment.''

After Annapolis he enrolled in the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey,
Calif., then went on to primary flight training in Pensacola, Fla., and advanced
jet flight training in Kingsville, Tex. In 1972 and 1973, he was a pilot of Navy
A-6 Intruder attack planes in Vietnam from the aircraft carrier Kitty Hawk.

''He impressed me as being thorough, dedicated and serious - and he always
insisted on perfection in his work,'' said Comdr. Bob Leitzel, who also flew
Intruders from the Kitty Hawk.

His next stop was the Naval Air Test Center at Patuxent River, Md., a school for
test pilots where he worked on guidance systems for cruise missiles and later
taught.

By then he had learned the code of the warrior, stoically accepting risks that
would overwhelm others. ''It's something we really didn't talk about,'' said
Comdr. Kenneth Carlton, deputy director of the Naval Air Test Center. ''We
accepted the risk. That's understood. Otherwise we wouldn't have been there.''

In 1977, as a lieutenant commander, Michael Smith moved to the Naval Air Station
at Oceana, Va., to begin a three-year stint with Attack Squadron 75. He was in
charge of maintenance and operations.

On one occasion, Commander Smith and his bombardier/navigator, Bob Besal, were
roaring across rural Florida on a practice bombing run 200 feet above the
ground.

''I looked out and saw we'd missed the target by what looked like a mile,
because of an error on my part,'' said the bombardier, now Lieutenant Commander
Besal, a safety officer at Oceana. ''Mike said, 'Watch this.' And he went into
the most unbelievable, gut-wrenching low-altitude turnaround and made a
remarkable recovery and hit the target.''

On the ground, he was ''still a North Carolina farm boy that you could get next
to and be friends with,'' said Comdr. James Hurston, who served with Commander
Smith at Oceana. ''He was not on an ego trip. He would still go on leave with
you and joke and have a good time - laughin' and scratchin', we called it.''

Commander Smith drove a faded green pickup truck, said Lieut. Comdr. William
Gregory, a safety officer at Oceana. ''It looked like it hadn't seen a coat of
wax in a thousand years,'' Commander Gregory said. ''He was just not a flashy
person.'' In 1980, Commander Smith was selected by NASA for astronaut training,
and he almost refused the job, Commander Hurston said. ''It was a hard decision
for him because he had also been screened and selected to be the commanding
officer of an A-6 squadron,'' he said. Commander Hurston recalled the day in
1980 when the two sat in his office at Oceana when a top official from the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration called for Commander Smith.

''He looked at me and I told him I couldn't make the decision for him,''
Commander Hurston said. ''Then he called Jane, and she said she'd be glad to
move to Houston. She said, 'Whatever you do, I'll support you,' '' At NASA,
Projects And Anticipation One reason he took the NASA job was to spend more time
with his family, from whom he had been separated while serving in the
Mediterranean in the late 1970's.

Commander Smith's children, Scott, 17, Alison, 14 and Erin, 8, looked forward to
the change. ''This will be an enrichment program for them,'' Mrs. Smith told a
Navy newspaper. ''They have been interested in spacecraft and aircraft for a
long time.''

About three years ago, Commander Smith had a talk with Scott about the dangers
of space flight, said Commander Carlton of the Naval Air Test Center. ''He told
him about the risks involved and that he needed to think about that, because
something could happen,'' he said. ''He told Scott that if something did happen,
he would have to be strong.''

Commander Smith trained at NASA for five years, attaining the rank of full
commander in 1982. He worked on a variety of technical projects from flight
operations to night landings, but he was always hoping for a flight assignment.

When he got it he called dozens of his military colleagues and hometown friends,
and many of them made the trip to Florida to watch the launching. One of them
was Capt. Gerald Hesse, who traveled from Oceana to Cape Canaveral but had to
return early when the flight was delayed.

''We don't have to feel sorry for Mike,'' Captain Hesse said. ''Mike was doing
just what he wanted to do.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: SEVEN LIVES/The Last Crew of the Challenger

GRAPHIC: photo of Michael Smith from high school (page A22); photo of Michael
Smith (NYT/Keith Meyers) (page A22)

TYPE: SERIES

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 12, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT'S NEWS CONFERENCE ON FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC ISSUES

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 5089 words


Following is a transcript of President Reagan's news conference last night in
Washington, as recorded by The New York Times:

OPENING STATEMENT Good evening. Please sit down, I have a brief statement here.
We have, as you know, sent our budget to the Congress and it's a fair and a
responsible budget and it clearly does the job of putting America on course to a
balanced budget through steadily declining deficits, as mandated by the new
Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law.

Now, last Friday a three-judge panel of the Federal District Court issued a
ruling against a portion of Gramm-Rudman-Hollings. We await a final Supreme
Court decision, but nothing the Court says should or will remove our obligation
to bring overspending under control. Congress shares that obligation. It must
meet its responsibility to reduce deficit spending and pass a budget resolution
by April 15.

For our part, we have met the targets for lower deficits, but not by cutting
Social Security or essential support for low-income persons and not by gutting
defense or raising taxes on the American people. We mean to cut unessential
spending out of the Federal budget and we mean to leave family budgets alone.
All told, our budget meets the deficit targets in part, by cutting about 5
percent from domestic programs. That's 5 cents on the dollar and that's what
we're asking Congress to cut.

If Congress can't do that much, well then, they should at least give me a line
item veto, because I'll make the cuts and get the job done. Let's be frank,
those who say that our budget is D.O.A. - dead on arrival - are really saying,
brace yourself for a tax increase. I think taxpayers want Congress to get its
own house in order. I do too, so rest assured that any tax increase sent to me
will be V.O.A. -veto on arrival.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Philippine Elections Q. The observers you sent to the Philippines have just
returned with reports that they witnessed fraud and violence. Couldn't this
undermine the credibility of the elections and strengthen the hand of the
Ccommunist insurgents in the islands?

A. Well, Mike, I'm, I am not going to comment on this process, just as they are
not going to render an official report until the counting has finally been
finished. I don't think it would be proper to do so.

Yes, they told me, ah, in just an interim few remarks, and made it plain that
they are not going to issue the official report yet. But they told me that they
had, there was the appearance of fraud, and yet, at the same time, said that
they didn't have any hard evidence beyond that general appearance. So we're
going to wait. We're neutral. And, ah, we then hope to, ah, have the same
relationship with the people of the Philippines that we've had for all of the,
these historic years.

Q. If I may follow up, sir. Did what they tell you give you concern about the
credibility there and what the impact will be for U.S. interests in the
Philippines?

A. Well, I think that we're concerned about the violence that was evident there
and the possibility of fraud, although it could have been that all of that was
occurring on both sides. But at the same time, we're encouraged by the fact that
it's evident that there is a two-party system in the Philippines, and a
pluralism that I think would, would benefit their people. And we're glad to see
that particular thing happen and we'll wait until we hear the outcome. Helen?

Minority Hiring Goals

Q. Mr. President, in the '60's you opposed all the civil rights legislation. But
more recently, you said that you were a part of the Martin Luther King
revolution. Since that, if that is the case, why is your Administration so bent
on wiping out the flexible hiring goals for blacks, minorities and women? And
I'd like to follow up.

A. Helen, we're not, we're not wanting to do that. But we have seen, in
administering these programs, we've seen that the affirmative action program was
becoming a quota system. Now, I've lived long enough to have seen quotas when
they were employed long before there was a civil rights movement, when they were
employed, in my youth, to definitely discriminate and use the quota as a means
of discrimination. And therefore, we feel that, yes, we want affirmative action
to continue. We want, we want what I think Martin Luther King asked for. We want
a color-blind society. We want, the ideal will be when we have achieved the
moment when no one, or when nothing is done to or for anyone because of race
differences or religion or ethnic origin. And, ah, it's done in, not because of
those things, but in spite of them. Hiring Goals Q. Sir, the affirmative action
order specifically forbids quotas. And I'd really like to say to you: Do you
think if you had been born a black or a woman that you would be President today?

A. I didn't think I'd be President today when I was born or many years
afterward, but, Helen, no, the thing -whatever the law may say, and I know what
Hubert Humphrey said about it and this is what we're talking about. We were
talking about the practice. Not individually and personally, no, but we find
down there at the bureaucracy level and out there actually in personnel offices
and so forth, they chose the easy course, set down a system of numbers and say,
well, we'll go by that. And this is what we're trying to correct. Now, wait a
minute. If you'll let me please do something I haven't done before, but just
recently a group of newcomers to your ranks came into the Oval Office and I met
them and I thought that since they are newcomers at least just as a
representative here to start with let me call on a couple of those. I don't even
know where you're sitting. Maybe you didn't have your hands up, but just two of
them, and then we'll go on with the regular hands up. Dave Beckwith of Time?

The Money Supply

Q. Thank you, Mr. President. Recently two of your top economic officials, Owen
B. Miller and C.E.A. Director Beryl Sprinkel, have suggested that the Federal
Reserve should be tightening a little more, worrying about inflation in
conducting the nation's monetary supply. Do you agree with them, that the Fed
has been too loose lately?

A. Well, I have to admit that - you know, it isn't an easy - the tools aren't
that sharp that you can maintain the money supply exactly where you want it all
the time. And it is true that recently it got above their own bracket, their own
line of where they wanted to keep the increase, and sure enough, you saw a
couple of percentage points on the low side of the zero, of the period added to
what has been well under 4 percent inflation rate. So I think this is what they
were referring to. We've got to keep our eye on that and keep it there as much
as we can.

Now the other one was Walter Robinson, Boston Globe.

Welfare Changes

Q. Mr. President, in your State of the Union Message last week you said that we
need welfare reform and that the true test of a welfare system is one in which
people get off of welfare. And the day after you said that, the Governor of
Massachusetts was in town to talk about a program in his state which has taken
23,000 people, trained them in jobs and taken them off welfare. That program and
others like it in other states have been made possible by a Federal program work
incentive. Now the next day, on Wednesday, your budget recommended abolishing
this program, and I'd like to ask you why that is.

A. Well, I don't think that that program was really the manner or the way by
which the states were doing that. You see, what those states are doing and what
Governor Dukakis is doing in his state is what we did in California as part of
our welfare reforms way back when I was Governor there. And when I got here I
had our people start informing the states of this.

We were allowed an experiment at that time. We could only do it in 35 counties,
and the department then in Washington refused to allow us to do it in San
Francisco and Los Angeles Counties. But what we did was submit a questionnaire
to these 35 counties, to the communities in the counties, and we said would they
send us a list of things that they would be doing if they had the manpower and
the money - useful things.

And we got quite a list and few if any boondoggles. We crossed them out when
there were some. And then we said, ''O.K., you've got the manpower and the
money. We are going to order able-bodied welfare recipients to report for these
useful jobs. No more money to be spent if it was the same money. They're doing
it in return for their welfare grants.''

And then at the same time - well, we only had them work 20 hours a week so we
wouldn't be violating any minimum wage requirements. We said the other 20 must
be spent either in job training or in job hunting. And we assigned job agents to
these people. And each one of them had a list of names to watch these people and
they were doing these community chores. And we funneled through that program and
into private enterprise jobs - not 23,000, but 76,000 people! And this was
during the recession of '73 and '74.

And when we got here to Washington we said it worked so well there, let's see if
there aren't going to be other states that would be interested. But it's just
the plain welfare grant that makes this possible for others to do.

Q. Mr. President, I would like to follow up. This program, which is administered
by the Labor Department, provides job-training funds. And the Massachusetts
program has found that for every dollar that's spent, the Government gets $2
back on welfare savings. And it seems to have been a success. The Labor
Department says it has been, and you've recommended it be canceled. And it seems
to fly in the face of your stated purpose in your State of the Union Message.

A. Well, but we are keeping the program - the partnership program in which we in
partnership with local governments and the private sector train for jobs that
are going begging in that particular area. There's not much point in going into
an area and training people for jobs that aren't available. But you only have to
look at the Sunday papers - and I've mentioned it before, the help-wanted ads -
to find out that there are employers that are having trouble finding employees.

And so we're training for that specific thing. And it has the highest job
placement record of any of the employment programs the Government has ever
tried. Leslie?

Domestic Budget Cuts

Q. I have so many questions to ask you, sir, I can't decide which one. But I
will ask you if I can about your statement on taxes. Your budget calls for cuts
in domestic programs. You call them nonessentials, but a lot of people don't
agree with you. You're calling for cuts in education, in school lunches, other
nutrition programs. You're calling for cuts in student aid. The question is, why
won't you accept something like an oil import tax or an oil import fee that
would not disturb your basic tax cut for the individuals in order to save some
of these programs that so many Americans do consider essential?

A. Well, I don't think that we're cutting the essential parts. No one looks far
enough to see that the small amount of the cut is in what could be called in the
area of fat - that's in administration. No level of government has the high cost
administration that - than the Federal Government. At every echelon of
government where they perform a program for the people, the percentage of the
dollar that goes to administer that program is less at the community level, a
little higher at the county level, a little higher at the state level, and
tremendously higher at the Federal level.

Now, if we can eliminate some fat, we can handle this. But also, you don't bat a
thousand percent in making sure that everyone is deserving. For example, in
programs such as the aid to college students, we find students that are getting
this aid and their families are in an income tax bracket, or a tax bracket, an
income bracket that really there's no reason or excuse for them to be getting
Federal help.

Q. But sir, you know that many people will accuse you - black college enrollment
is way down; a lot of middle-class families with many children find it much
harder to send their children to college - and why won't you accept that oil
import fee to offset that?

A. Because it's historic that when you go above a certain percentage in taking
revenue from the private sector - government taking revenue from the private
sector - you find that you slow the economy. And this is why the latest evidence
of this is that our tax program, once instituted, I think is the principal
reason for the 38 straight months of economic recovery that we have had. Sam.
Philippine Fraud Q. Mr. President, two weeks ago your chief of staff, Donald
Regan, said that if Ferdinand Marcos was re-elected and certified as such, we
would have to do business with him, even if he were re-elected through fraud. Is
that your policy?

A. What we have to say is that the determination of the Government in the
Philippines is going to be the business of the Philippine people, not the United
States. And we are going to try and continue, as I said before, the
relationship, regardless of what government is instituted there by the choice of
the people. And that's all I can answer.

Q. If I may, sir. It is argued that there's a Communist insurgency there; that
the best way to play into the hands of the Communists is to back someone, a
dictator, who has been re-elected by fraud. That the best way, it is argued, to
oppose the Communist insurgency is to back the forces of democracy. What about
that?

A. Well, we're backing the forces of democracy. And the people there are voting
and they're holding their own election. And the only party in the Philippines
that boycotted the election was the Communist Party. So there's very great
evidence that whatever takes place, you've got two parties and the evidence that
a sizable percentage of each party has voted for a different candidate of the
two candidates. So there is a solid support for both candidates there. Now, as I
said before, I'm not going to comment on any of these other things while this
vote count is still going forward. Now, Chris.

Soviet Dissidents

Q. Mr. President, the Soviets today released dissident Anatoly Shcharansky, but
of course there are thousands of other Soviets who would like to leave that
country that the Soviets won't let leave. Do you regard today's release as a
propaganda move or do you see any real change in the human rights situation in
the Soviet Union?

A. Chris, I don't have any way to determine what their motives are in doing
this. I only know that since the Geneva meeting there has been not only this but
others released, more so than in a great many years. I'm encouraged by this
because I did talk at great length about the matter of human rights with the
General Secretary and all we can do is hope that this is a beginning, a sign for
what's going to continue to take place.

Q. If I may follow up, Sir. Mr. Gorbachev says that he cannot release another
leading dissident, Andrei Sakharov, because of his knowledge of Soviet nuclear
secrets. Do you see any legitimacy to that argument?

A. Well, it's an argument they've used for a number of people, people who have
in their estimation been close to some things that they feel are secrets for
their own security and that they have said that they cannot let people go that
have access to those secrets. Now, I have no way of judging how valid that is,
but as I say, they've made a start and I hope it is just a start and that
they'll continue. Ralph?  Policy on Haiti Q. Mr. President, did the United
States play any role in President Duvalier's decision to leave Haiti? And the
second question, if I may, Mr. President, do you intend to increase economic aid
to the new government there?

A. Well, we are just faced now with what we can do. I can only tell you that we,
we hope we can be of help, as this interim government goes foreward to try to
institute democracy there in, in Haiti. Ah, our participation in the, in
Duvalier's leaving was that of providing an airplane to fly him to France.

Q. Mr. President, you didn't give him any strong advice to leave, did you?

A. No. And he never, ah, he never asked us for any.

Care for the Aged

Q. Mr. President, you ah, spoke last week about one of the great fears of the
American people as they grow older, that their lifetime of savings will be wiped
out by catastrophic illness. And government and private studies suggest that the
real risk of catastrophic, of being wiped out by catastrophic illness lies not
in the hospital and the doctors' bills but in long-term chronic care like
nursing homes. Are you willing to open the Social Security system, the Medicare
system, to pay for nursing home care for the chronically ill elderly?

A. I have asked, I can't answer your question yet because I've asked simply for
a study as to how we can meet the total catastrophic thing for people who have,
have need. And as I say, we had a program that we thought would have worked
successfully in California and we couldn't get any public interest in it and it
would've provided unlimited care and through a private insurance coverage so
that there wouldn't have been any, any governmental administrative overhead in
the program.

Q. Mr. President, do you rule out the use of general tax revenue to support
premiums to, to a plan to support nursing home care?

A. Well, the plan that we had in California, the individuals that, ah, the cost
was so low that the individuals could meet the premium cost of that. Now, if
there were some people that couldn't, why, I'm quite sure, as we help in
anything else, we would, we would help in that too.

Flights Near Libya

Q. Mr. President, the United States as you know is beginning to resume the
flight operations in the Mediterranean near Libya. Do you believe that - and
it's also designed to reassert our rights to patrol international waters - why
then haven't we crossed that line that Qaddafi calls the death line?

A. Well, I don't know the nature of the operations that have been conducted.
They conduct them in various parts of the Mediterranean. I don't know that
they're all through yet. We have conducted operations there, early on in my
Administration, in which I was informed because they thought I should be that he
had ordered that that was their waters, which was akin to us claiming all of the
waters from the tip of Florida over to the border of Mexico and Texas, and that
some of the maneuvers would entail some planes and some ships in crossing that
line, but not getting into what are actually their waters. And I gave the
go-ahead on that, and I would again. I don't know if they didn't cross it in any
way this time - it must have been because the maneuvers did not call for it.

Q. Do you think though that resuming the operations at this time might be
playing into Qaddafi's hand by helping him project the image that he wants to
that he's being picked on by the U.S.?

A. Well, it didn't add to his image the first time we did it, and as I say, it
would be done not for any impression on him; it would be done because simply we
believe that our squadrons were there. The Navy is going to have to conduct
exercises and keep itself in fighting shape.

And I'm going to call on - not because you have a red dress on - but just
because you caught my eye.

Corporate Takeovers

Q. And because it's Nancy's favorite designer. Mr. President, in view of the
many corporate mergers going on, both friendly and unfriendly, and in view of
the fact that in a few years we perhaps could wind up with only a handful of
billion-dollar conglomerates, would the Administration plan to propose or
support any legislation to limit some of these mergers, which are getting a
little bit out of hand?

A. Well, I can't comment on whether they're getting out of hand or not, but I do
know that we have a body of law that offers us all the protection we need. In
fact, I think as we've expanded into a world competition, some of that law has
been overprotecting. We have to recognize now that we're not just dealing with
competition within our own borders but competition with firms from outside the
borders. And, no, I don't believe that there's any threat or danger of monopoly
control here in our land at all. And I don't think there will be.

Pentagon Waste

Q. Mr. President, why did you so strongly denounce - why did you so strongly
denounce the misrepresentation of Secretary Weinberger as being wasteful and the
cartooning of him with a toilet seat around his neck while at the same time you
were rewarding the very newspaper that did this by giving them an exclusive
interview yesterday?

A. Well, I've given others exclusive interviews. I try to do that when it's
possible in our timing to do that. And it was an opportunity due to the question
that was asked that I could point out the injustice of this, because we didn't
buy any $600 toilet seat. We bought a $600 molded plastic cover for the entire
toilet system. And it is the same thing. It is the same thing that is used in
the commercial airliners, and they pay the same kind of money that we have to
pay for it. So I thought it was a pretty good place to make -Public Broadcasting
Q. On the same subject of your media awardings. Why is it that when there is
such a need to save money, is public Public Broadcasting being rewarded with $3
million a week in taxpayers' money when they are known widely in many quarters
as the voice of Managua, and when they refuse to air the Charlton
Heston-narrated expose of much of the media in Vietnam, which was shown last
week right here at the White House?

A. Well, I can't answer for that, as to why they make their decision on their
programming or not. I would've settled for Charlton Heston making the speech
that he made about me in Los Angeles a few weeks ago. Let me get back over here.
Yeah.  Policy on Philippines Q. Mr. President, your previous answer on the
Philippines election left the impression that no matter what goes on in the
election, the United States will accept the outcome. You didn't mean to say that
an unprecedented fraud is going to be accepted by the United States, did you,
Sir? Is there some limit to that, to where we stop?

A. No, I said that we're depending on the Filipino people to make this decision.
This is their election. And we'll wait and see what the final count determines.

Q. But if it's quite obvious and even some of the observers from your own
commission are indicating that, if it's quite obvious that it's been a total
steal, the United States isn't going to accept the outcome just as it is, are
they?

A. You're asking me one of those ''If'' questions. And I'm not going to answer
''If'' questions. I took my pattern from Franklin Delano Roosevelt when he was
President and he held his first press conference and he said, ''I will set down
one ground rule'' which he never violated. He said ''I will not answer any 'If'
questions.''

Summit Meeting

Q. Mr. President, some within your Administration are reported to be growing
impatient with what they see as Soviet foot-dragging for setting a date for this
year's summit. Do you share in that impatience?

A. Well, I'd like to have it pinned down. They haven't come up with any other
date. They mentioned another period, we informed them that that was going to be
running into our coming election and we would prefer the earlier date. But, no,
we haven't seen any evidence that they're trying to get out of this or anything
of the kind, because they've already invited us, invited me there for one in
1987.

Q. So in your view, there's no thought that possibly Mr. Gorbachev may be trying
to win some concessions on arms control in exchange for an agreement on a date?

A. I don't think so. That kind of linkage wouldn't work.

Bush's Beliefs

Q. Mr. President, various Republicans who would like to succeed you, including
the Vice President, have been spending a lot of time lately going to various
conservative groups trying to get their seal of approval. In your view has
George Bush been politically and philosophically consistent over the years?

A. Well, you're asking a fellow who was once a liberal New Deal Democrat before
he became a Republican. So sometimes we do change our minds with things that
have gone on. But I just have to tell you that he has been heart and soul in
support of everything that we're trying to do, and I am convinced of his
sincerity in supporting all of those measures.

Q. I'd like to follow up. On Mr. Bush's reluctance to discuss any issues on
which the two of you may have differed privately since you've been President,
could you tell us an issue or two in which he's had a significant impact on your
thinking or your decisions?

A. Oh, he is - I can't - one of the reasons I couldn't answer specifically on
that - I have to tell you that he is a part of every decision, part of the
policy making here just as are the other members of the Cabinet. He and I both
sit in with the Cabinet, and he is part and parcel of all the policy here in the
Administration.

Veterans' Mortgages

Q. Thank you, Mr. President. You mentioned in your Saturday radio broadcast that
we were going to reach the Gramm-Rudman cuts by a few little garage sales. Is it
your desire to see that 250,000 veterans who have certificates of eligibility to
buy V.A. homes are going to be excluded from having this opportunity because the
Veterans Administration says they're out of money and must meet the
Gramm-Rudman-Hollings quota?

A. I can't answer that question specifically either here as to what we're going
to do. I know that we don't want to penalize our veterans -take away any of the
benefits and so forth that they have, and I'd just have to tell you that with
everything that's going on right now I couldn't answer you about the situation
of the housing loans for veterans.

Affirmative Action

Q. Mr. President, back to affirmative action. Do you plan to change the
executive order so that goals and timetables will no longer be required?

A. I'm waiting to see what the recommendation is. This is still being studied
and they haven't presented an actual recommendation to me. All I know at the
moment is that what they're studying is how can we eliminate this possibility of
a quota system, so I want to tell you that I don't want to do anything that is
going to restore discrimination of any kind.

In fact, I'm trying to prevent discrimination with this idea, as I say, of
eliminating quotas. So I know it was mentioned here before that supposedly I'm
opposed to human, to civil rights - no, I was opposed to certain features of
programs that were being advocated, but there were other programs that I did
support, and frankly I was doing things about civil rights before there was such
a program.

Q. You have strong views about civil rights. What are your views on goals and
timetables?

A. Well, as I said before, I think that we must have a color-blind society.
Things must be done for people neither because of nor in spite of any
differences between us in race, ethnic origin or religion.

And it's so easy to fall into a bureacratic practice of saying, well, isn't this
the easiest thing: Let's just tell them they have to have X number and that'll
settle it.

Well, let me give you an example. Recently, here in the East - and I won't name
the locale - we had a public housing come - apartment. And they had on their own
set a quota. And the quota was for 30 percent black. Now, they couldn't - they
didn't get 70 percent white; they had empty units. And yet because their quota
was full, they were turning away every black applicant that came to the public
housing because of their quota. This is the type of thing we want to stop.

And it isn't Government policy. Again, as I say, you have to recognize that when
you go down far enough in the echelons of bureaucracy, things can take place
that you find you're almost helpless to stop.

I had such an experience in a whole different field - it had to do with health -
when I was a governor. And found out that the bureaucracy evidently opposed the
change we wanted to make so they deliberately distorted the order and picked on
the most helpless people, those that were the most invalided. And I found out
there wasn't really any way that I could police that throughout the entire
state. And I called a press conference of your colleagues there, and told them
that I had to rescind the program we tried to put into effect because I could
not control those people at that level.

Now I think - don't get me wrong - I think that the bulk of our employees are
fine and patriotic and sincere in all of their work. But I also know that there
are others that are just going to - as we all sometimes do in private jobs -
they're going to do it the easy way. And I want to fix it so they can't do this
the easy way.

Philippine Bases

Q. Mr. President, are the two U.S. bases in the Philippines of paramount
importance, when you consider U.S. policy toward the Philippines? Or would you
put the future of those bases at some risk, if it meant standing up for
democracy there?

A. One cannot minimize the importance of those bases, not only to us but to the
Western world and certainly to the Philippines themselves. That, if you look at
the basing now of the blue ocean navy that the Soviets have built, which is
bigger than ours, and how they have placed themselves to be able to intercept
the 16 choke points in the world - there are 16 passages in the world, sea
passages, through which most of the supplies and the raw material, and so forth,
reaches not only ourselves but our allies in the Western world. And obviously
the plan, in case of any kind of hostilities, calls for intercepting and closing
those 16 choke points.

And we have to have bases that we can send forces to reopen those channels. And
I don't know of any that's more important than the bases on the Philippines.

Q. Mr. President, if I can follow up. Has the U.S. given any consideration to
other places in the region we might have bases, if the situation in the
Philippines seemed to become untenable?

A. I have to tell you that as good military will always do, and not just here
but in everything else, I am confident that our Navy has itself or is looking
for contingency plans for anything that might happen in any place, to us.

Thank you very much.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 12, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A MISSION IN MANILA FOR HABIB

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 11


Philip C. Habib was spotted by a couple of reporters on Monday having lunch in
the State Department cafeteria.

Asked what he was doing at the department, the retired trouble-shooter responded
without blinking an eye that he was visiting old friends while ''passing
through'' Washington to see a daughter who lives here. He then bantered with the
reporters about nothing in particular.

It was a classic example of Mr. Habib's skill at preserving diplomatic
confidentiality. What he was really doing in Washington became clear today when
President Reagan announced that he was sending him to the Philippines.

His mission will be to advise Mr. Reagan on how the United States can best
nurture the hopes for democracy demonstrated in the recent elections while
helping the Filipino people ''overcome the grave problems'' they face in the
aftermath of seriously flawed elections there.

An Old Hand in Asia

Mr. Habib, a gregarious man who fights a continual battle to lose weight because
of his history of heart attacks, has had long diplomatic experience in Asia. He
has met President Ferdinand E. Marcos and is familiar with many of the leaders
in the Philippines.

In many ways, Mr. Habib's mission is similar to his service as Mr. Reagan's
special envoy to the Middle East from 1981 to 1983. For the first year of that
mission, Mr. Habib sought to work out an arrangement that would avoid a clash
between Syria and Israel over Lebanon.

Then, after the Israelis invaded Lebanon in June 1982, he labored on an accord
to bring order to that country. Late in the summer of 1982 he succeeded in
working out an agreement for the withdrawal of Palestine Liberation Organization
forces from Lebanon, but putting together a peace pact involving Israel, Syria
and the various Lebanese factions eluded him, as it has everyone else who has
tried.

He finally went back to retirement in July 1983, frustrated at not being able to
bring peace to the country of his forefathers.

His Task in the Philippines

Mr. Habib, who will be 66 years old on Feb. 25, faces the task of persuading
President Marcos to recognize that the interests of his nation and of the United
States depend on his not trying to steal the election from his challenger,
Corazon C. Aquino, and in bringing about economic and military reforms.

He is probably as well-suited as anyone for the task, having spent most of his
long diplomatic career in the Far East. He was a key State Department official
during the Vietnam War, and played a major role in the Paris negotiations to end
the war. From 1971 to 1974 he was Ambassador to South Korea and from 1974 to
1976 Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs.

In 1977, until felled by a series of heart attacks, he served as Under Secretary
of State for Political Affairs, the highest rank to which a career Foreign
Service officer can usually aspire.

Philip Charles Habib was born in Brooklyn on Feb. 25, 1920, the son of a
Lebanese grocer in a Jewish neighborhood. He went to school in Bensonhurst and
recalled later that he was a Christian who could be relied upon by Orthodox Jews
to turn the lights on and off during the Sabbath, something forbidden to the
devout.

Service in the Army

After working for a while as a shipping clerk, he went to the University of
Idaho, from which he graduated in 1942. After joining the Foreign Service in
1949, he took time off to attend the University of California in Berkeley, where
he received a Ph.D. in 1952 with a thesis on the economics of lumber. He had
served in the Army during World War II, rising to the rank of captain.

Mr. Habib is married to the former Marjorie W. Slightam and they have two
daughters, Phyllis and Susan.

Mr. Habib now lives in the San Francisco area, but also spends time in Florida
when not taking on an assignment in business as a consultant or for the
Government as a trouble-shooter.

''If you are working 9 to 5 and if your wife is contented, you are not doing
your job,'' he once told a group of diplomats.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Philip Habib (NYT)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 13, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S 'CHOKE POINTS' STRETCH FROM SEA TO SEA

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 717 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 12


Pentagon officials said today that 16 geographical ''choke points'' referred to
Tuesday by President Reagan included a wide variety of ocean transit areas,
ranging from the Panama Canal to stretches of ocean that are hundreds of miles
wide between Greenland and Iceland and Britain.

Mr. Reagan cited these areas in his news conference in response to a question
about the importance of United States bases in the Philippines.

Mr. Reagan said that the bases would help the United States protect vital sea
lanes that passed through choke points - straits or canals - that the Soviet
Union would try to close in a conflict.

He said that the basing by the Soviet military showed that the Soviet forces
''have placed themselves to be able to intercept the 16 choke points in the
world'' through which supplies and raw materials are shipped to Western nations.


Base at Cam Ranh Bay

Naval experts said that Mr. Reagan may have been referring to a base for Soviet
aircraft at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam, which would enable Soviet medium-range
bombers to threaten sea lanes near Indonesia, as well as a floating drydock for
Soviet submarines at Aden in Southern Yemen, near the Persian Gulf.

But they also said the Soviet Union would not place a high priority on attacking
many of the choke points cited by Mr. Reagan during some military scenarios.
Official and nongovernment experts also added that the Soviet Union was
potentially more vulnerable to the closing of choke points than the United
States.

United States Navy doctrine stresses that the United States would seek to use
choke points in the Pacific and the Northern Atlantic to bottle up the Soviet
fleet in its home waters during a conflict.

''It is a two-way street,'' said one Naval expert. ''We sit abreast the Danish
straits, the Turkish strait and northern Norway,'' he added, by way of example.

Report on Open Ocean

A report by the Chief of Naval Operations said that possible Soviet efforts to
efforts to interfere with the resupply of North Atlantic Treaty Organization
troops in a war could occur in the open ocean and would not necessarily involve
choke points.

The report also notes that the Soviet Union's emphasis on interrupting Western
ocean supplies during a conflict has ''fluctuated over time.''

The report said if a conflict was short or involved the use of nuclear weapons,
interdicting Western shipping would be a ''relatively low priority'' for Soviet
military leaders.

The report added that the Soviet Union might attempt a major open-ocean
operation against United States shipping in the event of a long conventional
war.

Defensive Measures Cited

It said that the initial Soviet naval operations would not focus on interrupting
Western supplies but would involve defense measures to protect Soviet submarines
carrrying strategic nuclear missiles and to keep United States aircraft carriers
away from Soviet territory.

A naval expert said that the Soviet facility at Cam Ranh Bay would enable the
Soviet Union to sent medium-range bombers to threaten sea lanes in waters near
Indonesia.

The report by the Chief of Naval Operations notes that Soviet naval strike
aircraft were first deployed at Cam Ranh Bay in 1983 and that the Soviet Union
now has about 10 TU-16 Badger medium range bombers at the facility, including
Badgers that are used for mid-air refueling.

A Pentagon official said that the 16 ''choke points'' cited by Mr. Reagan were
mentioned in a United States Navy publication on ''world maritime chokepoints.''


Florida Straits Included

They include the Florida Straits, between Florida and Cuba, the Panama Canal and
the Strait of Magellan, according to a Pentagon official.

Other choke points include the so-called ''G.I.U.K. Gap'' between Greenland and
Iceland and the United Kingdom and the straits of Skagerrak and Kattegat which
lead to the Baltic Sea. The G.I.U.K. Gap is a military term and not generally
recognized by geographers.

The list also includes the Suez Canal, the Strait of Hormuz in the Persian Gulf
and the strait of Bab el Mandeb, which leads from the Arabian Sea to the Red
Sea.

Other choke points include the Strait of Malacca near Singapore and Sunda Strait
and Macassar Strait near Indonesia, and the Gulf of Alaska, Pentagon officials
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 13, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WEINBERGER ASKS POWER TO SHUT 3 BASES FAST

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 649 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 12


Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger challenged Congress today to prove its
willingness to save money by authorizing him to shut unneeded military bases
with two months' notice.

He selected as a starting point three facilities in the home districts of
prominent House Democrats who have criticized the Reagan Administrtion's
military spending increases.

Secretary Weinberger, in a letter to Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona,
chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, said he was prepared to shut
the three facilities in Massachusetts, Pennsylvania and Colorado in 45 to 60
days if Congress would authorize it and provide the $300 million needed.

The facilities listed by Mr. Weinberger were the Army Materials Technology
Laboratory in Watertown, Mass.; the Philadelphia Naval Hospital and a large
section of Lowry Air Force Base in Denver.

Senator Gary Hart of Colorado, a member of the Armed Services Comittee, said
that the three were in the districts of Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill of
Massachusetts, Representative William H. Gray 3d of Pennsylvania and
Representative Patricia Schroeder of Colorado.

A Pentagon spokesman, Robert B. Sims, denied political motivations. He said the
bases were being cited to determine the will of Congress. ''It is important to
get a sense of the seriousness with which Congress views base closures,'' he
said. ''The Secretary views this, as Senator Goldwater does, as an important
issue and one we should move forward on.''

Savings Are Not Estimated

Mr. Sims, while discussing the contents of Mr. Weinberger's letter, refused to
disclose the actual document or estimate the savings that might be achieved.

Telephone calls to Senator Goldwater, a Republican, and his press aides were not
immediately returned.

Mr. Sims said Mr. Weinberger wanted Congress, in one move, to strip away ''the
cumulative buildup of impediments to base closings.''

For example, he said the Secretary wanted the authority to shut bases ''without
regard to the National Environmental Policy Act or other laws'' that require
impact studies.

The Defense Department said it now took a minimum of two years to close a base.

Funds Are Test of Will

Mr. Weinberger requested an appropriation of $300 million to proceed with the
three closings, Mr. Sims said, adding, ''It is important that we know from
Congress that it is serious about providing the funds.''

Senator Goldwater has tried to speed base closings as a cost-saving device. He
has complained that neither Congress nor the White House has the political will
to do it because partisan or local concerns always override.

The new budget-balancing law, indeed, in requiring cuts in the Pentagon budget,
specifies that the Defense Department may not save money by closing bases.

Mr. Sims said the three bases had been selected either because they were
outdated or too large or because the service involved believed the work could be
performed elsewhere.

Purposes of 3 Bases

The Army Materials Technology Laboratory in Watertown uses 48 acres of land but
employs only 755 military and civilian workers, Mr. Sims said. According to the
Army, its functions could be moved to existing laboratories.

The Philadelphia Naval Hospital was built in 1935 and employs about 820 people,
Mr. Sims said. In the Vietnam War it had a daily patient load of 1,000, but that
has dwindled to 135 and the Navy would prefer to close the hospital and build a
smaller clinic at the Philadelphia Navy Yard, he said.

Lowry, because of it is right next to Denver, no longer functions as an active
flight base and sits ''on some of the most valuable land the Air Force
controls,'' Mr. Sims said.

The Air Force said it wanted to close the training center but leave the
accounting and personnel centers in place. That would result in the transfer of
4,500 employees and 5,000 students to other training facilities.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REMARKS ON C.I.A.'S POLICY

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 836 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Feb. 13


Following are excerpts from the text of a speech by Robert M. Gates, the Central
Intelligence Agency's deputy director for intelligence, prepared for delivery
tonight at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government:

Recent events here have again sparked broad discussion of both the propriety and
wisdom of university scholars cooperating in any way with American intelligence.
On Dec. 3 of last year The Boston Globe stated, ''The scholar who works for a
government intelligence agency ceases to be an independent spirit, a true
scholar.'' These are strong words. In my view they are absolutely wrong. My
remarks tonight center on two simple propositions:

First, preserving the liberty of this nation is fundamental to and prerequisite
for the preservation of academic freedom; the university community cannot
prosper and protect freedom of inquiry oblivious to the fortunes of the nation.
Second, in defending the nation and our liberties, the Federal Government needs
to have recourse to the best minds in the country, including those in the
academic community. Tensions inevitably accompany the relationship between
defense, intelligence and academe, but mutual need and benefit require
reconciliation or elimination of such tensions.

Cordiality of the 1950's

Relations between the scholarly community and the C.I.A. were cordial throughout
the 1950's. Faculty or students rarely questioned the nation's need for the
agency and its activities. These halcyon days were soon to change. There was
some criticism on campuses over C.I.A.'s involvement in the Bay of Pigs
expedition in 1961. But the real deterioration in relations between C.I.A. and
academe paralleled the wrenching divisions in the country over the Vietnam War.
The decline in C.I.A.-academia ties accelerated with the disclosure in
''Ramparts'' magazine that C.I.A. had been funding the foreign activities of the
National Student Association for a number of years.

Sensational allegations of wrongdoing by C.I.A. became more frequent in the
media in the early 1970's, culminating in the establishment of the Rockefeller
Commission and subsequently both the Church Committee in the Senate and the Pike
Committee in the House of Representatives.

The agency's relations with the academic world have improved in recent years for
a variety of reasons, including developments abroad and recognition in the
academic community that C.I.A., together with the Departments of State and
Defense, has been an important and useful supporter of area and regional studies
and foreign language studies in the United States.

Need for Help and Cooperation

There is, however, one constant in the history of this relationship and in its
future as well: our need for your help, and the opportunity you have to
contribute to a better informed policymaking process by cooperating with us.

We have again looked at our rules and polices as a result of the controversy
here at Harvard, and this too has produced some modifications. For example, the
Directorate of Intelligence now explicitly tells any organization or individual
organizing a conference on our behalf that the participants in the conference
should be informed in advance of our sponsoring role. Quite frankly, because we
organize the overwhelming majority of our conferences ourselves, this had not
arisen before.

We also have looked again at the question of whether our funding of research
that is subsequently used in a publication by a scholar should be openly
acknowledged. There are several good reasons that argue against such an
approach, including the possiblity of difficulty with a foreign government by
virtue of acknowledged C.I.A. interest in its internal affairs; the possibility
that acknowledged C.I.A. interest in a specific subject could affect the
situation itself; and, finally, concern that readers might assume the scholar's
conclusions were, in fact, C.I.A.'s.

'At Least Some Change'

We re-examined this issue with considerable care. There are certain
circumstances under which disclosure of our funding of research may be required,
and we of course comply. Beyond this, we have decided that our interest in
maintaining the cooperation of this country's scholars and allaying
misunderstandings and suspicions that have grown out of our earlier appraoch
warrant at least some change in our policy.

Accordingly, C.I.A. will henceforth permit acknowledgment of our funding of
research that is later independently published by a scholar unless (1) The
scholar requests privacy or (2) we determine that formal, public association of
C.I.A. with a specific topic or subject would prove damaging to the United
States. Any acknowledgment of C.I.A. funding would be accompanied by a statement
to the effect that the views expressed are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of C.I.A. or of the U.S. Government.

Consultation and cooperation with C.I.A. on the problems this nation faces
abroad do not threaten academic freedom.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

What's a Low Unemployment Rate?

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 541 words


Each month the White House trumpets yet another increase in the number of
Americans with jobs. Now the eagerly awaited parallel seems also to have
occurred: unemployment has taken a welcome dive. At 6.6 percent, the rate of
joblessness last month was lower than the Government's forecast for the end of
the year and is finally down to a level not seen since a year before President
Reagan took office.

Encouraging as this is, a basic contradiction remains. Even 6.6 percent is high
unemployment, especially so in a strong economy.

The unexpected decline in January may have been just a blip. Retailers laid off
fewer people than usual after Christmas because they hired fewer before
Christmas; and mild weather buoyed outdoor construction work. But there's also
been a pickup recently in factory jobs, which had stagnated while service
industries logged all the gains.

That's all good news but not yet good enough. The overall jobless rate in
January 1986 was no better than in January 1980, six years earlier, and well
above the years between the Korean and Vietnam wars, when it dropped as low as 4
percent and averaged about 5.25. Since the mid-70's the rate has dropped below 6
percent only once. Labor Department projections indicate only slight improvement
by 1995. For unemployment to endure at such high levels is bad news.

Willing workers who can't find jobs are an expensive waste, and none are more
wasted than the young trying to get started. Two of every five jobless workers
in January were under 25. The unemployment rate of black teen-agers increased in
January, to 41.9 percent; the rate for black college graduates under 25 hovers
near 17 percent, compared with less than 5 percent for whites.

Three years of good growth hasn't reduced overall unemployment to an acceptable
level. No one can pinpoint what is acceptable, but it's commonly said to be
about 6 percent under current conditions. Under better conditions, it could be
lower.

The problem is bigger than growth and bigger than America. Some of our
unemployment, particularly in manufacturing, arises from the escalation of the
dollar, a consequence in turn of the Government's huge deficit borrowing. Even
the Administration's belated efforts to ease the dollar down won't reopen
factories that have closed for good.

Unemployment prospects are heavily influenced by uncontrollable population
trends. In the next 10 years, the number of men in the labor force aged 35 to 55
will rise; the numbers of younger and older men will decline. The number of
women in the labor force will rise more than the number of men.

There are useful steps to take now, starting with budget deficit reduction in
Washington, to bring interest rates and the dollar down, and more stimulation by
European governments. Budget constraints limit any immediate substantial
expansion of Federal construction work, but many state and local governments
have surpluses. Federal education and job-training programs that President
Reagan would shrink or eliminate are an invaluable investment in the future.

Let trumpets herald the news of rising employment and dropping unemployment. The
changes are impressive. But behind them remain unsolved problems of economic
waste and human misery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 14, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SCREEN: 'DELTA FORCE'

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 480 words


IN his ''Missing in Action,''

Chuck Norris refought and won the Vietnam War long before Sylvester Stallone's
search-and-destroy mission titled ''Rambo.'' Ever the pacesetter, Mr. Norris now
turns his attention to the problem of Palestinian terrorism and, not
surprisingly, emerges victorious if somewhat winded.

''Delta Force,'' which opens today at the UA Twin and other theaters, will be
the 1986 film all others will have to beat for sheer, unashamed, hilariously
vulgar vaingloriousness. The mind reels at the thought of what Mr. Norris and
his associates might do with the story of Gen. George Armstrong Custer's
unfortunate accident on the Little Big Horn. Crazy Horse wouldn't know what hit
him.

''Delta Force,'' directed by Menahem Golan and written by him with James Bruner,
is actually two half-baked movies in one. It's an ''Airport''-type movie,
complete with a not-quite-all-star supporting cast. It's also a ''my patience is
at an end'' movie. It begins with a disastrous, dumbly planned American attempt
to free hostages in Iran in 1980, and ends triumphantly five years later, when a
crack new United States commando unit, called the Delta Force, rescues the
hostages taken in the Palestinian hijacking of an American 707 out of Athens.

''Delta Force'' seems to be based loosely on the 1985 hijacking of the Trans
World Airlines jet, during which the Palestinian hijackers murdered a young
United States Navy scuba diver on the runway of the Beirut airport. Mostly,
though, it seems to be wildly fanciful, chauvinist fiction in which, at the
climax, a heroic band of American commandos effectively takes over all of Beirut
-slaughtering Arabs not only at will but also with some pleasure.

Mr. Norris plays Maj. Scott McCoy, the driving dynamo of the Delta Force, under
the command of Col. Nick Alexander (Lee Marvin), with whom he shared the
humiliation of the failed Iranian evacuation. Cross-cut with the commando
sequences are sequences aboard the aircraft, whose passengers are played by,
among others, Joey Bishop, Lainie Kazan, George Kennedy, Susan Strasberg, Martin
Balsam and Shelley Winters, whose role is too small for her to squeeze all her
mannerisms into it.

The otherwise great Hanna Schygulla, her hair dyed platinum blond, appears as
the plane's courageous, guilt-ridden, German-born purser. Terrorists Beware!

THE DELTA FORCE, directed by Menahem

Golan; written by James Bruner and Mr. Golan; produced by Mr. Golan and Yoram
Globus; released by the Cannon Group Inc.

At UA Twin, Broadway at 49th Street; 34th Street Showplace, 241 East 34th
Street, and 86th Street East, Third Avenue. Running time: 126 minutes. This film
is rated R.

With: Chuck Norris, Lee Marvin, Martin

Balsam, Shelley Winters, George Kennedy, Joey Bishop, Lainie Kazan, Robert
Forster, Hanna Schygulla, Susan Strasberg, Bo Svenson and Robert Vaughn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Chuck Norris

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GOVERNMENT TRUST: LESS IN WEST EUROPE THAN U.S.

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1139 words

DATELINE: ROME, Feb. 15


Citizens of the leading Western European democracies trust their governments
less than Americans trust theirs and are far less inclined to express pride in
their countries, polls by The New York Times have found.

But the study also found sharp variations in national feelings of trust over the
last decade and suggested that Americans place an extremely strong emphasis on
national pride.

The findings emerged from polls carried out by The Times and CBS News in the
United States and by Gallup International for The Times in five European
countries.

According to the surveys taken in late 1985, 49 percent of Americans said they
trusted the Government in Washington to do what is right ''all or most of the
time.'' The comparable figure in West Germany was 41 percent, and in France and
Italy 33 percent.

Britain and Spain Even Lower

In Britain and Spain, the figures were even lower, 30 percent and 29 percent,
respectively.

For the United States, a telephone poll was conducted and had a margin of
sampling error of plus or minus 3 percentage points. In the European countries,
face-to-face interviews were used, with a margin of sampling error of plus or
minus 4 percentage points.

More startling were the findings when respondents were asked whether they were
proud of their country.

In the United States, 87 percent said they were ''very proud'' to be an
American. At the other extreme, only 21 percent of West Germans described
themselves as ''very proud'' to be a German. And while only 1 percent of
Americans said they were not very proud or not at all proud of their country,
fully 32 percent of West Germans gave this response.

The other countries in Europe fell in between. Some 42 percent of the French, 44
percent of the Italians, 58 percent of the British and 65 percent of the
Spaniards said they were ''very proud'' to be a citizen of their country.

Long a Staple of Polling

Surveys about national pride and confidence in public institutions have been a
staple of the polling industry since World War II and have aroused a broad
debate among social scientists over just what respondents are trying to say when
they give answers to pollsters' questions.

In the case of questions about trust in government, researchers agree at least
that what is being measured is not just confidence in democratic institutions,
but also in a particular government at a particular time.

Thus, the findings that Americans trust their Government more than Europeans do
are in part a reflection of President Reagan's popularity, especially when it is
compared with European incumbents.

An individual's trust in his or her government, said Dr. Max Kaase, professor of
political science at the University of Mannheim, related not only to trust in
the normal mechanisms of the government, but also to whether one's party was in
power and to a general sense of ''how things are going,'' especially in the
economy.

In all the countries surveyed, trust in government has fluctuated sharply over
the last decade and is closely related to political preference.

In the United States, for instance, the proportion trusting government all or
most of the time fell to 34 percent in 1974, during the Watergate scandal, and
to 26 percent in March 1980, during the Iran hostage crisis and a period of high
inflation.

Dramatic Change in Italy

Among the most dramatic changes are those that have taken place in Italy in the
last 10 years.

In 1976, only 13 percent of Italians said they trusted their government all or
most of the time, and 37 percent said they never trusted the government. By
1985, the proportion trusting the government had risen to 33 percent, with only
27 percent saying they never trusted the government.

''The sharp decline in trust in government here really followed the student
revolt of 1968,'' said Dr. Franco Pavoncello, a Rome-based Italian survey
consultant. ''At the same time, Italy was going through the shock after the oil
embargo and a great increase in inflation which led to economic upheaval.''

On top of this, he said, the Christian Democratic Party had ''monopolized
power'' for some three decades.

Christian Democrats Lost Hold

Significantly, he added, the Christian Democrats lost their monopoly hold on the
Prime Minister's post, as Giovanni Spadolini, a Republican, and then the current
incumbent, Bettino Craxi, a Socialist, took office.

''Put that together with improving economic circumstances, and people started to
feel that things were moving,'' Dr. Pavoncello said.

In Italy, as in the United States, trust in government has increased all across
the political spectrum.

The West German case is slightly different. The overall numbers show a
substantial decline in trust, to 40 percent in 1985 from 50 percent in 1974.

Sharp Drop on German Left

But the change seeems almost entirely a result of a sharp drop in confidence
among those on West Germany's political left. In 1974 the moderate coalition of
Social Democrats and Free Democrats, first under Willi Brandt and then Helmut
Schmidt, retained not only substantial trust on the left, but also significant
confidence in the center and even on the right.

On the other hand, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's coalition of Christian Democrats and
Free Democrats seemed to have polarized the country more along ideological
lines, at least as of late 1985. There has been an increase in trust in
government on the right, but a sharp drop on the left and a moderate decline in
the center more than compensated for those.

The enormous pride found among Americans parallels both survey and anecdotal
data about what is apparently the surge of patriotic or nationalistic feeling,
especially among the young. But Dr. Kaase, pointing to past studies, said
Americans had always ranked high on national pride.

By contrast, he said, ''pride in country'' is a concept that comes with
difficulty in West Germany and was given an aura of illegitimacy by the Nazis.
One striking finding of the recent survey is that young West Germans are even
less proud of their country than their elders are.'''

Germany's Division Cited

''People have been very reluctant to apply the concept of pride in this
country,'' Dr. Kaase said. ''It's essentially the result of the Third Reich and
the existence of two Germanies. With the country divided, people are uncertain
over what to do with the concept of pride.''

Dr. Pavoncello said national pride was ''a very touchy question'' in Italy as
well, ''first of all because there is a Fascist experience, and there was a lot
of emphasis on national pride then which sort of delegitimated the idea.''

''You cannot compare what happened in the U.S. defeat in Vietnam to what
happened in Italy in 1943,'' he said. ''We're not talking about national
catastrophe as we were here.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart of poll of the trust in governments of Britain, West Germany,
France, Italy, Spain, and the U.S.

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI REPORTED TO SAY G.I.'S MAY BE THERE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 625 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 15


A group of American members of Congress said today that Vietnamese officials had
acknowledged for the first time that missing Americans might be living inside
Vietnam, in remote areas not under full Government control.

They said Deputy Foreign Minister Hoang Bich Son had told them that three
Vietnamese teams were investigating reported sightings of Americans and had
invited the United States to take part.

The members of Congress, who came here after two days in the Vietnamese capital,
said Vietnamese officials also promised to return the bodies of 14 more
Americans missing in action from the Vietnam War and had increased to 70 the
number of missing on whom they promised reports.

''For the first time, the Vietnamese Government is investigating a large number
of live sightings,'' said Representative Gerald B. Solomon, Republican of
Upstate New York, who is leading the nine-member House of Representatives task
force on missing Americans and prisoners of war in Southeast Asia.

Hanoi's Position Is Modified

''For years, Vietnam maintained that no live Americans were in Vietnam,'' he
said at a news conference. ''They later changed that to say there were no live
Americans under their control. But now they have moved to the position where
they say that there could be live Americans that they are unaware of.''

Mr. Solomon, who met for three hours with Mr. Hoang, said the Foreign Minister
had stressed that Vietnam was not holding any Americans against their will.

Another delegation member, Representative Benjamin A. Gilman, Republican of
Upstate New York, said the Vietnamese had indicated that there might be
Americans living in the mountains or other remote areas not under full
Government control.

Representative Solomon said, ''They have invited the U.S. Government as well to
participate in any of these investigations, and I think that is most
significant.'' #2,441 on Missing List A total of 2,441 Americans are listed as
missing in action from the Vietnam War, including 1,797 missing in Vietnam and
the rest in Laos and Cambodia.

Since the United States withdrew its military forces from Indochina in 1973,
there have been 806 reported ''live sightings'' of Americans in the region, most
by refugees, according to Federal Government records. Federal officials say they
have discounted all but 95 reports.

Representative Bob Dornan, Republican of California, said he believed Vietnam
might be holding Americans to make use of their technical knowledge.

Representative Bill Hendon, Republican of North Carolina, said there was a
'''great deal'' of intelligence information indicating that Americans remained
in remote areas of Vietnam, but he did not elaborate.

Vietnam said early last month that it had collected about 50 new reports of
missing Americans and would turn them over soon. The Congressmen said Hanoi
officials have promised to hand over information on 20 additional cases, for a
total of about 70.

Meanwhile, Mr. Dornan announced that the bodies of eight American servicemen
recently returned by the Vietnamese have been identified by the United States
Joint Casualty Resolution Center in Hawaii, the military organization
responsible for resolving cases of the missing. ---- No U.S. Comment on
Sightings WASHINGTON, Feb. 15 - A State Department spokesman said today that
there would be no comment on the findings of the Congressional delegation.

''The U.S. has investigated every report of live sightings of Americans,'' the
spokesman said. ''So far we have not been able to prove that Americans prisoners
of war remain in Indochina. We cannot rule out the possibility that there are
live American prisoners there, however. So we proceed on the assumption that
some Americans may be held.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

REVAMPING THE OLYMPIC FRANCHISE

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1720 words


AT the 1988 Olympic Games, the Coca-Cola Company will not have the option of
playing favorites. When it decided to associate itself with the event, it had to
pay to become the ''official'' soft drink of not only the American team, but of
the athletes from Nicaragua, Israel, Syria - in fact, of the Olympic squads of
at least 120 other nations.

Similarly, Federal Express will probably be the official air courier of all the
teams, Kodak will be their official film, and Xerox has agreed in principle to
be their official copier.

Under a new program devised by the International Olympic Committee,
multinational corporations will be paying as much as two to three times more to
affiliate themselves with the Olympics than they did four years ago, when they
signed up for the Los Angeles Games. But for this Olympiad they can, for the
first time, promote their identification with the Olympics in nearly every
country participating in the Games.

Up until now, a company that paid to be an official sponsor of the summer or
winter Games was permitted to market its Olympic association only within the
Olympiad's host country - unless it had negotiated separately with the Olympic
committee of each participating nation. Coca-Cola, for example, signed more than
25 contracts in 1984 - with either national teams or host cities - to be able to
publicize its Olympic affiliation in their nations - an approach that many
companies found tiresome and time consuming. It was a ''bits and pieces''
approach to Olympic marketing, said Michael J. Forte, director of marketing
communications for the Eastman Kodak Company.

The Olympic movement has a big stake in the new international marketing
arrangement. Corporate sponsorship has grown increasingly important to its
financial health as the Games get more expensive and as the International
Olympic Committee seeks to lessen its dependence on government support and on
revenues from television rights. I.O.C. officials say the new international
program will also increase monies that it can give to national teams that cannot
afford well-trained, well-equipped squads.And companies that might not be
willing to spend the time and money in painstaking individual negotiations with
other teams may be more willing to sign up under the new program, they say,
since all the teams are represented in a package deal.

However, under the new arrangement, the American team, the biggest Olympic
squad, will still receive the largest share of corporate funds because the vast
majority of the sponsors are expected to be American-based multinationals.

By selling the winter and summer Games as a package, the smaller winter Games
are assured of their share of corporate support. The 1984 summer Games in Los
Angeles raised $120 million from corporations; the 1980 winter Games in Lake
Placid, N.Y. raised but $9 million.

''The benefit of new program is that you can make one deal and sew up the whole
package of marketing rights without going around the world,'' said Richard W.
Pound, the member the International Olympic Committee's executive board who is
responsible for television and marketing rights.

The few companies that have signed up apparently agree. Xerox, the only
corporation to divulge what it will pay, signed a letter of intent to pay about
$9 million for its link with the 1988 Games. For the Los Angeles Games, Xerox
paid only $3.5 million.

But other companies are complaining about the expense, and the program is
running into problems. ''I wouldn't be surprised if they could not sell all the
rights,'' said Robert H. Helmick, president of the United States Olympic
Committee.

Meanwhile, a squabble has developed over the I.O.C.'s hiring of ISL Marketing
A.G., an international sports marketer, to solicit the corporate sponsors and
persuade national Olympic committees to participate. (See box.) The new program
works like this: Corporations apply to ISL, on a first-come, first-serve basis,
for a marketing monopoly in 44 product categories - everything from pretzels and
vitamins to cosmetics and colognes. Each product category carries a pre-set
price tag for a company, a price based on the combined fees the teams and host
cities could have negotiated on their own under the old system.

The money they pay - anywhere from $5 million to $15 million - goes to Calgary
and Seoul, the 1988 Olympiad's host cities, to the I.O.C. and to Olympic
committees from the countries that have signed up with ISL to be recipients in
the program. So far, about 125 nations out of a possible 160 or so have signed
up. ISL is not expecting countries such as Cuba, North Vietnam and Afghanistan
to participate.

Once a company has paid for its category, it may use the Olympic logo and other
promotional assets in its sales and advertising campaigns in every participating
nation. The new program also allows sponsors the usual exclusive rights to set
up sales facilities at the Olympic sites and to receive preferential seating and
hotel accommodations for clients they entertain at the Games.

As in the past, companies offering products and services that fall outside the
official categories - cars, beer and airlines, for example - can gain Olympic
identification by arranging their own marketing agreements with national Olympic
committees and the Olympic organizing commitees for Seoul and for Calgary.
ALTHOUGH few companies that qualify for the new program have signed on the
dotted line, ISL says many others have tentatively agreed to participate.

But some have already decided against the move. The Campbell Soup Company, for
example, balked at the price asked by ISL. ''Campbell's got good mileage out of
the Olympic association in 1984, but for this price we wouldn't do it,'' said
Scott Rombach, director of public relations. According to Mr. Rombach, the
company paid $500,000 to be the official soup of the 1984 winter Games and was
asked for $7.2 million to sponsor the 1988 Games.

American Express has also declined to join. ''We have to pick and choose those
opportunities that address the needs of our customers -and this one did not,''
said Sara Mullen, an official at the company who said the ISL program involved
''considerably more'' than the $4 million American Express paid to help sponsor
the Los Angeles Games.

Other companies say the comprehensive package does not suit their current
advertising and promotional campaigns. The program is global in scope, but
companies cannot target specific markets.

Fuji Photo Film U.S.A., a $9 million sponsor of the Los Angeles Games, refused
to pay the $15 million it says ISL requested for the 1988 Olympiad package
because, said James L. Chung, director of financial relations for Fuji, ''we
felt that alternative marketing opportunities could more effectively help us
meet our worldwide marketing objectives.''

In fact, even one of the companies that did sign up for the program did so for
one reason that has little to do with benefits to be gleaned from a packaged
approach to global marketing. Federal Express, according to Cliff Deeds, its
senior manager for international marketing in the Far East, signed up mainly
because the summer Games will be held in Seoul, and that dovetails nicely with
Federal Express's strategy to expand its Asian markets.

The problem of targeted global marketing, counters ISL, can be solved within the
program. Under the new agreements, company officials point out, corporations can
re-sell their Olympic marketing rights in any specific country to another
company.

Officials at ISL are stubbornly optimistic, and say that they ultimately expect
to raise about $200 million. If too many of the product categories remain
unfilled by June of this year, ISL will drop some and add others.

Mr. Helmick of the United States Olympic Committee has a simpler idea: ''If they
can't fill the categories, ISL should take a realistic look at the pricing,'' he
said.

ISL's contract with the I.O.C. expires at the end of the 1988 Games. ''This is a
trial,'' said Mr. Pound. ''If it works, great. If not, we'll go back to the old
way.''

A DEAL THAT HAS SOME CRYING 'FOUL'

When the International Olympic Committee chose ISL Marketing A.G. to run the new
corporate sponsorship program last May, it churned up a controversy. Critics are
charging that the three-year-old Swiss-based company has no proven track record
in the field, and that the I.O.C. awarded the contract without competitive
bidding.

''The I.O.C. did not leverage its position'' when it hired ISL, said Bud
Stanner, a senior vice president at International Management Group in Cleveland,
which claims to have expressed interest in marketing the Games, but was never
invited to bid.

''It was not something we opened to tenders,'' said Richard W. Pound, an
executive board member of the I.O.C. ''ISL was picked by osmosis. It was the
only organization prepared to sit down and develop the program.'' Mr. Stanner
counters that his company had no chance to discuss its ideas because the award
to ISL was made so swiftly.

ISL, which had revenues of about $200 million last year, according to William P.
Breen, president of its American marketing division, is 51 percent owned by
Horst Dassler and his four sisters - who together own Adidas, the giant West
German shoe and sporting goods manufacturer. The remaining 49 percent of ISL is
owned by Dentsu, Japan's largest advertising agency.

Some contend that Mr. Dassler used his longtime contacts with the international
sports committee to win the contract. Adidas, although it does not make any
products included in the new marketing program, has been equipping Olympic
athletes since the 1930's.

''That ISL, out of nowhere, gets one of the biggest sports contracts in the
world clearly identifies that Dassler is in a position to get the contracts he
wants,'' said Patrick J. Nally, chairman of West Nally Ltd., an international
sports marketing company in London that competes with ISL. ISL has also arranged
to sell the marketing rights to this year's World Cup soccer championship in
Mexico City.

According to Juan Antonio Samaranch, the I.O.C.'s president, ''Mr. Dassler has
been close to the I.O.C., but I don't see any problem.'' Said Mr. Dassler:
''What I do is best for the Olympic movement. I have no conflict of interest
whatsoever.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article in this section last Sunday on Olympic marketing rights misstated the
Xerox Corporation's status in the 1988 Olympic Games. Xerox has not signed to be
the official copier for the 1988 Olympics.

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Emma Lazarus or Elizabeth Arden?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 612 words


The deadliest shot in all the furor over the Statue of Liberty and Chrysler
Chairman Lee Iacocca is ''commercialization,'' and it's being fired by both
sides.

The trouble arose when Secretary of Interior Donald Hodel removed Mr. Iacocca
from one of two organizations concerned with restoring the Statue of Liberty and
nearby Ellis Island. Mr. Iacocca angrily ascribes his firing to Interior's
desire to ''commercialize Ellis Island.'' The Government plan would create a
conference center and hotel, financed by what Mr. Iacocca calls ''the sale of
tax shelters to the rich.''

Now consider the rival Iacocca plan. ''He should know commercialization when he
sees it,'' says a Park Service official. It calls for a large glass building to
include a brewery, music halls and ethnic food shops. That does not sound
exactly like a blueprint for non-commercial dignity.

The competition between plans probably explains Secretary Hodel's sudden step.
He admires Mr. Iacocca's feat of raising almost a quarter-billion dollars for
the restorations. But he calls it a conflict of interest for Mr. Iacocca to head
both the fund drive and the commission that helps decide how to spend the money.
That sounds unduly punctilious. The heated battle over plans seems a more
plausible explanation. Which plan is better?

Neither. Both sound thoroughly commercial. The golden door contemplated in both
sounds more like Elizabeth Arden than Emma Lazarus, more like a luxury spa than
a place to ruminate on the tired, poor and tempest-tossed. Why limit the future
of such evocative American icons to two development plans?

There was reason to be uneasy about commercialization from the start. Private
fund raising brought with it sordid scenes like beer companies contesting the
exclusive right to use the Statue of Liberty in advertising. Franchise rights
have been sold for 750 products including official swizzle sticks and air
fresheners; that turns Miss Liberty into a Statue of License. Why were private
funds needed in the first place? There could hardly be a more logical reason to
spend public funds than the public celebration next July Fourth.

If money was to be sought privately, Mr. Iacocca has done an exceptional job of
finding it, $230 million and counting. What's now clear is that it's time for
commercialization, of all kinds, to stop.

The process of deciding on restoration has so far gone on mostly unnoticed and
unremarked. The Iacocca controversy now puts the public squarely on notice of
the need to pay attention and ask questions. The first question is, Why must
Ellis Island be converted into any kind of development at all, luxury hotel or
ethnic food fair? There is no shortage in America of suburban malls in which one
can eat souvlaki, croissants, won ton, empanadas and pizza by the slice.

Yet there is a distinct shortage of places of quiet, powerful dignity, like the
Vietnam memorial in Washington. Once, literal-minded patriots denounced the
starkness of names engraved on marble as a ''black gash of shame.'' The only
shame now is theirs. This has become the most moving of Washington's public
places. Ellis Island can uncover its own deep feelings.

The second question, now that the Iacocca affair has awakened public attention,
is, How can the public's interest be informed and its concerns addressed? What
can the Government do by way of hearings or competitions to assure that the
restoration meets the demands of history and fitness, not just the need for
return on investment? In removing Mr. Iacocca from his commission job, Secretary
Hodel said he needed ''unfettered'' advice about the restoration. Why not ask
all of us immigrants?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S MASTER OF COMPROMISE: RICHARD DARMAN

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines; Francis X. Clines is a reporter in the Washington
bureau of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 35, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3808 words


AT THE END OF A BUSY DAY, OTHER PEOPLE SIM-ply go to sleep, maybe say a prayer
first in the dark, or slip off in a final draught of worry. Not Deputy Secretary
of the Treasury Richard G. Darman. He puts the finishing touches on a letter to
himself - a careful, tightly penned, and quite idiosyncratic single-sheet
diagram of whatever major issue has been on his mind that day. It might be a
plan for the miasmic tax-overhaul struggle in Congress, for which he has been
President Ronald Reagan's pointman, or perhaps a dicey stratagem for advancing
the Administration's effort to bring order to the volatile world of
international monetary rates.

Whatever the problem, the tiny words, arrows and squiggles Richard Darman marks
on the paper are as meticulous a map as he can make of it. He puts the drawing
down, totemlike, on his night table, near a pad and pen, ready for whatever
serendipitous jottings might awaken him like Dickensian wraiths. To sleep,
perchance to solve. ''I may be crazy, but I think I get a lot of work done while
sleeping,'' says Mr. Darman. Craziness is one flaw his more respectful
adversaries do not discern in this bold, occasionally brazen technocrat who is
employed, basically, to rack his brain on behalf of President Reagan. ''I tend
to think my mind . . . will make linkages,'' Mr. Darman continues, ''and at 3 or
4 or 5 in the morning or whenever I'd naturally wake up, I've suddenly got three
or four ideas that fit right in as the logical next bits of work on that
problem.''

He smiles apologetically, showing a rare moment of vulnerability. ''What do you
think? Sounds sort of foolishly excessive? But it works for me. It finds ways
out of the maze.'' NOCTURNAL DOODLING MAY BE AS ABERRANT as Dick Darman gets.
The President should hope so, for at 42 years of age, Mr. Darman has come to be
recognized as one of the Administration's most durable strategists and its
unofficial Minister of Words in the Realpolitik of compromise.

While Reagan zealots have bemoaned the Administration's lapses into adjustment
and concession on key issues, the President, in silent approbation, has retained
middle-ground pragmatists like Mr. Darman specifically to manage such
politically difficult problems as Social Security reform and annual fiscal
compromises.

The success of the pragmatic approach is well illustrated by Richard Darman.
After serving three Republican Administrations in six Cabinet departments and
the White House for a total of 11 years, Mr. Darman relishes the slow process of
issue-finesse that others find fuzzy and frustrating.

''Above all, Dick loves the process, the machinations,'' says Kenneth M.
Duberstein, the Reagan Administration's former Congressional lobbyist. ''He has
this way of focusing way ahead, seeing the obstacles, the hurdles, and figuring
how to jump them.'' More than philosophical genius, modern American politics
requires and rewards clever mechanists of this sort, people who can tinker
within the confines of collegiality toward the achievement of specific goals.
This is Richard Darman's speciality.

A year after Mr. Darman's transfer from the White House to the Treasury
Department in early 1985, his strategic ability faces its fullest test yet. He
and other Administration officials understand that in the all-consuming issue of
tax revision, President Reagan is reaching for a historic domestic legacy, while
risking mortal definition as an ineffective lame duck should he fail. Mr. Darman
and his mentor and boss, Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d, are now preparing
for a Senate struggle at least as lacerating as the surprising and harrowing
fight over taxes with their own Republicans in the House of Representatives last
December. Mr. Darman will again be the President's detail man, watching and
exhorting clause by clause, word by word, when the final composition of the bill
begins later this month.

N RICHARD DARMAN, THE PRESIDENT has an odd minion. Mr. Darman did not campaign
for Ronald Reagan in 1980, nor even dust off an old issue paper from his days in
the Nixon and Ford Administrations, where he was a management specialist in
several Cabinet departments. Instead, Mr. Darman waited until Mr. Reagan was
elected and his own earlier patron in Government service, James Baker, had been
chosen by the President-elect to be chief of staff at the White House. He then
approached Baker with what sounded like a modest proposal: to design a system to
manage the paper flow in the Oval Office and then, his lord willing, perhaps to
oversee it.

''He knew where the power levers were,'' explains Mr. Baker today. ''He told me,
'You know, you've got to be in a position to make sure you've got your hands on
the paper flow.' ''

As the President's handpicked outsider, Mr. Baker knew that he needed friendly
protection from longtime Reagan loyalists. Further, Mr. Baker understood that
the West Wing paper flow - a daily, two-foot-thick total of notes, reports and
supplications that the royal guard either allows before the President's eyes or
consigns to relative oblivion - could provide that protection, and thus should
be as well engineered as a castle drawbridge.

And Mr. Baker, like few others, also recognized that be-neath Mr. Darman's
ambitious, occasionally sulfurous demeanor lurked a strategic craftsman with a
seer's gift for anticipating the shifts and snags that an issue engenders in
Congress, and an alchemist's talent for concocting the responses and antidotes
that are required to nurture an initiative.

Attracted by Mr. Darman's proposal, the new chief of staff offered his old
protege and colleague from the backwater days in the Ford Administration's
Commerce Department the position as his deputy.

Once in the White House, Richard Darman spent four years building and
buttressing a redoubt of paper in the jungle of West Wing politics. Eventually,
he was placed at Ronald Reagan's side, proudly tasked with the responsibility of
briefing the Chief Executive for special encounters with outsiders, including
state visitors and the press. Later, with the advent of the 1984 campaign
season, Mr. Darman won supervision of speech writing, down to each jot, whit and
euphemism. He was also charged with preparing the President for his televised
debates with Walter Mondale. He made himself, in effect, the President's
first-term word factotum. WORDS ARE RICHARD DARMAN'S DOMAIN; HE revels in the
shades of gray that comprise the Washington spectrum. ''In the end, all the
substance and tactics come to the drafting of words, whether you're talking
about a law, a regulation, an order or a speech,'' he says. ''My job frequently
involves mediating about words. What it all gets down to often is somebody with
a pen and paper.''

The result is usually more canny than dramatic. An example is the quickly
produced soupcon of vagueness Treasury Secretary Baker required last May, when
he wanted to issue a carefully couched offer to ''consider the possible value of
hosting'' a world conference to stabilize currencies. The prosaic artistry of
this six-word phrase was its signaling of a major world initiative by the
Administration, while avoiding the language of alarm and leaving room for
retreat.

''He got the trial balloon up, right when we needed it, on one of the most
delicate and important issues,'' says an Administration official. ''That's
Darman's work, his special touch.''

Like few others in Washington, Mr. Darman is dedicated to the belief that the
true innovations of politics are transacted when the final, crucial words of an
issue are put down on paper. He has been known to fall to his knees to
hand-letter last-minute insertions in Presidential speeches. And he was there at
Secretary Baker's side last Sept. 22, during a private meeting at the Plaza
Hotel in New York, listening word by nuance to the economic ministers of the
Group of Five, the five major Western industrialized nations. Mr. Darman's
attention was focused on the crucial final edit of one paragraph in a nine-page
communique. After measuring and kneading the words as differences were aired, he
helped quickly to redraft its wording, knowing the six-line comment would alert
the world to the Reagan Administration's dramatic new intent to consider
intervening in the currency markets to reduce the dollar's exchange rate. The
key words had all the allure of banker's gray: ''In view of present and
prospective changes in fundamentals, some further orderly appreciation of the
main nondollar currencies against the dollar is desirable.'' But those words
nonetheless discreetly trundled the issue forward, helping to stall the dollar's
dangerously escalating value.

I N THE PRECARIOUS fight to keep tax reform alive last December, Mr. Darman was
dealing with the kind of chaotic, free-floating issue on which he claims to
thrive. Typically, the success, though still tentative, came late in the game.

The Baker-Darman strategy was simple: to get some sort of tax-overhaul measure
moving out of the Democratic-controlled House, where all tax bills must
originate, and into the preferred precincts of the Republican Senate. But the
underlying problem was that the Republicans had to be secondary in the plan.
Frustrated House Republicans, peeved by Presidential courting of the opposition,
unexpectedly resisted the initial procedural vote to pass a bill that Mr. Darman
had scouted and shepherded, day by day, with Democratic leaders. ''I was caught
short,'' he concedes.

A few hours after that setback, as the capital pundits dusted off their ''lame
duck'' cliches, Mr. Darman estimated in a private conversation that the rift
would be repaired with a personal appeal from President Reagan himself and a
letter of detailed reassurances to miffed Republicans. A lesser reaction - a
paperless apology uttered within the White House, for example - might only
heighten the strife. The calculation proved to be correct. Earlier in the
tax-reform debate, Mr. Darman and Mr. Baker had composed a similar strategic
missive, in which President Reagan endorsed the legislative ''process,''
distinguishing it from the substance of the Democrats' tax-reform bill, which he
could hardly embrace. That letter was sent to House Republicans after a weeklong
delay by the White House staff, a delay which may have fed the brief Republican
revolt. Such letters - now recognized as part of Richard Darman's style of
strategic compromise - may be nonbinding and chimerical, as critics complain,
but during the tax revolt, Mr. Darman the wordmeister flashed them like aces in
a poker game.

The last-minute turnaround in the House has created a stronger opportunity in
the Senate, contends Darman. ''We have the luck of benefiting from our own
mistake,'' he says. ''Tax reform is now a much more highly visible issue, a kind
of heroic underdog, a 'Rocky V' opportunity for the President.''

T HE TAX-REFORM STRAT-egy, based on pragmatic political assessments, continual
compromise and incremental steps, is essential Richard Darman and reminiscent of
his previous efforts for Jim Baker. They spent much of the first term polishing
the gambit of making mere Presidential annotation seem a concession. During
those early battles - over the sale of Awacs planes to Saudi Arabia in 1981, for
example, or the stationing of troops in Lebanon in 1982 - key unhappy
legislators would be invited to assist in the glossing of a text, or to help
''negotiate'' words of apparent qualification in a Presidential letter.

For all the heightened arcana about third world debt and multilateral
development that accompany the job at the Treasury Department, Mr. Darman's
basic technique there remains the same as it was in the White House. He tackles
a problem first by mastering its special glossary, word by word, book by book.
''I've always tried to get myself to a position where, if possible, I could get
to know as much or more than anyone else in the room on whatever was the issue
of substance,'' he says.

As he studies, he lingers beyond the scrim of partisanship, listening to the
actors' words, trying to uncover common ground by negotiating, suggesting,
manipulating, shifting words to make them finally agreeable.

''The trick,'' he says ''is to arrange a context in which several competing
politicians can step forward together to simultaneously share what credit and
blame there is for something that's going to at least be ambiguous.''

In conversation, Richard Darman is always attempting a fresh metaphor to explain
the experience of strategizing and negotiating that obviously gives joy to his
life. He compares political compromise, in a favorite current analogy, to a game
of pinball. ''You put a ball in play with a ballistic shot and now your world is
filled with all kinds of bumpers and random possibilities,'' he says. ''But the
important thing is, the flippers are in your control. It's bump and flip, bump
and flip, a convoluted approach to the goal.'' Crafty flipper nudges are the
stuff of his dreams; incremental improvement constitutes the art of
self-government for him.

Mr. Darman dismisses as simplistic the notion that a politician sets, aims
squarely, and fires directly at his target. His deliberate allowance for
accident, serendipity and compromise in politics can annoy conservative
ideologues. ''There are a lot of people who are naturally attracted to what I
call premature certainty,'' he says, masking the mockery of conservative rivals
in which, in private conversation, he has been known to indulge.

Occasional, reasonable accommodation might not be controversial in another
Administration. But James Baker and Richard Darman regularly reinvent it for the
ostensibly purist President as if it were the wheel. Mr. Reagan, for all the
prodding from supporters on the right, has not yet complained about their
''pragmatism.''

'' 'Pragmatist' may be a dirty word to some,'' observes Treasury Secretary
Baker, ''but the success of any President requires translating phi-losophy into
action, and Dick has done a lot to help with strategies.''

In a way, Mr. Baker may haunt Mr. Darman as much as help him. Some critics feel
that, whatever his brilliance, Mr. Darman's shortcoming is in the personal,
social side of politicking that is Mr. Baker's forte. Richard Darman is a very
smart man, and does not hesitate to show it; a Senate leader accustomed to
dealing with him even coined the term ''Darmanesque'' to describe someone too
clever by half at politics. His cleverness, tinged with vanity, can lead him to
be cutting in personal contacts.

''If I ever run into Darman in a working-class bar I'll knock him on his rump,''
a White House worker was once heard muttering sarcastically on the driveway of
the Executive Mansion after a dressing down in Mr. Darman's office over a
relatively petty misstatement of his title, a touchy issue for the Deputy
Treasury Secretary. In humble comment, Mr. Darman says only that he still learns
a lot from politics and works on his shortcomings.

But several who know him believe Mr. Darman's pride serves him well. ''Vanity
reflects a desire to make a mark,'' says former Attorney General Elliot
Richardson, an early Darman mentor. Adds Mr. Richardson: ''For sheer
intellectual capacity, I'd rate Darman at the top of all the bright young people
I've worked with.'' Another friend says: ''They'll tell you his ego is every bit
as big as his intellect, and I'll tell that's not a bad combination for
surviving in this town.''

I N EXPLAINING HIS appetite for analyzing and mediating conflict, Richard Darman
roams all the way back to childhood competition with three close siblings in a
stable, ''moderately affluent'' family rooted in three generations of New
England textile and industry management. Eastern Establishment in a way that few
Reaganites are, Mr. Darman was ideal for the undergraduate life at Harvard
College, and then at the business school, in the 1960's, when some of the best
and brightest schemes of modern government technocracy were invented.

Mr. Darman, however, recalls that the great lesson at Harvard for him was
visceral, not analytical. It was outside the classroom, in Harvard Yard, the day
alumnus John F. Kennedy returned in triumph as the President-elect of the United
States, a model of wit and success before the staring freshman. Mr. Darman
remembers being struck with the sense that government could involve moral and
esthetic virtue.

Beneath the thickening crust of experience, Mr. Darman still believes in John
Kennedy's vision. ''One of the nice things about the field of public policy is
that one is trying to deal with . . .'' He pauses, almost apologetically, but
continues, '' . . . with the Good, which is one of man's ancient higher
interests.''

The idealism is uttered gently by a man otherwise cynical about government. Mr.
Darman joined the Nixon Administration's Department of Health, Education and
Welfare in 1970, where he became close to H.E.W. Secretary Elliot Richardson. In
1973, when Mr. Richardson was named Attorney General, Mr. Darman followed him to
the Justice Department. He served on the department's strategy team 12 1/2 years
ago when the felony conviction and resignation of Vice President Spiro T. Agnew
were negotiated. He still savors the stratagem he helped to construct to insure
that the Vice President departed clearly culpable, with a felony conviction, but
also quickly, with a simple plea, enabling a credible successor to be sworn in
before President Nixon's Watergate crisis exploded. ''It was creative
problem-solving,'' Mr. Darman recalls with pleasure.

Less than two weeks later, Mr. Darman was forced to join Mr. Richardson in the
''Saturday Night Massacre,'' the resignations that resulted from the Attorney
General's resistance to President Nixon in the Watergate investigation.

Mr. Darman prides himself on thinking so far ahead in the Washington flow that
he is never surprised. But the ''massacre'' was his one moment of pure shock in
government service. ''For us to get out of our own office - the office of the
Attorney General! - we had to be searched by F.B.I. agents who supposedly worked
for the Attorney General,'' he says. ''So weird, leaving Government for doing
what you think is right, like some political prisoner. . . . It seemed so
totally un-American, like a parody of a police state. ''

His reminiscence is not bit-ter; rather, the memory of the ''massacre'' serves
to bolster Darman's faith in the value of political conflict. ''What's wrong
with conflict?'' he asks. ''In our system, there is no practical threat that
someone is going to be able to impose his or her value system on the society
without plenty of conflict.''

Mr. Darman professes disinterest in the power chase that feeds so much
Washington conflict. ''It's too easy to get caught up in the notion that this
culture tends to reinforce, that we really are as powerful as some people choose
to pretend,'' he says. Actually, power is ''exceedingly diffused, and that's
very good.''

Friends say his stated wariness about power stems in part from the influence of
his wife and the mother of their two young sons, Kathleen Emmet. An author with
a doctorate in English literature and a Garboesque reputation for avoiding the
Government social mill, she is said to challenge, occasionally and privately,
her husband's role in the Reagan Administration's inner sanctum. She declined to
be interviewed, but Mr. Darman concedes, ''She makes sure there is a corrective
skepticism toward this whole world of so-called power culture and toward
elements of its hypocrisy.''

Mr. Darman's actions concerning power may be more revealing than his words. His
appetite for high Government service remains unflagging, say his friends, and he
maintains workaholic days long after many early members of the Reagan
Administration have relaxed their pace in the second term, or retreated to
business lunches and memoir writing. He continues carefully to build his way in
cyclical Republican incumbencies toward an eventual full Cabinet post or two, in
the British careerist manner, much like his early employer and role model,
Elliot Richardson.

F OR ALL HIS DISPAS-sionate pragmatism, Richard Darman in private conversation
is one of the few Reagan staff members who sounds as fervid as the President in
his belief that patriotic symbols can transcend politics.

''The thing is, we all live in this educated, cynical world and culture in the
Northeast corridor. But in many ways, America really is about morning, about
spring,'' he says, echoing the commercials of the Reagan re-elec-tion campaign.
''If a society starts to get cynical about itself, it will turn out to be
self-fulfilling. I think that's part of the European malaise.''

Such sentiments emerge not from some old-boy member of Ronald Reagan's ''kitchen
cabinet,'' but from the Harvard pragmatist who figures that voters discern
character more than issues in a campaign. At a certain point, he says, intuition
carries the day in politics, in both the voting booth and the strategist's
arena.

''There's something very positive about America's naive hope,'' says Mr. Darman.
''It has to be constrained with realism. . . . But realism without the romance
turns cynical, negative, and ultimately self-destructive.''

This intuitive truth about politics was sensed clearly by Mr. Darman when, in
the Harvard Yard, he watched President-elect John F. Kennedy come through,
carrying with him the promise of what he would call, in his Inaugural Address, a
''revolution of hope.''

''There is a tie between Kennedy and Reagan,'' Mr. Darman contends, as he sits
in his office, pad and pencil in hand. ''For years as a society we were still
coming out of the post-Kennedy-assassination confusion. . . . There were the
disappointments of Lyndon Johnson and the Great Society, the disappointment of
Vietnam; the soul-searching, where America was not clear about what its role in
the world was supposed to be, not clear about the possibilities for effective
action; the ambivalence about the strength of the executive branch that grew out
of Watergate.''

Even President Reagan's critics should admit that he has restored executive
action, asserts Mr. Darman. But his explanation of Mr. Reagan's success has
nothing to do with technocratic know-how, nor strategic wordcraft, nor even with
the art of compromise. Instead, his reasoning touches something tribal,
something primal.

''Kennedy was shot and died. . . .'' says Mr. Darman slowly. ''Reagan was shot
and survived. It personified the restoration of this notion of the possible.''

At this, Richard Darman is jotting a tiny diagram on a pad, as if a solution is
getting clearer after a long night. But his eyes seem wide with the implication
of what is at the heart of politics: not strategy so much as national ritual.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Richard Darman in front of the Treasury (NYT/Jose Lopez);
Photo of Darman conferring with President Reagan (The White House) (Page 36)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: NONFICTION;
TACTICS IN 3-D

BYLINE: By Ronald Bailey

SECTION: Section 7; Page 17, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 236 words


Conventional maps have always made it difficult for armchair historians to
understand the problems that terrain imposes on military leaders. In John
Macdonald's lavishly illustrated volume, GREAT BATTLEFIELDS OF THE WORLD
(Macmillan, $35), computer technology has created 9 1/2-by-12-inch
three-dimensional maps of 30 famous battlefields that provide a much-enhanced
perspective of the locales in which these battles were fought. Details such as
troop and weapons deployment, ground cover and towns and villages have been
superimposed onto each of these computer-generated maps. At their best the
illustrations provide a helicopter's eye-view of a battlefield. But not all
achieve this effect. The military encounters included span the centuries, from
Hannibal's brilliant victory over the Romans at Cannae in 216 B.C. to the defeat
of the French in Vietnam at Dienbienphu in 1954. Mr. Macdonald briefly examines
the social and political problems that led to each clash and analyzes the
tactics used by each side. Readers will wonder why some battles were omitted.
For example, it is hard to believe that the World War II battle at Kohima in
Burma - though a gallant struggle by a British force outnumbered ten to one by
the Japanese -was as significant as Stalingrad or Vicksburg, which are both
absent from this volume. Nevertheless, this is a visually stunning book that
military history buffs should enjoy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOTED WITH PLEASURE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 902 words


Short Pants, Long Career One thinks of Count Basie, the late pianist and band
leader, as sophisticated and dapper in his dress. In his autobiography, we find
him playing the piano in a dance hall while still wearing short pants. This is
from ''Good Morning Blues'' (Random House), with Albert Murray.

In those days you wore short pants, knee breeches, or sailor-boy pants until you
were in your teens. I don't remember exactly how old I was when I got my first
pair of long pants. But I was already playing some dances when I was still in
short pants. Sometimes we used to have to make up some sort of excuse to get me
into some of the places, because I was too young. Back during the time when I
was running around with Sonny Greer, sometimes he used to let me help him carry
part of his drum set so I could get into the dance hall to play. A Flower and a
Marine Here's a Marine second lieutenant finishing up a three-day patrol in
Vietnam by meditating on a flower and Gertrude Stein. He is one of many
unexpected voices in ''Dear America: Letters Home From Vietnam'' (Pocket Books),
edited by Bernard Edelman.

This morning, my platoon and I were finishing up a three-day patrol. Struggling
over steep hills covered with hedgerows, trees, and generally impenetrable
jungle, one of my men turned to me and pointed a hand, filled with cuts and
scratches, at a rather distinguished-looking plant with soft red flowers waving
gaily in the downpour (which had been going on ever since the patrol began) and
said, ''That is the first plant I have seen today which didn't have thorns on
it.'' I immediately thought of you.

The plant, and the hill upon which it grew, was also representative of Vietnam.
It is a country of thorns and cuts, of guns and marauding, of little hope and of
great failure. Yet in the midst of it all, a beautiful thought, gesture, and
even person can arise among it waving bravely at the death that pours down upon
it. Some day this hill will be burned by napalm, and the red flower will crackle
up and die among the thorns. So what was the use of it living and being a beauty
among the beasts, if it must, in the end, die because of them and with them?
This is a question which is answered by Gertrude Stein's ''A rose is a rose is a
rose.'' You are what you are what you are. . . . The flower will always live in
the memory of a tired, wet Marine, and has thus achieved a sort of immortality.
Double Dead Donne John Donne was an argumentative poet and here, in ''The
Expiration,'' we see him characteristically quarreling with love and fate in a
tight conundrum. This is from ''The Oxford Book of Short Poems,'' edited by P.
J. Kavanagh and James Michie. So, so, break off this last lamenting kiss, Which
sucks two souls, and vapours both, away; Turn thou, ghost, that way, and let me
turn this, And let ourselves benight our happiest day. We asked none leave to
love, nor will we owe Any so cheap a death as saying, Go. Go; and if that word
have not quite killed thee, Ease me with death by bidding me go too. Oh, if it
have, let my word work on me, And a just office on a murderer do. Except it be
too late to kill me so, Being double dead: going, and bidding go. Values Falling
Like Dew Frenchmen love to offer definitions of themselves, and no one does it
better than Jean-Paul Sartre. In ''On Living in an Old Country'' (Verso/
Schocken) by Patrick Wright, Sartre is rather flattering, for a leftist, to the
bourgeoisie.

In a bourgeois society it is the constant movement of people, the collective
currents, the styles, the customs, all these things, that in effect create
values. The value of poems, of furniture, of houses, of landscapes derives in
large part from the spontaneous condensations that fall on these objects like a
light dew; they are strictly national and result from the normal functioning of
a traditionalist and historical society. To be a Frenchman is not merely to have
been born in France, to vote and pay taxes; it is above all to have the use and
sense of these values. And when a man shares in their creation, he is some
degree reassured about himself; he has a justification for existence through a
sort of adhesion to the whole of society. To know how to appreciate a piece of
Louis Seize furniture, the delicacy of a saying by Chamfort, a landscape of the
Ile de France, a painting by Claude Lorraine, is to affirm and to feel that one
belongs to French society; it is to renew a tacit social contract with all
members of that society. In one stroke the vague contingency of our existence
vanishes and gives way to the necessity of an existence by right. Every
Frenchman who is moved by reading Villon or by looking at the Palace of
Versailles becomes a public functionary and the subject of imprescriptible
rights. If Horses Don't Eat It It's one of the virtues of baseball that the
frequent pauses in a game lend themselves to speculation and wit. Here are some
examples from ''Baseball Wit'' (Crown), edited by Bill Adler.

If horses don't eat it, I don't want to play on it. (Richie Allen, infielder,
about artificial turf.) Fans don't boo nobodies. (Reggie Jackson.) He threw me
his arms, his elbow, his foot, and his wrist, everything but the ball. The next
thing I knew, he threw the ball. (Eddie Yost, infielder, on Satchel Paige's
deceptive motion.) He has the personality of a tree trunk. (John Stearns,
catcher, about Dave Kingman.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NORMALIZING RELATIONS SERVES OUR INTERESTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 151 words


To the Editor:

John Balaban persuasively argues for normalizing relations with Vietnam (Op-Ed,
Feb. 3). The case he makes is equally cogent for Cuba, Albania, Mongolia and
North Korea.

Basic diplomatic principle supports relations with all established states but
posits that neither relations nor recognition implies love of these states nor
sanctioning of what they do. Our President described the Soviet Union as an
''evil empire,'' but even he advocates increasing, not breaking, relations with
Russia. We neither love nor trust Moscow, but few are so foolish as to advocate
not dealing with it.

Nonrecognition of Vietnam and Cuba and complete lack of relations with Mongolia,
Albania and North Korea, all long-established states, serves the cause of
unnecessary hostility and misunderstanding, not the national interests of any
responsible nation. GREGORY HENDERSON Bedford, Mass., Feb. 3, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 18, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMIC FORECASTS BRIGHTER AS RESULT OF OIL PRICE SLUMP

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1328 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 17


Prospects for the nation's economy this year, which many experts found troubling
as recently as a month ago, have abruptly brightened with the sharp decline in
oil prices.

Almost daily now, Government and business gauges of the economy's performance
spew out encouraging statistics showing faster growth, lower inflation and
stable interest rates - all pointing to a stronger and healthier year than
analysts were predicting as 1986 began.

Even more important, some economists say the country may be positioned to return
to the kind of recession-free, low-inflation conditions it last enjoyed in the
late 1950's and early 1960's, before spending for the Vietnam War and the
soaring oil prices of the 1970's knocked the economy off balance.

''The Boom Begins,'' says the February newsletter sent out to investors by
Richard A. Levine of Sanford C. Bernstein Inc., a Wall Street firm.

''Six months ago,'' said Richard B. Hoey, chief economist at Drexel Burnham
Lambert Inc., ''I thought that we might have a recession in 1987. But I've
changed that. I think we could have six years of growth right through 1988.''

Reagan Administration economists, who have been at pains to defend their
predictions of vigorous 4 percent growth this year, following a sluggish 2.3
percent gain last year, now wonder if their new figure is too low. ''We haven't
even begun to see the effects of the drop in oil prices,'' said Robert Ortner,
the Commerce Department's chief economist. ''That may very well assure the 4
percent growth, and I think better than 4 percent is possible.''

The Administration has been predicting a slight rise in inflation, to an annual
rate just under 4 percent. To many economists, that figure also now seems too
pessimistic.

Wharton Econometrics, a forecasting firm in Philadelphia, says the $8-a-barrel
cut in oil prices - from $25 late last year to about $17 now - will lop a full
percentage point from the rise in the Consumer Price Index it had been expecting
for this year. As a result, Wharton says, inflation this year should be just 2.8
percent.

The brighter scenario, many economists say, means better job prospects than
expected, more money for consumers to save and spend and for business to invest
in new factories, more gains in the stock and bond markets and generally a more
prosperous and healthy economy.

They say it also means narrower Federal budget deficits and fewer of the
wrenching shifts in economic policy that Government agencies -the Federal
Reserve Board, in particular - have adopted in recent years to curb inflation.
Most economists expect the Federal Reserve to try to keep interest rates right
about where they are or let them dip a bit.

Some Offsetting Factors

All of the economists cautiously qualify their optimism. The still-growing
record deficit in the nation's balance of trade and an enormous burden of
business and consumer debt, for example, hang over the economy, hurting some
businesses and keeping interest rates from declining much more. And a few who
predict a full-blown boom, rather than strong but restrained growth, also
predict a sharp slowdown next year.

Some economists add that this month's rush of positive reports on inflation,
unemployment, growth and production may be a fluke - the reward of winter
weather unusually conducive to shopping and construction.

And they hasten to note acute difficulties in regions such as Texas and the
Middle Western farm belt for some economic sectors, including agriculture,
banking and energy. Many of these sectors are suffering from the backlash of
forces that helped them prosper earlier: high interest rates, high inflation and
soaring prices of real estate and commodities, including oil.

Nearly all analysts, whatever their reservations, expect a better year now than
they did before. Mr. Levine of the Bernstein firm says the economy could grow an
extraordinary 7 percent this year - faster even than in 1983 and the first half
of 1984 while it was bursting out of the 1981-82 recession.

Changes Made in Forecast

Data Resources Inc., a large economic forecasting concern in Lexington, Mass.,
anticipated a year of anemic 1.9 percent growth when it issued its forecast in
December. But prospects seem brighter to this firm, too. Now it is predicting
2.3 percent growth with lower consumer-price inflation, at 3.2 percent, and
lower interest rates than it expected earlier.

''We have been revising the figures steadily in the last six months because of
the oil situation, and I suspect we're going to go still higher,'' said Robert
Gough, senior economist at Data Resources. ''Most of the economic news of the
last couple of weeks has clearly been on the bright side.''

A relative pessimist is Stephen S. Roach, economist for Morgan Stanley &
Company, the investment banking organization. He calls ''oil a clear positive,''
but he says manufacturing industries and factory wages have gained little ground
lately. So he expects growth of about 3 percent this year - the same as the
consensus of most private economists until a few weeks ago. The consensus now
appears to be shifting to about 3.5 percent.

Economists also differ in the confidence they place in the commitment of the
Administration and Congress to reduce Federal budget deficits and in whether
they expect the Federal Reserve to try to thwart a return of inflation by
pushing up interest rates and thereby slowing the economy.

Budget Prospects Studied

But here, too, analysts find less to fear than they did a few weeks ago. The
budget deficits were already showing signs of some shrinkage before the drop in
oil prices.

Faster economic growth, which lifts Federal tax revenues and slows spending for
such purposes as unemployment aid, should help reduce the deficit further. This
help from an accelerating economy, the analysts say, should make it easier for
Congress to deal with the new Gramm-Rudman-Hollings budget-balancing law.

The Federal Reserve, too, could see less need to raise interest rates.
Increasing rates might force the dollar's international value back up, which
neither the Federal Reserve nor the Administrtation desires. Higher interest
rates also would aggravate the loan-repayment difficulties of debtor countries,
especially Mexico, which is under new pressure because of its slump in imcome
from oil exports.

Normally the Federal Reserve might also worry that declining interest rates, by
encouraging a lower dollar, would tend to cause higher inflation. A cheaper
dollar contributes to inflation by raising the prices Americans must pay for
imported goods.

Deflation for Commodities

But some economists say the economy continues to experience disinflation (a
slower rate of price increases) and is even experiencing actual deflation
(falling prices) in major commodities, among them oil. Although the Federal
Reserve welcomes disinflation, economists say, it worries about bankruptcies and
foreclosures among businesses and banks with operations tied to commodity
prices.

Last week the Federal Reserve received some evidence of deflation. The
Government reported a decline of seven-tenths of 1 percent in its Producer Price
Index for January.

Given those concerns, economists see little reason for the Federal Reserve to
push up interest rates, and they see a possibility that it might let them drop
slightly.

''The decline in oil prices is occurring in combination with the decline in the
dollar,'' said Mr. Hoey of Drexel Burnham Lambert. ''That offsets the decline in
oil prices. So why should the Fed tighten?''

Oil exerts much of the same enormous power over the economy today that it did in
the 1970's when prices expoloded. Nariman Behravesh, Wharton's chief economist,
said oil and related energy costs, such as coal, gasoline and electrical power,
account for about 10 percent of consumer spending. As prices decline, consumers
and businesses can spend some of that money for purposes other than energy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 18, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AFGHAN WAR, AFTER 6 YEARS, BECOMES A SOVIET FACT OF LIFE

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1724 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 17


After six years, the Afghan war has begun coming home.

The outlines may be hazy - the size of the Soviet force, the scale of the
fighting, the casualties and the Western reports of Soviet atrocities are not
widely known here, or are dismissed as Western propaganda. Yet in conversations
with Russians the war has become more familiar and tangible.

Although the Soviet Union has made no statistics public, hundreds of thousands
of Soviet youths, most of them draftees, are known to have gone and returned
from the dusty and dangerous mountains to the south. Thousands have been wounded
and killed. Some have returned crippled, some troubled.

Ways to Beat the Draft

High school seniors compare notes on ways to beat the draft while their mothers
talk openly of their fears. Television broadcasts and newspapers carry reports
of heroic feats and imperialist-backed bandits. But in the streets the talk is
of danger, hashish and death. Many a Russian knows where there is a gravestone
with the legend, ''Killed fulfilling his internationalist duty.''

A new slang has evolved - Afghanistan is ''tam,'' ''over there,'' and ''Afghan''
is the soldier who fought there. The rebels are ''contras,'' after the rebels in
Nicaragua, or ''dushmans,'' for a Tadzhik word meaning ''opponent, foe,'' to
which the Russians now ascribe the meaning of ''bandit.''

''The war is not a social problem for us, the way Vietnam was for you,'' one
Moscow writer said. ''But it definitely has become a social reality. Everybody
has heard how bad it can be over there, and nobody wants to go.''

Education Deferments Scarce

Although the figures are not made public, most people seem to agree that
education deferments from the draft have become all but impossible to get.
Draft-age youths speak with impressive erudition of medical deferments and army
units to avoid. One youth described how a classmate tried to feign madness,
begging the draft board to send him to Afghanistan so he could start killing.

There are haunting echoes here, yet little in the Soviet attitude toward
Afghanistan can compare with the American anguish over Vietnam. No public
opposition here, no mass doubts, not even graffiti on the walls. The long habit
of entrusting such matters to the Government, the shared sense of threat from
abroad and the tight control on information have evidently combined to block
most domestic dissent.

Warring Against 'Imperialists'

In official accounts the Soviet force in Afghanistan remains a ''limited
contingent'' doing its ''internationalist duty'' in an ''undeclared war'' begun
by Western imperialism through reactionary rebels. Even news dispatches about
the fighting bear the dateline ''With the Limited Contingent of Soviet Forces in
Afghanistan.''

Still, the Soviet coverage of the war has abandoned the early description of
dedicated soldiers giving purely humanitarian assistance. Accounts these days
talk of combat missions and pitched battles. In Geneva during the summit
meeting, a Soviet official acknowledged that Soviet casualties were on the
increase, although numbers have never been disclosed.

And the press has slowly come to publicize a domestic side to the war.

One recent report in Komsomolskaya Pravda, the paper of the Young Communist
Youth League, was strikingly different from anything written before. It told the
story of Anatoly, a veteran who had returned to Togliatti, an industrial city on
the Volga, profoundly affected by his service in Afghanistan, racked with guilt
for having survived and furious at the complacency, greed and shallowness he
found back home.

A Purified Warrior

It was a profile with distinct echoes of ''Coming Home,'' ''The Deer Hunter,''
even ''Rambo.'' The story presented Anatoly not as a victim of the war, but
rather as a young man whose vision had been purified by the experience.

In Afghanistan, Anatoly was overwhelmed by the poverty, the brutality, the
resignation of the peasants, the violence. He watched a girl die of hunger, and
was horrified at his helplessness. He was wounded, and several times came close
to death.

''He says that now one of the most frightening things for him is the approach of
night,'' wrote Aleksandr Drobotov, a criminal investigator who wrote the account
of a meeting with Anatoly. ''The distractions and concerns of the day fly off,
and he is left alone with his thoughts and his conscience.''

''He thinks that he was not always brave enough, that often he should have been
killed, but always someone bolder than he was at his side,'' the account
continued. ''And now he carries out his self-imposed sentence. He was second in
battle, he believes, and must now live for those who were first and stayed there
forever.''

'Pay the Bandits Back'

''To this day Anatoly believes he did not have time to fully pay the bandits
back. Already then he formed in his soul the distinction between 'us' and
'them,' or rather 'us' and 'the contras.' And as a rule, the contras had to be
destroyed, or there would be another string of deaths, new grief.''

Returning home, Anatoly was appalled at the clamoring after blue jeans and music
cassettes, the black marketeers and drunkards that now seemed almost a
desecration of the suffering he had seen. In his mind, the corrupt became the
new contras.

He had come to Mr. Drobotov to demand punishment for a black marketeer whose
case the investigator had just dropped for lack of evidence, and he threatened
to dispense justice himself if the authorities would not.

The investigator learned that there were others with Anatoly. ''It was easier
for them together,'' Mr. Drobotov wrote. ''They found several others who had
served 'Over There.' They meet at agreed places, they talk about the past,
train, keep up their skills. They decided that too many contras -thieves,
parasites - had sprouted, and that the Government would only gain if they dealt
with the contras themselves.''

Investigator Is Awed

The meeting, Mr. Drobotov wrote, profoundly affected him. Though he tried to
explain to Anatoly the dangers of vigilantism, he found himself in awe of the
veteran. ''He brought that purity from the ringing revolutionary spring of
Afghanistan, of which most of us have only the most distant perception,'' the
investigator wrote.

The stark figure of Anatoly and the sympathy expressed for him in the pages of
Komsomolskaya Pravda seemed to introduce a new figure into the coverage of the
war. And instead of analyzing his problem the paper seemed to sympathize with
his position.

No other newpapers have carried anything similar to the story of Anatoly. But
accounts have come to light about the plight of veterans of the Afghanistan war.

The newspaper Sovetskaya Rossiya wrote sympathetically some time ago about a
disabled veteran who was set upon for cutting to the front of a ticket queue, as
is the right of disabled war veterans, by people who thought he was ''too young
to have fought in the war,'' apparently meaning World War II. The army newspaper
Krasnaya Zvezda, by contrast, wrote critically of a 20-year-old soldier who
found it difficult to return to ordinary life after Afghanistan, and would not
be satisfied with the benefits and gratuities offered him.

Rise of the Draft Evader

Last month, Krasnaya Zvezda broke new ground by touching on one of the more
senstive new realities, draft evasion. The newspaper, published by the military,
focused on the city of Vladivostok in the Soviet Far East, but it was clear that
the article addressed a widespread problem.

It described a conscript who refused to enter the army even after spending a
year in labor camp for draft evasion. Another had tried to avoid service by
presenting a false medical certificate prepared by a friendly doctor. Yet
another used connections in high places to stave off conscription. One young man
avoided the draft because a cooperative theater hired him and immediately sent
him off on a long tour.

''The cases cited are not typical of our life, of course,'' Krasnaya Zvezda
wrote. ''But we cannot close our eyes to them since whatever else, they have an
adverse influence on a certain section of young people and undermine their
belief that the law is the same for one and all.''

The paper complained that law enforcement agencies frequently brushed aside the
military's request for enforcement, and did little against enterprises like the
theater that cooperated with draft evaders. The article made no reference to
Afghanistan, but it was evident that the source of the problem was there.

Defense of the Homeland

Newspapers also have begun going beyond the standard slogan ''internationalist
duty'' to explain the Soviet presence in Afghanistan. Heroes of the war are
frequently depicted in news reports as direct descendants of World War II
heroes, and invocations of patriotism and national security have become common
in official discussions of the war.

Responding to a question in Komsomolskaya Pravda recently, a World War II
veteran drew a direct connection between the war and defending the homeland.

''There, in Afghanistan, our warriors, fulfilling their internationalist duty,
are also defending their Ukrainian, Siberian, Kazakh homes,'' wrote the veteran,
Gen. F. Makhayev.

It may not be a wholly convincing argument. But it is one that speaks of a
commitment to see the war through to an end. Whatever reluctance there may be
about serving in Afghanistan, or however skeptical they may be about the
official accounts, most Russians seem to take it for granted that Soviet forces
will stay in Afghanistan until it is pacified, as they did in the Caucasus and
in Central Asia. 19th-Century Yiddish Stories Are Printed by Soviet Union The
Soviet Union has brought out a collection of the 19th-century works of Mendele
Moikher Sforim, one of the classic writers in Yiddish literature, according to
Tass, the Soviet Government press agency.

The collection, which is being reissued in Russian, is being published on the
occasion of the 150th anniversary of the writer's birthday; he lived from 1836
to 1917.

Mendele Moikher Sforim, who wrote mainly in the 1860's and 1870's, sought to
modernize Eastern European Jews by mocking what he considered their
unworldliness and piety and what he viewed as their obsolete system of educating
their children.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 18, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CHANCE ENCOUNTER LED TO WORLD WAR II NOVEL

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 718 words


Richard Wiley's first novel, ''Soldiers in Hiding,'' has been acclaimed for its
realistic descriptions of World War II's Pacific Theater, although the author, a
member of the postwar generation, was born just a few months before Japan
surrendered.

Mr. Wiley, however, like the Japanese-American narrator of his novel, Teddy
Maki, has lived and worked on several of the world's continents. He spent time
with the Peace Corps in a small Korean fishing village, and later went to study
Japanese in Tokyo, where he met his future wife, Gigi.

''And I also met someone else there who eventually would become the hero of my
novel,'' said Mr. Wiley, who lives in Tacoma, Wash. ''He was a
Japanese-American, a musician, who ended up drafted into the Japanese Army. He
had gone over there from Los Angeles before Pearl Harbor and couldn't get out.
He spent the whole war in China, but nothing much happened to him. Afterward, he
lost his American citizenship. That happened to at least a dozen
Japanese-Americans, but he was the only one I knew. Met him in school in Tokyo
-he was one of my teachers. I spent a lot of time with the guy, I liked him a
lot. He was about 70 years old at the time and died four or five years ago.

'Fighting Own Countrymen'

''What happened to him, the divided life he was forced to endure, remained fixed
in my head,'' he said. ''The idea of a guy stranded abroad, fighting against his
own countrymen. So when I got down to writing fiction, I thought of him again.
Of course, the character patterned after him has more adventures. My character
is sent to the Philippines, the scene of a lot of combat with guerrillas and
Americans. He tries to disengage. Years afterward, he is haunted by the death of
his friend, another American jazz musician in Japanese uniform. And he ends up a
star on Japanese television.''

After a few years of listening to Mr. Wiley tell his stories, his
Philippine-born wife persuaded him to get started on a novel. He wrote three
short stories in 1972, submitted them to the University of Iowa Writers
Workshop, got accepted in 1974, and spent two years in Iowa City writing
fiction. ''I had a great time there, studying with writers like Vance Bourjaily
and Leonard Michaels, and others passing through, including E. L. Doctorow and
John Irving,'' he said. Afterward, he went to Lagos, Nigeria, as a school
administrator for several years.

While ''Soldiers in Hiding'' is Mr. Wiley's first published work, it was the
third novel he wrote. His first unpublished novel, set in Korea, was called
''Festival for Three Thousand Maidens.'' ''It was based on a time hundreds of
years ago when the purity of Korean maidens was challenged after a Chinese
invasion,'' he said. ''The publishers that turned it down said it had a nice
feeling of energy and some wonderful scenes.''

Alaska Gold-Rush Tale

His second unpublished novel, ''Fool's Gold,'' was about the Alaska gold rush.
''My grandmother had run a general store there and had also sold baths - yes,
baths - to the miners,'' he said. ''It was turned down by 30 publishers. One
editor accepted it for $1,200, I went out and bought the champagne, but then his
editor in chief said no. Close, but no cigar.''

Mr. Wiley started to write ''Soldiers in Hiding'' in 1978. He said he went down
different roads, took wrong turns and polished it before it was finally accepted
by Joyce Johnson at Atlantic Monthly Press. ''Her editorial help was
magnificent,'' he said. Mr. Wiley is now writing a novel tentatively called
''Small Crimes of the Nineteen-Sixties,'' about Americans in Africa.

To reach Mr. Wiley by telephone, a curious reader must interrupt his wanderings
around the schools of Tacoma. To support his fiction - and also because he
believes in what he is doing as a teacher and administrator - Mr. Wiley works
for a living.

His imposing job title is bilingual coordinator for the Tacoma Public Schools.
That includes 45 schools, with 5 high schools, and a concentration on a dozen
schools where bilingual education is a must for the refugee students who
originally came from Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam to the State of Washington as a
result of the Vietnam War's dislocations.

He is still on the job as a bilingual educator while writing his second -or is
it his fourth? - novel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Richard Wiley (Gili Wiley)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 19, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DONORS TO NEEDIEST CITE HOPE

BYLINE: By JOHN T. McQUISTON

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 193 words


Hope for a better life for the homeless, the ill and the despairing is cited by
many donors to the 74th annual appeal of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.

Marlene Taussig of White Plains sent a gift of $10 ''for a better life for the
many unfortunate souls in our metropolis.''

From Lewisburg, Pa., came a check for $250 from Janet C. Weis, and a note,
saying, ''It seems to me that giving is really quite selfish because it always
gives me such a great pleasure.''

Raymond E. Graglia of Bradley Beach, N.J., sent $5, with a request that the
''donation be directed to homeless Vietnam vets.''

Contributions to the fund, both large and small, continue to arrive from around
the country, although the 74th annual drive officially ends Feb. 28.
Contributions after that date will be added to the 75th fund drive. The proceeds
of the fund are distributed throughout the year by eight private social agencies
to individuals and families in need in the metropolitan area.

Donations have also arrived from trusts and foundations. Among them was a check
for $1,000 from the Dover Fund, representing a gift from Lionel and Suzanne
Pincus of Manhattan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 20, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Congress;
The Global Village: A Case in Point

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1101 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


Senator Thad Cochran, a Mississippi Republican, was part of the American team
that monitored the Philippine elections two weeks ago. When he returned home he
was stunned to find how many constituents were aware of those elections and
wanted to express concern about the outcome.

''The story had dominated the news for two weeks,'' the Senator said. ''I think
the concentration by the media on the election - the opportunity the American
people had to see it on TV and read about it in the papers - stirred up interest
throughout the country in what happened there.''

To many lawmakers, the Philippine election provides a case study, much as did
the civil rights movement and the war in Vietnam, of how intensive press
coverage of events can influence the voting public and, in turn, the reactions
of Congress.

In this view, there is a direct link between the dramatic television accounts of
the Philippine election campaign and the resolution adopted today by the Senate
to condemn ''widespread fraud'' on the part of President Ferdinand E. Marcos.

Only nine senators opposed the resolution, and virtually no one on Capitol Hill
is willing to defend Mr. Marcos's handling of the election, although some still
say that despite his faults, he is the leader best suited to defend the country
against a growing Communist insurgency.

''Marcos has been revealed by the media as a gruff, tyrannical autocrat,'' said
Senator Jim Sasser, a Tennessee Democrat. ''The American people react to that,
and we react to them. It's gotten to the point that nobody wants to be
associated with the Marcos regime or say a kind word about them.''

Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who heads the
subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs, said of the Philippine election:
''It's another example of how TV creates a political reality of its own.''

A prime example of how this political reality can affect Congress was the
experience of Senator Richard G. Lugar, the Republican from Indiana who is
chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee. Mr. Lugar, who headed the
Philippine observer group, played down the issue of electoral fraud when he
first met with President Reagan last week to report his observtions.

But after Mr. Reagan said at a televised news conference that there might have
been fraud on both sides of the campaign, the public reaction was so fierce both
here and in the Philippines that Mr. Lugar felt compelled to contradict the
President's account of events.

Ordinarily, foreign policy issues do not inspire as much interest among the
electorate as domestic issues, except when they directly affect individual
voters, for instance a worker whose job is threatened by foreign trade
competition.

But politicians and policy-makers have learned that news coverage can
occasionally penetrate that cloud of indifference on foreign matters. Vivid
battle scenes from Vietnam, broadcast nightly on American television, helped
turn public opinion against Government policy in Southeast Asia.

''The Philippines are a lot like South Africa in 1985,'' Mr. Solarz said. ''It's
not just the unrest in South Africa; it's the fact that it is repeated every
week on TV that brought it home like never before.''

Many lawmakers said that television coverage of the Philippine balloting was
among the most extensive ever accorded a foreign election. ABC News and NBC News
both broadcast their evening news programs from Manila for several days, and CBS
News sent to cover the voting a team of experts that usually analyzes American
elections.

''They covered it almost like it was an American primary out in the
hinterlands,'' said Mark Helmke, an aide to Senator Lugar.

Confronted by the strong challenge of Corazon C. Aquino, Mr. Marcos was well
aware of the saturation coverage and used the networks to argue his case with
the American public. ''Marcos seemed to spend half of every working day on
American TV,'' Mr. Solarz said. But the Marcos public relations efforts were
overwhelmed by graphic scenes of fraud and violence. ''Here it was,'' said
Senator Bill Bradley, a New Jersey Democrat, ''right on the evening news and on
the front page of every newspaper: They kill their opponents!''

Mr. Helmke added that the Filipinos depicted on television were often
English-speaking, middle-class people with whom Americans could identify.
''People who looked like your mother were guarding the polling places and
standing up to the goons,'' he said.

Mr. Lugar's case showed how quickly the political climate can be changed by
television coverage. When he returned from Manila, the Indiana Republican was
summoned to the White House for a meeting with Mr. Reagan. His strategy, Mr.
Helmke said, was to stress to the President the positive side of the election
and indicate that a Marcos victory was not inevitable. ''In Lugar's view, we had
an opportunity to influence how the election might come out,'' Mr. Helmke said.

As part of that strategy, Mr. Lugar did not emphasize the problem of fraud in
the election. The Senator was afraid, Mr. Helmke said, that if the President
denounced the electoral process, he would give Mr. Marcos an excuse to nullify
the elections entirely.

Reagan's Now-Famous Statement

Senator Lugar left the White House thinking his strategy had worked, because the
Administration had agreed to send Philip C. Habib, the veteran diplomat, on an
emergency mission to the Philippines. But that night, at a news conference, Mr.
Reagan carefully avoided criticizing Mr. Marcos for the cases of fraud that
members of the official observer team had reported, and he then made his
now-famous statement that fraud could have been occurring on both sides of the
Philippine election.

Philippine television was devoting extraordinary coverage to developments in the
United States, and within hours, the President's comments had elicited a strong
reaction among Marcos opponents. By the next morning, Mr. Helmke said, the storm
of criticism had grown so heavy that Senator Lugar decided ''he had to come out
flatly and say the President was wrong.''

At the time, Mr. Helmke was concerned about Mr. Lugar's credibility and told
reporters that the Senator had actually witnessed more serious examples of fraud
than he had told the President about. Later, the spokesman insisted that Mr.
Lugar had ''pulled no punches'' with the President. But whatever was said
between the two men, Mr. Lugar's strategy was defeated by the President's words,
and the reaction of public opinion.

''In don't think anybody anticipated it working out quite that way,'' Mr. Helmke
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard Lugar

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

The Doctrine/Un-Doctrine of Covert/Overt Aid

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1047 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 20


In his 1985 State of the Union Message, President Reagan issued a call for
''support of freedom fighters'' who ''are risking their lives on every continent
from Afghanistan to Nicaragua to defy Soviet-supported aggression and secure
rights which have been ours from birth.''

Now the Reagan Administration is pushing to add weight to those words, known to
some as the Reagan Doctrine. It wants to resume covert military aid to
anti-Communist guerrillas in Nicaragua and Angola and to continue similar
programs elsewhere.

To its proponents, the Reagan approach represents an unusual fusion of power
politics and morality. To doubters, it is neither practical nor proper.

As a result, on Capitol Hill, in foreign policy journals and even within some
quarters of the Administration itself, the doctrine is stirring mounting debate.
For example, a House subcommittee today sharply criticized new military aid to
Angolan and Nicaraguan rebels.

Administration officials expect the ''freedom fighters'' and their Soviet-backed
adversaries to figure critically in the next summit conference between Mr.
Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, tentatively set for later this year.

''These regional issues will be as important as arms control on the agenda,'' a
high-ranking White House official said.

For all the prominence of the idea, Mr. Reagan and his top aides continue to
eschew calling what they are doing a doctrine.

'A Simple Proposition'

''We don't like to put labels on what is after all a simple proposition, that we
are helping peoples fighting for their freedom and laying the basis for
negotiated settlements,'' said the White House official.

Presidents Truman, Nixon and Carter offered up propositions about providing aid
to stop Communism and had no trouble seeing their pronouncements proclaimed as
doctrines. But in this case, top Administration officials do not seem to want to
be tied down to a specific label and commitment.

Nonetheless, other lower-level Administration officials and a claque of foreign
policy experts calling themselves neo-conservatives or neo-internationalists
have embraced it and elevated the words and actions to doctrinal status.

The core of the approach amounts to four covert programs:

* $250 million yearly for the last several years to Afghan guerrillas battling
mainly Soviet forces. These guerrillas are said to be holding their own against
increasing Soviet power.

* About $27 million in humanitarian aid last year to the guerrillas opposing the
Sandinista regime in Nicaragua, an amount Mr. Reagan wants increased to $100
million this year, including $70 million in military aid. Reports are that the
rebels have been losing ground in the last year.

* A request for $15 million, mostly in military aid, to the guerrilla leader
Jonas Savimbi who is fighting an Angolan government backed by Moscow and Cuba.
Stalemate continues here.

* $5 million yearly in economic aid to Cambodian groups trying without much
result to drive Vietnamese forces from Cambodia.

These programs are all covert in name only. The Administration appears to want
to retain that fig leaf partly for reasons of international etiquette and law
and partly to give itself room to maneuver on the amount of commitment.

The White House has been trying to extend the covert aid program since 1981,
initially because officials believed that the Soviet Union had military
superiority and therefore had to be kept off balance and bled in much the same
manner as the United States had been by such Soviet-sponsored wars of national
liberation as the Vietnam conflict.

Now, with Administration officials generally believing that Moscow is on the
defensive strategically, the rationale has shifted and covert aid is seen as
beneficial to negotiations and the selling of American values.

Secretary of State George P. Shultz provided the fullest exposition of the
doctrine in a speech last December. ''Diplomacy is unlikely to work unless there
is effective resistance,'' he told an audience in London. ''Sometimes, help may
better be given without open acknowledgment.''

This reasoning has been roundly attacked by George F. Kennan, the veteran
American diplomat, in a recent article in Foreign Affairs; by Professor Robert
W. Tucker of Johns Hopkins University, who is often described as a
neoconservative, in the new magazine called The National Interest, and by an
assortment of liberals in Foreign Policy magazine and in Congress.

With Similar Themes

Their arguments vary, but they strike similar themes.

To them, the idea of helping anti-Communist rebels virtually everywhere is too
open-ended and will get the United States embroiled in countries where there are
no vital American interests.

To most of them, to call these rebels ''freedom-fighters'' is a travesty.

For example, they see the former National Guardsmen who people the
anti-Sandinista guerrillas as no less undemocratic than the Sandinstas and with
a lot less popular support in Nicaragua. They feel similarly about Jonas Savimbi
as against the Marxist government of Angola. As for the Moslem insurgents in
Afghanistan, they are anti-Soviet, to be sure, but they are also known as
religious fanatics with no love for anything Americans would call democracy.

To many of the critics, more aid to these rebel forces is not likely to force
compromises out of their adversaries at the negotiating table. Rather, as they
see it, it could end up spurring further Soviet aid to their allies and getting
many more people killed in the process.

And rather than causing Moscow to back off and pursue a form of detente more to
the Administration's liking, the critics aver that Moscow is more likely to see
this pursuit of ''democratic revolutions'' as a fundamental challenge to its
interests and therefore a barrier to detente.

But to Charles Krauthammer, a columnist for The New Republic who is a foremost
defender of the doctrine and who is widely credited with its christening, there
should be no apologies for its ''universalism and moralism.'' That, he argues,
is the way to combat the ideological underpinnings of Soviet foreign policy.

Whatever the rationale, Administration officials make plain, Mr. Reagan intends
to push ahead, because he believes it makes Moscow hurt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jonas Savimbi

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WEEKENDER GUIDE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1421 words


Friday OPERA AT RANDOM His fascination has always been with random noise, the
kind of accidental sounds he could coax from what he once called
''noninstruments.'' At a cocktail party several years ago, John Cage was
listening, bored, to a Brahms symphony on the record player. Suddenly, the
telephone rang and a door slammed shut, strange notes clawing into the music.
''Now isn't that beautiful?'' he said to a guest. Tonight and Saturday, Mr.
Cage, the avant-garde composer who has used everything from computers to cactus
plants to create music, is himself a sound to listen for: He is the ''spoken
orchestra'' for an opera titled ''The Bus to Stockport and Other Stories.'' The
work, based on Mr. Cage's stories, had its premiere last night and is part of
the Opera Uptown series, at the Minor Latham Playhouse of Barnard College, 119th
Street and Broadway. This weekend the performances are at 8 P.M., with a
Saturday matinee at 2 P.M. The score is by Eric Valinsky and Peter Schubert,
with additional music by Richard Einhorn and J. S. Bach. The director is Rhonda
Rubinson. Don't frown on the idea of going more than once: the point of this
work, Mr. Cage characteristically proposes, is that each performance is
different and random, a unique blend of music and words, movements and lighting.
Tickets are $3; $2 for people over 65 and Columbia University students with
identification. Information: 280-2079.

HARLEM FILM FESTIVAL

Back from Vietnam, Ned Charles is a moody, volatile veteran who travels
restlessly through sordid city streets and poor back country that,
cinematically, is our window on the black condition in the United States. This
is the plot of ''Ashes and Embers,'' a film by Haile Gerima, the Ethiopian-born
film maker also noted for his earlier ''Bush Mama.'' The film plays tonight at 7
o'clock at the opening of the second Harlem Film Festival at the Aaron Davis
Hall of the City College of New York, 134th Street and Convent Avenue. Beginning
at a reception at 6 P.M., Mr. Gerima will be on hand to discuss the film. On
Saturday, a slate of seven films will start at noon. The first two, ''Sky
Captain,'' by Mary Neema Barnette, and ''Clarence and Angel,'' by Robert
Gardner, look at the life of urban youth. The next three films deal with the
life of musicians. And the final two films, starting at 5:15 P.M., are by Ayoka
Chenzira. ''Hair Piece: A Film for Nappy Headed People'' is a zany, 10-minute
animated satire that deals with what black people, throughout history, have done
with their hair. And it asks viewers what beautiful hair is, anyway. ''Silent
Sounds Screaming'' is a longer, more serious film, focusing on child abuse. Miss
Chenzira will be present to discuss her work. Admission to tonight's program is
$3; to Saturday's, $5. A series ticket, including admission to the programs next
weekend, is $12. Information: 690-6900.

ARBUCKLE IN RETROSPECT

''Leap Year'' is a slapstick film that Roscoe (Fatty) Arbuckle made in 1921. But
audiences back then never saw it. Paramount banned the movie when Mr. Arbuckle
was put on trial in the death of a Hollywood starlet after a raucous party in
his San Francisco hotel suite. The comedian was ultimately cleared of the
manslaughter charges, but his career was ruined by the scandal. Beginning to GOG
jump night, Mr. Arbuckle and his work will be the subject of a two-weekend
retrospective at the American Museum of the Moving Image, 34-31 35th Street, in
Astoria, Queens - four blocks from the Broadway station of the RR line. ''Leap
Year'' will be shown this evening, along with ''Fatty at Coney Island,'' a
destructive foray through an amusement park with Buster Keaton, made in 1917,
and ''The Waiter's Ball'' (1916). On Saturday, eight shorts Mr. Arbuckle made
for Mack Sennett's Keystone Studio, will be shown, including ''Fatty and Mabel
at the San Diego Exposition'' and ''When Love Took Wings.'' Both programs begin
at 7:30 P.M. At 6:30 P.M. each night there will be a screening of a ''video
essay'' on the religious role that rock music plays in young people's lives,
titled ''Rock My Religion.'' Admission, including entrance to the museum's
gallery, is $4. Information: (718) 784-4742.  Saturday PERAHIA IN RECITAL ''I've
come face to face with Beethoven, and what I thought was aggressive I now find
assertive. Also, my wife likes him.'' Thus did Murray Perahia explain last year
why he has turned his talents to the stormy compositions of the German master
after having established a lyrical style more given to works by Chopin, Mozart
and Schumann. On Saturday at 8:30 P.M., at the Colden Center of Queens College,
the 38-year-old pianist will appear in a solo recital featuring Beethoven's
Sonata in D minor (Op. 31, No. 3). Also on the program, and characteristic of
his newer repertory, is Michael Tippett's Sonata No. 1. Mr. Perahia's two other
selections are by Chopin (the Ballade in A-flat major, Op. 47) and Schumann's
Sonata in G minor (Op. 22). The center is at the corner of Kissena Boulevard and
the Long Island Expressway (Exit 24 on the expressway or the Main Street station
in Flushing, last stop on the No. 7 subway line). Tickets are $12, $14 and $15.
Information: (718) 793-8080.

ALL-BEETHOVEN PROGRAM

Sonatas for the violin, in this case the violin of Elmar Oliveira, are part of
an all-Beethoven program sponsored by the Beethoven Society Saturday afternoon
at Alice Tully Hall. Mr. Oliveira, the first violinist to win the Avery Fisher
Prize and the first American to win the Tchaikovsky International Violin
Competition in Moscow, will be joined by the pianist by Lillian Kallir. The
three violin sonatas are Opus 12, No. 1; Opus 96 and Opus 47, the ''Kreutzer.''
Tickets are $12 and $15. The show begins at 3 P.M. Information: 362-1911. Sunday
VIVALDI A LA ROUSSEAU Presumably, Antonio Vivaldi never thought about revising
the discourses of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who was his junior by more than 40
years. But the French philosopher fancied himself a musician and once wrote an
arrangement for solo flute of the ''Spring'' section of the Italian composer's
''Seasons.'' That work, performed by Paula Robison of the Chamber Music Society
of Lincoln Center, will lead off the society's Vivaldi-Haydn program Sunday at 5
P.M. at Alice Tully Hall. Appearing with seven members of the society will be
Christopher Hogwood, the British conductor and harpsichordist who directs the
Academy of Ancient Music, and Jan DeGaetani, the American soprano. Along with
''Spring,'' the program will include two concertos and a sonata by Vivaldi,
Joseph Haydn's cantata ''Arianna a Naxos,'' and his ''Surprise'' symphony (No.
94 in G major). Mr. Hogwood will play keyboard for the Haydn works on a
reproduction of a fortepiano, the instrument Haydn and Mozart used, which
predated the modern pianoforte. Tickets are $15. There are also performances
Monday and Tuesday at 7:30 P.M. Information: 362-1911.

IRREVERENT ADVISER

''How to Make a Lot of Money in College'' marked Andrew Tobias's first
appearance on the literary scene, a guide written during his undergraduate days
at Harvard. He soon followed that with ''How to Make Honor Grades on 15 Hours a
Week,'' and since then has published a string of books dealing with personal
finance. Among these are ''The Invisible Bankers: Everything the Insurance
Industry Never Wanted You to Know''; ''The Only Investment Guide You'll Ever
Need''; ''Getting By on $100,000 a Year (and Other Sad Tales),'' and ''The Funny
Money Game.'' The often irreverent Mr. Tobias will deliver a talk Sunday at 7:30
P.M. as part of the ''Lecture Series for Singles''at the 92d Street Y, on
Lexington Avenue. Tickets are $10. Information: 831-8603.  PROBING THE MALE MIND
Vaudeville, clowns and comedians have been the attractions this month at
Celebrate Brooklyn's Sunday afternoon series in the Prospect Park Picnic House.
This weekend, the concluding program of the series features Eric Bogosian, a
serious social critic as well as a comic, who is currently starring in
''Drinking in America'' Off Broadway. His theme is the psyche of the American
male, and the kinds of intoxication he explores go far beyond booze and drugs -
to cravings for money, and power, and sex. Mr. Bogosian's performance Sunday, at
3 P.M., will include some new material. The Picnic House is at Prospect Park
West and Fifth Street, near the Seventh Avenue station of the F train or the
Grand Army Plaza station of the 2, 3, and 4 lines. Admission is $5. Information:
(718) 788-0055.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Fatty Arbuckle

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 21, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By John Gross

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 968 words


COME MORNING. By Joe Gores. 218 pages. The Mysterious Press. $15.95.

THE STAKED GOAT. By Jeremiah Healy. 232 pages. Harper & Row. $14.95. TAILOR'S
DUMMY. By Irving Weinman. 215 pages. Atheneum. $13.95. EIGHT years ago Runyan
cracked open a diamond merchant's safe in San Francisco. It was an inside job
-an obliging security guard called Cardwell, who owed Runyan a favor from
Vietnam, had proposed it to him, and let him into the office. It was also a
double-cross - at the last moment Cardwell pulled a gun. Although Runyan was
hit, he managed to make his escape; then the law caught up with him, and he drew
15 years to life at San Quentin, but not before he had stashed away the diamonds
in a safe place.

Now he is back on the streets again. An insurance investigator has arranged his
parole. Not for nothing, of course - he isn't a very nice or a very honest
insurance investigator, and he has his own reasons for wanting to get hold of
the missing stones. But Runyan hasn't made any admissions or promises; he still
has to be worked on.

One way or another, in fact, Runyan is in demand. Cardwell, a born loser, may be
lying low, but he had some shadowy partners in the original heist who are much
less shy. A beautiful stranger called Louise, who has written to Runyan while he
was inside, is waiting for him at the prison gate - she says she is researching
a book about prisoners, but it soon becomes clear that she is taking orders from
someone sinister. Is he the same man as the unknown killer who is dogging
Runyan's steps?

It turns out that the diamonds have disappeared, and as Runyan's troubles
multiply he is forced into committing another robbery. A complicated affair, it
calls for all his resourcefulness, and reveals fresh possibilities of betrayal.
But then he is treading a path that remains strewn with treachery until the very
end of the story.

Joe Gores has written half a dozen thrillers, but he is probably best known as
the author of ''Hammett.'' ''Come Morning'' doesn't quite have the dazzle of
that exercise in baroque semi-historical fiction: here and there the underlying
sentimentality shows through a little too clearly, and the denouement, though
neat and dramatically satisfying, is not as unguessable as it might be. Even so,
the story maintains an exceptional momentum, the atmosphere is appropriately
charged, and even without the note at the beginning in which Mr. Gores thanks
the various experts he has consulted - about rock-climbing, say, or about ''the
prisoner release process'' - you could recognize the authenticity of his
descriptions.

''The Staked Goat'' is Jeremiah Healy's second mystery story. Like the first,
''Blunt Darts,'' it features a Boston private eye called John Francis Cuddy,
whose career has taken him down the usual mean streets and left him with few
illusions. He isn't quite prepared, though, for the horror of the crime that is
about to confront him. An old army friend from Pittsburgh, one Al Sachs, is in
town; he calls, they make a date, he fails to show up. The next day his body is
found, naked and gruesomely mutilated.

All the signs point to a ritualistic sex killing, but Cuddy remains unconvinced.
It doesn't tally with anything he knows of the dead man; on the other hand a few
clues suggest that the crime may have had its ultimate origins in Vietnam, where
he and Al were both MP's. Setting out to search through the relevant files in
the Pentagon, he stumbles on a nest of murderous conspirators, and a deception
going back 20 years. For good measure he also has to cope with an unrelated
though converging danger -the brother of a criminal he has helped to put away is
bent on revenge.

It makes for a powerful story, one that fully confirms Mr. Healy's narrative
skills. The tension never lets up; at the same time apparent incidentals, such
as the impact of Al's death on his family and friends in Pittsburgh, are allowed
to develop their own convincing emotional groundswell.

On the other hand there is too much marginal violence (the two main plots
already have more than enough), while at the end of the story Mr. Healey, who
teaches at the New England School of Law, raises a pertinent question about the
ethics of revenge, only to sidestep the issue in a blaze of action. Admittedly
the act of vengeance in question, carried out by Cuddy against a vicious killer,
is brilliantly and excitingly engineered.

Where Mr. Healy presents us with the adventures of John Francis Cuddy, Irving
Weinman offers us the exploits of Lenny Schwartz - Detective Inspector Schwartz,
an unrepresentative member of the New York Police Department. (''Magna at
Harvard yet, he could have been anything,'' he imagines his family saying -
except that they don't actually talk like that.) Lenny has a son he is putting
through Yale on the proceeds of a bribe - a haunting fall from grace that may or
may not explain why further promotion eludes him. He also has a wife who is a
gifted art historian - a happy coincidence, since the case that saves his career
takes him deep into the art world, into the innermost workings of the
Metropolitan Museum. It also involves the contract killing of a successful
dealer, a tour of some louche sex clubs, bitter departmental politics, assorted
ethnic tensions, glimpses of life among the rich and well-connected, a side-trip
to Holland, and a jogger who ends up lying dead on the lap of the statue of Hans
Christian Andersen in Central Park.

''Tailor's Dummy'' is strong on New York detail, brisk dialogue and sardonic
glimpses of the way we (or some people) live now. The wisecracking humor and the
psychopathic crosscurrents of the plot don't always make a comfortable mix, but
apart from that it is consistently enjoyable - and, for a first novel, an
unusually assured performance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Irving Weinman, Joe Gores, Jeremiah Healy (Dori Gores; Bonnie
M. Tisler)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHALLENGE TO MARCOS: THE MEN WHO BROKE AWAYAFTER YEARS OF SERVING MARCOS, 2
OFFICIALS 'DON'T WANT TO BE A PART OF THAT';
GENERAL VOICES ANGER AT ABUSE OF MILITARY AND ELECTION FRAUD

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1115 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Sunday, Feb. 23


In a country where the armed forces have been shaken by widespread allegations
of corruption, favoritism and abuses of human rights, Lieut. Gen. Fidel V. Ramos
has long seemed a model of old-fashioned rectitude.

A graduate of West Point, General Ramos earned his reputation by years of
professional soldiering, rising gradually through the ranks during 39 years of
service. He was a platoon leader with the Philippine Army contingent in the
Korean War, fought against the Communist Huk guerrillas on the island of Luzon
in the same era, and led a contingent called the Philippine Civic Action Group
in Vietnam in the late 1960's.

A prudent man noted for his austere manner, the general, 57 years old, is
believed not to have used his rank to enrich himself. By some accounts, his
wife, Amelita, a teacher, earns three times as much as he does.

'This Has Been Building'

On Saturday, General Ramos's pent-up frustration with President Ferdinand E.
Marcos and what he saw as the President's misuse of the military boiled over as
he joined Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile in challenging President Marcos's
authority. Appearing at the dissident stronghold at Camp Aguinaldo, General
Ramos declared, ''This has been building up for some time now, but I became very
disappointed in the President when he continued to use my name to help prop up
his regime.''

Specifically, General Ramos charged that Mr. Marcos ''had been fooling us and
fooling the entire world'' by announcing that he had ordered the resignation of
Gen. Fabian C. Ver as Chief of Staff a week ago, with General Ramos supposedly
replacing General Ver. In fact, General Ramos said, the President had never
issued the order dismissing General Ver, who was implicated and later acquitted
in the assassination of Benigno S. Aquino Jr., Mr. Marcos's major opponent, in
1983.

From October 1984 to December 1985, while General Ver faced charges in the
Aquino killing, General Ramos was the Acting Chief of Staff.

Today, speaking bluntly and with evident passion, General Ramos accused Mr.
Marcos and General Ver of helping to rig the presidential elections this month
by illegally distributing guns to wealthy supporters of Mr. Marcos. He said
these ''cronies'' had used the arms to form private armies and terrorize voters.

General Ramos said Mr. Marcos had assigned him to assure clean and orderly
elections. ''But what really bites me,'' General Ramos continued, ''is that
while he gave me this responsibility, he and some of his leaders were doing just
the opposite.''

Report on Changes in Military

In addition, General Ramos charged that President Marcos had blocked all efforts
to eliminate corruption and violence against civilians by Philippine soldiers.
In December, General Ramos said, Mr. Marcos asked him to study how to change the
army, and he carried out the study with 17 other senior officers. But although
they submitted the report to Mr. Marcos on Dec. 23, the President had yet to act
on any of their recommendations, General Ramos said.

''There are too many officers close to General Ver,'' he said, who never do
''anything except serve in Malacanang,'' President Marcos's palace, and ''who
have risen to very high ranks not because of what they know or what they have
done, but because of their closeness to the President.''

''I don't want to be a part of that now,'' General Ramos said.

General Ramos graduated from West Point in 1950, had special training at Fort
Benning, Ga., and Fort Bragg, N.C., and earned a master's degree in civil
engineering from the University of Illinois. He has long been a favorite of
American diplomats and army advisers here, who have depicted him as representing
the best of both the American and Philippine military traditions, shared during
the common battle against the Japanese in World War II.

But his popularity with Americans has made General Ramos suspect among some
Philippine officers who recall the country's half-century as an American colony.

There have also been doubts about whether the direct, dour General Ramos has the
forcefulness to assume real leadership, according to some fellow officers.

Last spring, when a movement to effect changes in the military emerged among
some younger officers, General Ramos was thought to be part of it, but until his
break with President Marcos on Saturday he had never publicly acknowledged his
feelings on the subject. In a news conference on Saturday evening, the general
said the movement, composed of about 1,000 of the army's 15,000 officers, had
made him proud.

In December, Mr. Marcos said a rivalry existed between followers of General Ver
and General Ramos in the armed forces, but he insisted that the two men were not
involved and were concerned about the problem.

Ten days ago, General Ramos surprised some opposition officials by ordering the
arrest of a constabulary officer as a suspect in the killing of Evelio Javier, a
former Governor of Antique Province who was a leader of Corazon C. Aquino's
presidential campaign. The general also ordered an intensified search for a
former soldier who is a suspect in the shooting.

Opposition Asks for His Aid

A day later, viewing General Ramos as a possible figure of hope, the opposition
called on him to help stop a wave of killings of Aquino supporters in Quirino
Province.

But General Ramos has not been untouched by charges that the Government has
violated human rights. Three members of a 17-member fact-finding panel
recommended in December that he be charged with negligence in the shooting
deaths of 20 human rights demonstrators in Escalante, on Negros Island, in
September. Witnesses said soldiers had fired on a crowd of more than 5,000
people, most of them farmers.

General Ramos, who had been commander of the paramilitary Philippine
Constabulary and the integrated national police since the mid-1970's, is a
Protestant in an overwhelmingly Roman Catholic country.

He was promoted to general in 1970. In 1981, when he reached retirement age, Mr.
Marcos extended his service indefinitely.

General Ramos comes from a politically active family. His father, Narciso Ramos,
who died Feb. 3, was a longtime member of Parliament, served as Ambassador to
Taiwan, and was Foreign Secretary under President Marcos from 1966 to 1968. The
general's sister, Leticia Ramos Shahani, is with the United Nations in Vienna,
where she serves as Assistant Secretary General for Social Development and
Humanitarian Affairs.

On Saturday, General Ramos fled his home so abruptly after receiving word that
Mr. Marcos was about to have him arrested, he said, that he had to leave his
wife, five daughters and a granddaughter behind.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a Philippine Army officer greeting well-wishers through a
fence of the Defense Ministry (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INDONESIA SINKS BOATS SHUTTLING VIETNAMESE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 452 words

DATELINE: MEDAN, Indonesia, Feb. 22


Indonesia has begun to sink boats whose crews are found to be transporting for
profit refugees who are fleeing Vietnam, according to diplomats and refugee
officials in the region.

The officials say the refugees are brought ashore by the Indonesian authorities
before the boats are sunk. The officials also say no genuine refugee boats are
sunk.

The tough measures are intended as a warning to the Vietnamese before calmer
weather in the South China Sea, the officials say. May, June and July are months
when crossings are most frequent, with 4,000 to 5,000 Vietnamese boat people
arriving each month.

More than 250,000 Vietnamese have come here in the last decade. All are
resettled abroad.

Indonesian authorities have been frustrated in attempts in the last six months
to secure the cooperation of Hanoi in stopping an increasing trade in refugees,
carried out by what appears to be a fleet of more powerful boats.

Overtaxes the Country

Indonesians say the practice overtaxes this developing country's resources and
endangers Vietnamese lives because the refugees are reported to arrive
malnourished and with communicable diseases. No reliable estimates are available
on how many Vietnamese have drowned trying to cross the South China Sea, but
authorities in Jakarta say they believe the number is considerable.

The refugee-transport issue was publicly raised in August by Foreign Minister
Mochtar Kusumaatmadja after talks with the Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen
Co Thach.

At that time Indonesia told Vietnam it wanted to turn over to Hanoi the crews of
ships caught in the business of bringing refugees to these waters. The officials
say that neither the Vietnamese Government, with which Indonesia's relations
have been cordial, nor its embassy in Jakarta have responded.

Indonesia has since begun detaining crews and impounding boats, diplomats say.
People familiar with the operation say about four out of five of the so-called
shuttle boats are sunk, and the combined crews are put on the remaining vessel,
given fuel and provisions and sent back out to sea. Figures have not been
disclosed on the number of detentions, but diplomats say several dozen
Vietnamese sailors have been deported.

Indonesian authorities say they assume the shuttle trips, for which refugees
must pay in gold, are made with the knowledge of Government officials at one
level or another in southern Vietnam. Most of the voyages originate along the
Mekong River, some from Ho Chi Minh City.

Officials in Indonesia say bigger and more powerful boats are being used to
ferry the exiles, with imported engines of 50 horsepower or more compared with
the 5-horsepower fishing boats that were common earlier.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Congress Is Divided Over What to Do About NASA

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 965 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


For years, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has enjoyed a
privileged place on Capitol Hill. Lawmakers competed to praise its
accomplishments and support its programs. And in President Reagan's budget for
the next fiscal year, it is one of the few nondefense agencies recommended for
more money.

''NASA is doing something very special,'' Senator Slade Gorton, the Washington
Republican who heads the subcommittee that authorizes the agency's
appropriation, said last week. ''It's on the cutting edge of technology and
knowledge of the universe in which we live. It's an agency that represents the
American dream and American excellence.''

That reputation, however, is now at risk. As revelations started filtering out
last week about the explosion that destroyed the space shuttle Challenger,
killing all seven crew members, Senator Ernest F. Hollings, a South Carolina
Democrat, described the tragedy as an ''avoidable accident.'' Charging that he
had been mislead by testimony earlier in the week, Senator Hollings called for
the resignation of Dr. William R. Graham, the agency's acting director.

In particular, Mr. Hollings said he was alarmed at reports that agency officials
had rejected advice from technical experts to delay the shuttle's launching for
fear that unusually cold weather might jeopardize the safe functioning of the
vehicle's booster rockets. Along with two other Senate Democrats, Mr. Hollings
also criticized the Presidential commission that is investigating the disaster
for not moving swiftly enough, and proposed an independent Senate investigation.
Senator John C. Danforth, the Missouri Republican who is chairman of the
Commerce, Science and Transporation Committee, immediately rejected the request
for a separate study, accusing the Democrats of ''grandstanding'' and
''premature NASA bashing.'' As Mr. Danforth put it, ''All of us in public life
have an almost natural inclination to get into anything right away. We want to
be stage center, to hold hearings and summon witnesses, and that's what is
taking place.''

However the argument is resolved, it seems certain there will be new faces at
the beleaguered agency. James M. Beggs, who is on leave of absence as NASA
administrator, is reported to be ready to resign, and a Reagan Administration
aide said Mr. Beggs has recommended passing over his deputy, Dr. Graham, with
whom he barely speaks. The Administration's short list for the job was said to
include Edward C. Aldridge Jr., Under Secretary of the Air Force, and James
Fletcher, a former NASA administrator.

The new administrator, whoever he is, will be facing some tough questions about
NASA's performance. Senator Phil Gramm, the Texas Republican whose home state
includes the Johnson Space Center, summed up a common view in Congress this way:
''When a tragedy like that occurs, changes need to be made, and they will be.''

To supporters of the agency, all this may seem familiar. NASA went through hard
times in the 1970's, when manned flights to the moon were curtailed and the
space shuttle had not yet begun. But once the new craft started flying, the
agency was able to revive its reputation and bolster its budget. It also
managed, perhaps more than any other civilian agency, to inspire a sense of
national pride at a time when pride was in short supply.''When we had a lot of
problems - Vietnam and Watergate - people were excited about the space program,
it was successful,'' said Senator Danforth. ''It was something we could all
cheer for.''

NASA's fortunes were also boosted by the agency's superb instinct for public
relations. Members of Congress had long been invited to witness launches at Cape
Canaveral and hobnob with the astronauts. Then they were invited to fly in
space, and the shuttle journeys of Senator Jake Garn, Republican of Utah, and
Representative Bill Nelson, Democrat of Florida - both key figures on the agency
budget - proved to be triumphs of the publicist's art. So, it seemed until the
disaster in space, was the decision to send a teacher, Christa McAuliffe of
Concord, N.H., on a shuttle mission to symbolize the program's contribution to
scientific knowledge.

In the short run, lawmakers want answers about the tragedy itself. The central
issue is why last month's launching was allowed to go forward. ''What pressure
was on NASA to divert from the normal procedure?'' Senator Hollings asked in a
statement. ''Why did NASA demand a launch against the better advice of
experts?''

More precisely, Congress wants to know whether the agency cut corners to satisfy
demands from military and commercial contractors to speed up the launching
schedule. Hovering in the background is an even more troubling question: Did the
agency feel pressure to launch the vehicle with Mrs. McAuliffe aboard before
President Reagan gave his State of the Union address that evening?

In the long run, another set of questions seem certain to be asked. In a time of
tight budgets, should Congress finance a replacement for the lost shuttle?
Should more missions be performed by unmanned rockets? What is the fate of the
manned space station now on the drawing boards?

NASA's supporters are worried that the current wave of criticism could go too
far and damage the agency. ''We have immense concern for the people who work for
NASA, for their morale and effectiveness,'' Senator Gorton said. ''I don't want
to see this turned into E.P.A., everybody's favorite whipping boy,'' he added,
referring to the Environmental Protection Agency, which during the last few
years has been widely assailed as incompetent and ineffective.

Still, while the space agency is clearly in for a rough time, its support on
Capitol Hill seems basically solid. Americans like winners, but they also admire
loyalty.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Dr. William R. Graham, Rear Adm. Richard H. Truly and Jesse W.
Moore (NYT/Marilynn K. Yee)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MANILA WATCH;
Marcos Loses Support, and The U.S. Loses Some Options

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 938 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


EVEN as the Reagan Administration was cautioning against any precipitous action
in the wake of fraudulent Philippine elections, events erupted in Manila
yesterday that were beyond Washington's ability to control.

The Defense Minister and the acting Chief of Staff, who were regarded as leaders
of a movement to fight corruption in the Philippine military, announced they
were breaking with President Ferdinand E. Marcos. They called on the armed
forces to support Corazon C. Aquino, the opposition candidate in the Feb. 7
vote.

''We want the will of the people to be respected,'' said the Defense Minister,
Juan Ponce Enrile. ''I am morally convinced that it was Mrs. Aquino who was
elected by the Filipino people. We are committed to support her.'' Mr. Marcos,
at a news conference later, castigated the defecting senior military men, saying
they were participants in a plot to kill him and his wife, Imelda.

It was not immediately clear whether these developments presaged a violent
confrontation between factions in the military. The White House reiterated its
concerns that the elections had been ''marred by fraud'' and called for
''resolution of the issues'' without violence as quickly as possible. There was
speculation that other dramatic developments might soon follow. One scenario, if
Mr. Marcos continued to retain control, could be a new military crackdown. Mr.
Enrile said he had acted when he learned that Mr. Marcos planned to impose
martial law and arrest opposition figures. Another possibility, which Mr. Marcos
steadfastly denied would occur, would be a decision by the Philippine President
to leave the country. Mrs. Aquino could then assume power.

The developments seemed to catch policy makers in Washington by surprise. They
had noted unhappiness among some military officers at the apparent reluctance of
Mr. Marcos to remove Gen. Fabian C. Ver, whose resignation as Chief of Staff was
announced last weekend. General Ver, a cousin and longstanding aide of Mr.
Marcos, was under pressure from the United States, where he is seen as
responsible for corruption and military mismanagement, to resign.

But faced with a clamor in Congress for the United States to sever connections
with Mr. Marcos, the Reagan Administration was pleading for time before making
any decisions. The White House was waiting for Philip C. Habib, the special
Presidential emissary, to return from Manila today with recommendations on how
to deal with the complicated situation.

''We recognize that there are no easy answers,'' said Paul D. Wolfowitz, the
Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, who was
speaking before yesterday's developments. Senator Jim Sasser, Democrat of
Tennessee, proposed that the United States ''pull the plug'' on Mr. Marcos. But
how? And even if that were possible, there was concern that it might weaken the
United States hold on its big air and naval bases in the Philippines. (Both
countries benefit from American bases, page 3.) Secretary of State George P.
Shultz told a Senate committee that Marcos supporters had been guilty in the
election of ''fraud and violence on a systematic and widespread scale.'' But he
balanced this by adding that, in the Administration's view, ''We have on our
hands a very difficult and delicate situation, and we don't want to jump at it
with some precipitous action here.'' The Senate passed a resolution condemning
the election as fraudulent. And a House subcommittee voted to put all military
aid to the Philippines in an ''escrow account'' and funnel economic aid through
non-Government groups.

Military Concerns

The Administration's primary concern has been not to allow the political
conflict in the Philippines to lead to a breakdown in that country's armed
forces because of the dangerous Communist-backed insurgency, which seems to be
gaining strength month by month. Mr. Wolfowitz, warning Congress not to be hasty
in cutting military aid, said ''solutions must be Filipino solutions, not
American solutions.'' He added, ''As the drama unfolds, it will be particularly
important that the integrity of the Philippine armed forces be maintained, and
indeed strengthened as much as possible through reform. If the armed forces of
the Philippines disintegrates, there is only one organized armed force remaining
in the Philippines. That is the Communist New People's Army.''

Whether the United States had played a direct role in yesterday's developments
was unknown; senior officials who rushed to their offices seemed genuinely
surprised.

In the past, American Administrations have rarely succeeded in efforts to
stage-manage the ouster of faltering allies. The Kennedy Administration
supported a coup that deposed President Ngo Dinh Diem of Vietnam, whereupon
subsequent Administrations had to deal with instability amid escalating war. The
Carter Administration helped remove the Somoza dictatorship in Nicaragua; the
Reagan Administration is determined to dislodge Somoza's successors. The Shah of
Iran sought advice he never got from Washington on whether to crack down on his
opposition or flee.

Thirty-three years ago, the United States backed Ramon Magsaysay, who was
running against the corrupt Quirino administration in the Philippines. Mr.
Magsayay, who won by a landslide, was perhaps the country's most popular
president, and he succeeded in crushing the Communist insurgents known as the
Hukbalahaps. Mrs. Aquino is not viewed in Washington as a person with the
stature of a Magsaysay. But she did surprisingly well in the election, and there
is no other obvious civilian replacement for Mr. Marcos.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ferdinand E. Marcos; Photo of Corazon C. Aquino and her
running mate, Salvador H. Laurel; Chart of the United States aid to the
Philippines

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

W,HAT DID THE FOUNDING FATHERS INTEND?

BYLINE: By Irving R. Kaufman; Irving R. Kaufman is a judge of the United States
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, where he has served as Chief Judge.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 42, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3988 words


THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES WILL BE 200 years old on Sept. 17, 1987,
and a Bicentennial commission -headed by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger (whose
birthday felicitously falls on that date) - is under way, formulating plans for
''Constitution Day'' festivities. The celebratory air notwithstanding, recent
discussions of constitutional values seem to reveal more conflict than shared
pride. Some examples:

Last summer, in remarks before the American Bar Association, Attorney General
Edwin Meese 3d criticized the Supreme Court's recent decisions reaffirming the
First Amendment requirement that government maintain a ''strict neutrality''
toward religion. The Attorney General castigated the Court for ignoring the
''intent of the framers'' and stated that the Philadelphia Convention would find
the doctrine of ''a strict neutrality between religion and nonreligion . . .
somewhat bizarre.'' In an undelivered portion of his text, the Attorney General
seemed to question the applicability of the Bill of Rights to state governments.

In an address last fall, Justice John Paul Stevens responded to the Attorney
General's criticisms by stating that ''some uncertainty may attend an effort to
identify the precise messages'' of the framers. Speaking at Georgetown
University last October, Justice William J. Brennan Jr. rejected the ''arrogance
cloaked as humility'' of those relying on the ''facile historicism'' inherent in
the original-intent theory. The Supreme Court has agreed to hear a case in which
it will decide whether the right of privacy includes consensual adult homosexual
conduct. Critics contend that no right of privacy is men-tioned in the
Constitution or was envisioned by our Founding Fathers.

In the ongoing debate over original intent, almost all Federal judges hold to
the notion that judicial decisions should be based on the text of the
Constitution or the structure it creates. Yet, in requiring judges to be guided
solely by the expressed views of the framers, current advocates of original
intent seem to call for a narrower concept. Jurists who disregard this
interpretation, the argument runs, act lawlessly because they are imposing their
own moral standards and political preferences on the community.

As a Federal judge, I have found it often difficult to ascertain the ''intent of
the framers,'' and even more problematic to try to dispose of a constitutional
question by giving great weight to the intent argument. Indeed, even if it were
possible to decide hard cases on the basis of a strict interpretation of
original intent, or originalism, that methodology would conflict with a judge's
duty to apply the Constitution's underlying principles to changing
circumstances. Furthermore, by attempting to erode the base for judicial
affirmation of the freedoms guaranteed by the Bill of Rights and the 14th
Amendment (no state shall ''deprive any person of life, liberty, or property
without due process of law; nor deny to any person . . . the equal protection of
the laws''), the intent theory threatens some of the greatest achievements of
the Federal judiciary.

Ultimately, the debate centers on the nature of judicial review, or the power of
courts to act as the ultimate arbiters of constitutional meaning. This
responsibility has been acknowledged ever since the celebrated 1803 case of
Marbury v. Madison, in which Chief Justice John Marshall struck down a
Congressional grant of jurisdiction to the Supreme Court not authorized by
Article III of the Constitution. But here again, originalists would accept
judicial review only if it adhered to the allegedly neutral principles embalmed
in historical intent.

In the course of 36 years on the Federal bench, I have had to make many
difficult constitutional interpretations. I have had to determine whether a
teacher could wear a black armband as a protest against the Vietnam War; whether
newspapers have a nonactionable right to report accusatory statements, and
whether a school system might be guilty of de facto segregation. Unfortunately,
the framers' intentions are not made sufficiently clear to provide easy answers.
A judge must first determine what the intent was (or would have been) - a
notoriously formidable task.

An initial problem is the paucity of materials. Both the official minutes of the
Philadelphia Convention of 1787 and James Madison's famous notes of the
proceedings, published in 1840, tend toward the terse and cursory, especially in
relation to the judiciary. The Congressional debates over the proposed Bill of
Rights, which became effective in 1791, are scarcely better. Even Justice
William Rehnquist, one of the most articulate spokesmen for original intent,
admitted in a recent dissent in a case concerning school prayer that the
legislative history behind the provision against the establishment of an
official religion ''does not seem particularly illuminating.''

One source deserves special mention. ''The Federalist Papers'' - the series of
essays written by Alexander Hamilton, James Madison and John Jay in 1787 and
1788 - have long been esteemed as the earliest constitutional commentary. In
1825, for example, Thomas Jefferson noted that ''The Federalist'' was regularly
appealed to ''as evidence of the general opinion of those who framed and of
those who accepted the Constitution of the United States.''

''The Federalist,'' however, did not discuss the Bill of Rights or the Civil War
amendments, which were yet to be written. Moreover, the essays were part of a
political campaign - the authors wrote them in support of New York's
ratification of the Constitution. The essays, therefore, tended to enunciate
general democratic theory or rebut anti-Federalist arguments, neither of which
offer much help to modern jurists. (In light of the following passage from ''The
Federalist,'' No. 14, I believe Madison would be surprised to find his words of
200 years ago deciding today's cases: ''Is it not the glory of the people of
America that . . . they have not suffered a blind veneration for antiquity . . .
to overrule the suggestions of their own good sense . . .?'') Another problem
with original intent is this: Who were the framers? Generally, they are taken to
be the delegates to the Philadelphia Convention and the Congressional sponsors
of subsequent amendments. All constitutional provisions, however, have been
ratified by state conventions or legislatures on behalf of the people they
represented. Is the relevant intention, then, that of the drafters, the
ratifiers or the general populace?

The elusiveness of the framers' intent leads to another, more telling problem.
Originalist doctrine presumes that intent can be discovered by historical
sleuthing or psychological rumination. In fact, this is not possible. Judges are
constantly required to resolve questions that 18th-century statesmen, no matter
how prescient, simply could not or did not foresee and resolve. On most issues,
to look for a collective intention held by either drafters or ratifiers is to
hunt for a chimera.

A reading of the Constitution highlights this problem. The principles of our
great charter are cast in grand, yet cryptic, phrases. Accordingly, judges
usually confront what Justice Robert Jackson in the 1940's termed the ''majestic
generalities'' of the Bill of Rights, or the terse commands of ''due process of
law,'' or ''equal protection'' contained in the 14th Amendment. The use of such
open-ended provisions would indicate that the framers did not want the
Constitution to become a straitjacket on all events for all times. In contrast,
when the framers held a clear intention, they did not mince words. Article II,
for example, specifies a minimum Presidential age of 35 years instead of merely
requiring ''maturity'' or ''adequate age.''

The First Amendment is a good example of a vaguer provision. In guaranteeing
freedom of the press, some of our forefathers perhaps had specific thoughts on
what publications fell within its purview. Some historians believe, in light of
Colonial debates, that the main concern of the framers was to prevent
governmental licensing of newspapers. If that were all the First Amendment meant
today, then many important decisions protecting the press would have to be
overruled. One of them would be the landmark New York Times v. Sullivan ruling
of 1964, giving the press added protection in libel cases brought by public
figures. Another would be Near v. Minnesota, a case involving Jay Near, a
newspaper publisher who had run afoul of a Minne-sota statute outlawing
''malicious, scandalous and defamatory'' publications. The Supreme Court struck
down the statute in 1931, forbidding governmental prior restraints on
publication; this ruling was the precursor of the 1971 Pentagon Papers decision.

The Founding Fathers focused not on particularities but on principles, such as
the need in a democracy for people to engage in free and robust discourse. James
Madison considered a popular government without popular information a ''Prologue
to a Farce or a Tragedy.'' Judges, then, must focus on underlying principles
when going about their delicate duty of applying the First Amendment's precepts
to today's world.

In fact, our nation's first debate over constitutional interpretation centered
on grand principles. Angered at John Adams's Federalist Administration,
advocates of states' rights in the late 18th century argued that original intent
meant that the Constitution, like the Articles of Confederation, should be
construed narrowly - as a compact among separate sovereigns. The 1798 Virginia
and Kentucky Resolutions, which sought to reserve to the states the power of
ultimate constitutional interpretation, were the most extreme expressions of
this view. In rejecting this outlook, a nationalistic Supreme Court construed
the Constitution more broadly.

The important point here is that neither side of this debate looked to the
stated views of the framers to resolve the issue. Because of his leading role at
the Philadelphia Convention, Madison's position is especially illuminating.
''Whatever veneration might be entertained for the body of men who formed our
Constitution,'' he declaimed on the floor of Congress in 1796, ''the sense of
that body could never be regarded as the oracular guide in expounding the
Constitution.''

Y ET, I DOUBT IF STRICT proponents of original intent will be deterred by such
considerations. Their goal is not to venerate dead framers but to restrain
living judges from imposing their own values. This restraint is most troublesome
when it threatens the protection of individual rights against governmental
encroachment.

According to current constitutional doctrine, the due process clause of the 14th
Amendment incorporates key provisions of the Bill of Rights, which keeps in
check only the Federal Government. Unless the due process clause is construed to
include the most important parts of the first eight amendments in the Bill of
Rights, then the states would be free, in theory, to establish an official
church or inflict cruel and unusual punishments. This doctrine is called
incorporation.

Aside from the late Justice Hugo Black, few have believed that history alone is
a sufficient basis for applying the Bill of Rights to the states. In his
Georgetown University address, Justice Brennan noted that the crucial liberties
embodied in the Bill of Rights are so central to our national identity that we
cannot imagine any definition of ''liberty'' without them.

In fact, a cramped reading of the Bill of Rights jeopardizes what I regard as
the true original intent - the rationale for having a written Constitution at
all. The principal reason for a charter was to restrain government. In 1787, the
idea of a fundamental law set down in black and white was revolutionary.
Hanoverian England in the 18th century did not have a fully written, unified
constitution, having long believed in a partially written one, based on ancient
custom and grants from the Crown like the Magna Carta. To this day, the British
have kept their democracy alive without one. In theory, the
''King-in-Parliament'' was and is unlimited in sovereign might, and leading
political theorists, such as Thomas Hobbes and John Locke, agreed that
governments, once established by a social contract, could not then be fettered.

Although not a Bill of Rights, the Magna Carta -King John's concessions to his
barons in 1215 - was symbolic of the notion that even the Crown was not
all-powerful. Moreover, certain judges believed that Parliament, like the king,
had to respect the traditions of the common law. This staunch belief in
perpetual rights, in turn, was an important spark for the Revolutionary
conflagration of 1776.

In gaining independence, Americans formed the bold concept that sovereignty
continually resided with the people, who cede power to governments only to
achieve certain specific ends. This view dominated the Philadelphia Convention.
Instead of merely improving on the Articles of Confederation, as they had been
directed to do, the framers devised a government where certain powers -defined
and thereby limited - flowed from the people to the Congress, the President and
the Federal judiciary.

Alexander Hamilton recognized that the basic tenets of this scheme mandated
judicial review. Individual rights, he observed in ''The Federalist,'' No. 78,
''can be preserved in practice no other way than through the medium of courts of
justice, whose duty it must be to declare all acts contrary to the manifest
tenor of the Constitution void.'' Through a written constitution and judicial
enforcement, the framers intended to preserve the inchoate rights they had lost
as Englishmen.

The narrow interpretation of original intent is especially unfortunate because I
doubt that many of its proponents are in favor of freeing the states from the
constraints of the Bill of Rights. In fact, I believe the concern of many modern
''intentionalists'' is quite specific: outrage over the right-of-privacy cases,
especially Roe v. Wade, the 1973 Supreme Court decision recognizing a woman's
right to an abortion. (The right of privacy, of course, is not mentioned in the
Constitution.) Whether one agrees with this controversial decision or not, I
would submit that concern over the outcome of one difficult case is not
sufficient cause to embrace a theory that calls for so many changes in existing
law.

S OME OPPONENTS of strict interpretations of original intent, too, have been
guilty of taking an extreme position. Some, for example, have suggested that
invoking the framers is only a cloak to hide more modern and malevolent
intentions.

This view, however, ignores the threat of abuse of power posed by a life-tenured
judiciary. Unless restrained in some fashion, judges are capable of usurping
authority better left to the democratic branches. Judicial critics often refer
to the 1907 comment of Charles Evans Hughes (who later became Chief Justice of
the United States) that ''We are under a Constitution, but the Constitution is
what the judges say it is.''

The power of judges to declare laws unconstitutional does appear at odds with
majority rule. Why should a handful of Supreme Court Justices - or any Federal
judge - appointed for life, be able to invalidate the will of the people's
elected representatives, as expressed in a duly enacted statute? How does one
reconcile this power with our commitment to democracy?

As Hamilton foresaw in ''The Federalist,'' No. 78, and Chief Justice Marshall
established in Marbury v. Madison, review of legislation by nonelected judges
is, in fact, justified by their mandate to enforce the entirety of the law
including, when there is any conflict, the ''supreme law of the land'': the
Constitution. If judicial decisions are based on political notions instead of
legal principles, that imprimatur is lost.

One can, therefore, understand why a clear guide to constitutional
interpretation is thought necessary. History tells us of grave abuses of power
when judges feel unrestrained. Consider, for instance, the infamous Dred Scott
decision in 1857. Dred Scott was a slave whose mas-ter had taken him into the
Louisiana Territory and, under the terms of the Missouri Compromise, was thus
made a free man. Scott, however, later was taken to the slave state of Missouri.
With the aid of abolitionist lawyers, Scott brought a suit in Federal court to
obtain his freedom on the grounds he had been emancipated.

On appeal, the Supreme Court ruled against him. Hoping to settle the slavery
issue through judicial fiat instead of political compromise, the High Court
decided blacks were not citizens and Congress could not regulate slavery in the
territories. After noting the subjugation of blacks at the time of the
Constitution's adoption, Chief Justice Roger Taney concluded ''they had no
rights which the white man was bound to respect.''

The opinion was vociferously denounced in the North. ''The Court has rushed into
politics,'' raged The New York Tribune, ''without other purpose than to subserve
the cause of slavery.'' Instead of healing sectarian strife, the Court's
exercise of power most likely hastened the Civil War.

The Justices likewise suffered ultimate defeat when they attempted to halt the
advent of the modern welfare state. The Federal judiciary in the early decades
of this century regularly invalidated social legislation, such as child labor
statutes and minimum wage/maximum hours laws. Claiming that the due process
clause embodied economic liberty, judges relied on the rubric of ''substantive
due process'' to impose their own views on the nation.

This period is known as the ''Lochner era,'' after a famous case in which the
Supreme Court struck down a New York statute prescribing a 10-hour workday for
bakery employees (Lochner was the owner of a bakery who was prosecuted for
violating the statute). The Justices believed that the government lacked the
authority to interfere with private contractual arrangements. In a powerful
dissent, Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes denounced the Court's imputation of
laissez-faire capitalism to the Constitution: ''The Fourteenth Amendment does
not enact Mr. Herbert Spencer's Social Statics.'' The Lochner era came to a
close when the Supreme Court ultimately accepted President Roosevelt's New Deal
programs.

These examples indicate the need for judicial impartiality and restraint, but if
original intent is an uncertain guide, does some other, more functional approach
to interpreting the Constitution exist?

One suggestion is to emphasize the importance of democratic ''process.'' As John
Hart Ely, dean of the Stanford Law School forcefully advocates, this approach
would direct the courts to make a distinction between ''process'' (the rules of
the game, so to speak) and ''substance'' (the results of the game). Laws dealing
with process include those affecting voting rights or participation in society;
the Supreme Court correctly prohibited segregation, for example, because it
imposed on blacks the continuing stigma of slavery. Judges, however, would not
have the power to review the substantive decisions of elected officials, such as
the distribution of welfare benefits.

Basically, such an approach makes courts the guardians of democracy, but a focus
on process affords little help when judges decide between difficult and
compet-ing values. Judicial formulation of a democratic vision, for example,
requires substantive decision-making. The dignities of human liberty enshrined
in the Bill of Rights are not merely a means to an end, even so noble an end as
democratic governance. For example, we cherish freedom of speech not only
because it is necessary for meaningful elections, but also for its own sake.

T HE TRUTH IS THAT no litmus test exists by which judges can confidently and
consistently measure the constitutionality of their decisions. Notwithstanding
the clear need for judicial restraint, judges do not constitute what Prof. Raoul
Berger, a retired Harvard Law School fellow, has termed an ''imperial
judiciary.'' I would argue that the judicial process itself limits the reach of
a jurist's arm.

First, judges do not and cannot deliberately contravene specific constitutional
rules or clear indications of original intent. No one would seriously argue or
expect, for instance, that the Supreme Court could or would twist the
Presidential minimum-age provision into a call for ''sufficient maturity,'' so
as to forbid the seating of a 36-year-old.

I doubt, in any event, that Federal judges would ever hear such a question. The
Constitution limits our power to traditional ''cases'' and ''controversies''
capable of judicial resolution. In cases like the hypothetical one regarding the
Presidential age, the High Court employs doctrines of standing (proving injury)
and ''political question'' to keep citizens from suing merely out of a desire to
have the government run a certain way.

Moreover, the issues properly before a judge are not presented on a tabula rasa.
Even the vaguest constitutional provisions have received the judicial gloss of
prior decisions. Precedent alone, of course, should not preserve clearly
erroneous decisions; the abhorrent ''separate but equal'' doctrine survived for
more than 50 years before the Warren Court struck it down in 1954.

The conventions of our judicial system also limit a jurist's ability to impose
his or her own will. One important restraint, often overlooked, is the tradition
that appellate judges issue written opinions. That is, we must support our
decisions with reasons in-stead of whims and indicate how our constitutional
rulings relate to the document. A written statement is open to the dissent of
colleagues, possible review by a higher court and the judgment, sometimes
scathing, of legal scholars.

In addition, the facts of a given case play a pivotal role. Facts delineate the
reach of a legal decision and remind us of the ''cases and controversies''
requirement. Our respect for such ground rules reassures the public that, even
in the most controversial case, the outcome is not just a political ruling.

Judges are also mindful that the ultimate justification for their power is
public acceptance - acceptance not of every decision, but of the role they play.
Without popular support, the power of judicial review would have been
eviscerated by political forces long ago.

Lacking the power of the purse or the sword, the courts must rely on the elected
branches to enforce their decisions. The school desegregation cases would have
been a dead letter unless President Eisenhower had been willing to order out the
National Guard - in support of a decision authored by a Chief Justice, Earl
Warren, whose appointment the President had called ''the biggest damned-fool
mistake I ever made.''

Instead of achieving the purple of philosopher-kings, an unprincipled judiciary
would risk becoming modern King Canutes, with the cold tide of political reality
and popular opprobrium lapping at their robes.

My revered predecessor on the Court of Appeals, Judge Learned Hand, remarked in
a lecture at Harvard in the late 1950's that he would not want to be ruled by
''a bevy of Platonic Guardians.'' The Constitution balances the danger of
judicial abuse against the threat of a temporary majority trampling individual
rights. The current debate is a continuation of an age-old, and perhaps endless,
struggle to reach a balance between our commitments to democracy and to the rule
of law.

Although my office forces me to take a very direct part in the ongoing dialogue,
all Americans have a stake in what my judicial colleagues and I say about the
Constitution. At bottom, the debate is the consequence of our experiment, now
two centuries old, in giving our fundamental ideals written expression in a
Constitution. And that is cause for celebration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Attorney Gerneral Edwin Meese 3d (Atlan/Sygma, 68); Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Documenting a War

SECTION: Section 7; Page 41, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 303 words


To the Editor:

In his review of Gabriel Kolko's ''Anatomy of a War'' (Jan. 19), David M.
Oshinsky speaks of ''the well-documented Communist massacres in Hue during the
Tet offensive.'' I've looked long and hard for such documentation, and I'd very
much appreciate having Mr. Oshinsky direct me to it.

JOHN MORAN

Bronx David M. Oshinsky replies:

Communist officials in Vietnam have denied that their forces committed
atrocities in Hue during the Tet offensive. They claim that the mass graves
discovered there contain the bodies of Vietcong sympathizers who were killed by
South Vietnamese forces and of innocent civilians who were killed by American
firepower. But many journalists and historians disagree. Relying upon eyewitness
accounts and captured enemy documents, they contend that the Communists rounded
up and executed thousands of civilians (including merchants, intellectuals and
clergymen) who were suspected of collaborating with ''reactionary elements.''
Convincing evidence for this contention can be found in the following books:
''Big Story'' by Peter Braestrup (1977); ''Viet Cong Repression and Its
Implications for the Future'' by Stephen Hosmer (1970); ''Tet!'' by Don
Oberdorfer (1971), and ''The Viet-Cong Strategy of Terror'' by Douglas Pike
(1970).

Today almost all of the popular histories of the Vietnam War accept the
conclusion that the Communists did massacre many civilians in Hue. See, for
example, ''Backfire'' by Loren Baritz (1985); ''Vietnam'' by Stanley Karnow
(1983); ''America in Vietnam'' by Guenter Lewy (1978), and ''The March of
Folly'' by Barbara Tuchman (1984). Mr. Karnow, who revisited Vietnam in 1981 and
interviewed many people there, writes, ''The Communist butchery in Hue did take
place - perhaps on an even larger scale than reported during the war.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CHALLENGE TO MARCOS: A CROWD PROTECTS THE INSURGENTS

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1131 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Monday, Feb. 24


Before the dawn assault by riot troops, the armies of the night,
Philippine-style, squared off against the real soldiers, a brief encounter
Sunday that ended without a single shot and barely an angry word.

Several hours of confrontation between citizens and Government troops was
emblematic of the country's political crisis, an odd prism in which danger can
suddenly appear to be benign and hard lines somehow turn soft.

Not that the day was without ample potential menace.

In midafternoon, as many had feared, hundreds of marines and more than a dozen
armored cars, trucks and light tanks rode through the streets of northern Manila
and assembled on a huge rubble-caked field. Before them massed hundreds of
thousands of Filipinos, virtually every one of them wanting Ferdinand E. Marcos
to step down immediately as President.

Flowers for the Soldiers

Yet it quickly became clear that this was not a day that troops would attack.
They retreated docilely. But everyone who cheered their departure knew that
nothing guaranteed they would not be back, perhaps in earnest.

Throughout, the scene evoked antiwar demonstrations in the United States of the
1960's. Young men and women handed flowers and candy to soldiers. They planted
daisies inside the barrels of their rifles. Priests and nuns knelt before the
marines in the field's tall weeds and prayed.

The spirit shifted constantly, from one appropriate to a sanctuary to that fit
for a carnival.

''The people,'' said a man opposed to Mr. Marcos, ''have become a very strong
weapon.''

Heroes of the Opposition

The troops were ordered out to counter the serious threat to the Philippine
President posed by the two men who resigned this weekend as Defense Minister and
Deputy Chief of Staff, Juan Ponce Enrile and Lieut. Gen. Fidel V. Ramos. For a
second day, they fortified themselves inside military headquarters, surrounded
by hundreds of troops loyal to them, defying Mr. Marcos's order to surrender and
thereby deepening the Philippines' severe crisis.

In the course of the weekend, Mr. Enrile and General Ramos have become heroes to
the anti-Marcos forces, and countless thousands of people turned out Sunday in
the streets outside headquarters to lend support.

The Enrile-Ramos side left no doubt that it considered the crowd to be an
insurance policy. If marines were to attack, its leaders said, they would first
have to be prepared to kill many civilians.

''This is something new,'' said Col. Jose T. Almonte. ''Soldiers are supposed to
protect the civilians. In this particular case, you have civilians protecting
the soldiers.''

Early in the afternoon Mr. Enrile left the Defense Ministry inside Camp
Aguinaldo, where he had spent the night, and went to Camp Crame across the
street, headquarters of General Ramos's police constabulary.

Throng Gathers at Posts

The purpose was to consolidate forces, aides said, and so Mr. Enrile walked the
short distance, heading a march of gun-toting soldiers who walked alongside
rosary-holding nuns. Mr. Enrile strode with an Israeli-made automatic rifle
slung over his right shoulder.

To reach his destination, he had to be shoved in a flying wedge through a
surging throng that had gathered in the street between the two military posts,
stretching in either direction as far as the eye could see.

By then, Enrile loyalists were reporting that two battalions each of marines,
infantry soldiers and antiriot troops were advancing toward them. The only ones
in evidence, however, were the marines, who stopped within a mile of the camps,
in the giant field.

They had come from Fort Bonafacio, a stronghold in the capital of Gen. Fabian
Ver, Mr. Marcos's Chief of Staff, whose resignation was announced by Mr. Marcos
last week but who is still much in evidence.

Hurdles for the Tanks

On the main road leading from Camp Crame, the supporters of Mr. Enrile and
General Ramos had piled bags of rocks and sand as impediments to the tanks.
Buses were lined up several rows deep at a major intersection as an additional
barricade.

For all the precaution, the soldiers seemed uninterested in advancing farther.
Many sat in the field, rifles on the ground, faces impassive. The armored
vehicles studded the tall grass in no apparent formation.

They were under strict instructions, explained a colonel who gave only his last
name, Montesa. ''We told them not to follow unlawful orders,'' he said.
''Killing people is unauthorized.'' The field was encircled nearly all the way
by a concrete wall, and the enormous crowds of anti-Marcos demonstrators
gathered on the other side. Some chanted ''Cory! Cory!'' the nickname of Mr.
Marcos's presidential challenger, Corazon C. Aquino.

Gradually several of the younger people became emboldened and sat atop the wall.
A few dropped onto the grass and roamed among the marines. They handed out
flowers.  Soldiers' Smiles Win Cheers Maureen Aquino, no relation to the
presidential candidate, raced across the field passing out peppermint candies to
the marines, some of whom accepted and, to cheers, smiled.

She had just finished when a group of Roman Catholic priests and nuns crossed
her path carrying a six-foot reproduction of Jesus on the Cross. They stopped in
front of the soldiers, and sang the Lord's Prayer in Tagalog, the Philippine
language. Sister Claire Joseph walked from marine to marine, telling them,
''Pray with us.''

''If you cannot say it aloud,'' she said, ''You can do it through your heart and
mind.''

More and more demonstrators began mingling among the troops, who seemed largely
indifferent. Suddenly, a military helicopter that had hovered overhead for quite
a while landed in the field. For reasons unexplained, thousands of people
climbed the walls and raced toward the helicopter, forming a large semicircle
several yards from it and chanting, ''Cory! Cory!''

Almost as quickly as it came, the helicopter left. But the crowd stayed, and the
marine commandant who was on hand, Brig. Gen. A. A. Tadiar, had to figure out
what to do. It seemed that the decision had been made long before.

Night Brings a Retreat

As night arrived beneath a full moon, the trucks and tanks and armored cars
lined up and rode back to Fort Bonifacio, with only a truck of six or seven
marines left behind.

Jubilant demonstrators surrounded the caravan. One man inserted a yellow daisy
into the barrel of a 105-millimeter howitzer set atop an armored car. A few
pounded on the hoods of trucks, although with no apparent menace. Others chanted
in Tagalog at the soldiers, ''Sumama na kay'' - ''Join us.''

''We won,'' a young woman said. ''They went back to where they came from.''

''Yes, we won,'' said a Jesuit student, Alberto Cattanga, who stood next to her.
He added, ''For the moment.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of religious entreaties; photo of President Marcos

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

COMRADES OF 60'S MARCHES COMPETE FOR ATLANTA'S CONGRESS SEAT

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 927 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Feb. 23


In the 1960's, when the movement for equal rights burned intensely across the
South, John Lewis and Julian Bond worked side by side, helping to organize the
protests and marches that were to reshape the region.

Now, two decades later, these two veterans of the civil rights era, longtime
friends who together helped found the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee,
are political opponents, foes in the race for the Congressional seat from
Georgia's Fifth District, which includes most of Atlanta.

Mr. Bond, 46 years old; Mr. Lewis, also 46, and two other candidates, also
black, are seeking the Democratic nomination for the House seat being vacated by
Representative Wyche Fowler Jr., a Democrat. Earlier this month Mr. Fowler said
he was stepping down to seek the Democratic nomination to challenge Senator Mack
Mattingly, a first-term Republican.

The two other Democratic candidates who are planning to run for the Fifth
District seat, which was once held by Andrew Young, now Mayor of Atlanta, are
Charles Johnson, 37, an Atlanta lawyer, and Jan Douglass, 46, a community
activist.

Blacks Make Up 58% of District

Although the campaign is barely getting under way, the winner of the primary
Aug. 12 is virtually assured of going to Washington; the district, in which
blacks make up 68 percent of the population and 58 percent of the registered
voters, is heavily Democratic.

Mr. Fowler, who is white, defeated Mr. Lewis in a special runoff in 1977, after
Mr. Young resigned to serve as President Carter's chief delegate to the United
Nations.

Among many in Atlanta, where institutions and politics are still dominated by
leaders who were shaped in the struggle for black rights, the contest between
Mr. Bond and Mr. Lewis is already straining old loyalties.

''It as if there is a struggle within the family,'' said Michael Lomax, who is
the chairman of the County Commission in Fulton County, which includes Atlanta.

They Were Well-Known in 60's

Mr. Lewis and Mr. Bond, who announced their decision to run for the
Congressional seat within 10 days of each other, emerged in the 1960's as among
the best known of the young civil rights activists in the South.

Mr. Lewis, who has just turned 46, has been an member at large of the Atlanta
City Council since 1981, where some of his colleagues have chafed under his
insistent sponsorship of ethics reform. In the late 1970's he served in the
Carter Administration as director of domestic operations at Action, the Federal
agency for volunteer service.

Twenty-five years ago he served on the front lines of the movement. One of the
original Freedom Riders, he was jailed and beaten in countless demonstrations
across the South.

In 1963, Mr. Lewis was at the head of a line of voting rights marchers who were
beaten bloody by state troopers and sheriff's deputies as they sought to cross
the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Ala.

It Led to Voting Rights Act

That event, burned into the nation's conscience by photographs and television
film, led directly to Congress's passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965.

When Mr. Lewis was chairman of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee,
Mr. Bond was its communications director. But it was later, in 1965, that Mr.
Bond attained national attention, when he was as elected to the Georgia
Legislature, only to be denied his seat because of his outspoken opposition to
the war in Vietnam.

Three years later, amid the passion and turbulence of the Democratic National
Convention in Chicago, Mr. Bond was even nominated from the floor for Vice
President, an honor he was unable to accept because, at the age of 28, he was
too young to run for the office.

Mr. Bond's boyish good looks and prep school style make him appear younger than
46.

He Appears on Television

Although he has never moved beyond the Georgia Legislature, he has achieved a
kind of broad national celebrity, reflected in his appearance in the 1970's as a
celebrity host on ''Saturday Night Live,'' the nationally television show.

Even now, his income comes largely from speeches he makes about civil rights and
black politics.

Despite all this, he had to scramble to win re-election to his own Georgia
Senate district in 1984, after a 28-year-old black businessman, Hildred W.
Shumake, a relative unknown, accused him of missing 753 roll-call votes in four
years in the Georgia Senate and ignoring his constituents.

Mr. Lewis was badly beaten in his first race for Congress in 1977 by Mr. Fowler,
although redistricting in 1980, a move led by Mr. Bond, for the first time gave
the Fifth District more black voters than whites. ''I've never given up the
thought of running again,'' Mr. Lewis said.

Time to Move On

Mr. Bond's entry into the race was more surprising. He had turned down several
bids to run for the seat, declaring at one point he had no interest of serving
in Congress. In 1978 he even considered leaving politics for a career in
television.

But in an interview earlier this month, Mr. Bond said he felt the time was at
last ripe to move on. ''I've been here 20 years and I've gone just about as far
I can go,'' he said. ''I want to get into an arena where the issues in which
I've been most involved - war and peace, death and taxes - are best addressed.''

Mr. Lewis said he told Mr. Bond of his decision to run at a lunch in Atlanta
last October. ''He told me he was going to run too,'' said Mr. Lewis, explaining
that the exchange came right after they sat down. ''It turned out to be a pretty
short lunch,'' Mr. Lewis said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Julian Bond; photo of John Lewis

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 25, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

When the Peace Corps Was Young

BYLINE: By Paul Theroux; Paul Theroux is author of two dozen novels and travel
books.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1436 words

DATELINE: LONDON


My record was so bad that I was first rejected by the Peace Corps as a poor risk
and possible troublemaker and was accepted as a volunteer only after a great
deal of explaining and arguing. The alternative was Vietnam - this was 1963, and
President John F. Kennedy was still muddling dangerously along. I was sent to
Nyasaland; soon it became Malawi. And then a month before my two-year stint was
over, I was ''terminated'' - kicked out -fined arbitrarily for three months'
''unsatisfactory service'' and given hell by the Peace Corps officials in
Washington.

The truth was that I had been framed in an assassination plot against Hastings
Kamuzu Banda, the President for Life (''Messiah,'' ''Conqueror'' and ''Great
Lion'' were some of his lesser titles). The Peace Corps knew this, but the case
against me looked bad, so out I went.

It was a mess, and, looking back as the Peace Corps is about to mark its 25th
anniversary, on March 1, I recall that for a long while afterward I hated the
Corps and laughed at its subway posters. I hated the bureaucracy, the
patronizing attitudes, the jargon, the sanctimony. I remembered all the official
freeloaders who came out from Washington on so-called inspection tours, and how
they tried to ingratiate themselves. ''You're doing wonderful work here . . .
It's a great little country,'' they said; but for most of them it was merely an
African safari. They hadn't the slightest idea of what we were doing, and our
revenge was to take them on long bumpy rides through the bush. ''Sensational,''
they said.

On the subject of Vietnam, these bureaucrats were surprisingly hawkish and
belligerent. The volunteers were divided. This was an important issue to me,
because I had joined the Peace Corps to avoid being drafted. As a meddlesome,
contentious 22-year-old, I made a point of asking everyone his views on Vietnam.
What astonishes me today is how few people remember the ridiculous things they
said about Vietnam in the 60's.

But we are a nation of revisionists, and the chief characteristic of a
revisionist is a bad memory. No one now remembers how confused Mr. Kennedy's
Vietnam policy was or how isolated the student movement was. I had been involved
in student protests from 1959 until 1963 - first against R.O.T.C., then against
nuclear testing, then against our involvement in Vietnam, and when I applied to
join the Peace Corps this career as an agitator was held against me. It was all
a diabolical plot, I felt. And there was the President with such style -money,
power, glamour. He even had culture!

I had to fight my feeling of distrust and alienation in order to join. There
were many like me - antiauthoritarian, hating the dazzle and the equivocation.
And when the President was shot - we learned about it halfway through a training
lecture (something about land tenure in the Nyasaland protectorate) - we were
all properly put in our place. More revisionism, more guilt, and I thought: Get
me out of here.

Nyasaland was the perfect country for a volunteer. It was friendly and
destitute; it was small and out-of-the-way. It had all of Africa's problems
-poverty, ignorance, disease. It had a fascinating history that was bound up not
only with early African exploration - Livingstone himself - but also one of the
first African rebellions. The people were generous and willing, and as they had
not been persecuted or bullied, they were not prickly and color-conscious like
the Kenyans and Zambians. There was a pleasant atmosphere of hope; the
prevailing feeling was that the education we were providing would lead to
prosperity, honest government and good health.

An added thrill was that many British settlers were still in residence. They had
little contact with Africans - the place had never been a colony in the strict
sense, only a backwater - and yet they resented us. Most of us mocked them.
These pompous little creeps - so we said - went to gymkhanas and cocktail
parties at the local club and dated the settlers' children when they returned
from their Rhodesian boarding schools. We saw them as social climbers and
traitors, and feelings were very strong on the issue. It was not uncommon for a
Peace Corps volunteer in town for supplies to approach a group of settlers in a
bar and say something crudely provocative such as ''The Queen's a whore'' (her
portrait always hung over the bottles), and nearly always a fight would start.
To Africans these antagonisms were very exciting.

We had arrived in the country speaking Chinyanja fairly well, and we had plunged
in - made friends, taught school, ran literacy programs, coached sports and
generally made ourselves useful.

Now and then, I remembered that I was in the Peace Corps. That gave me an odd
feeling. I disliked the idea that I was with an outfit, and I rejected the
suggestion that I was an American official working abroad. I have never been
easy with the concept of the Peace Corps as an example to spineless Marxists,
and the implications of fresh-faced youngsters wooing third worlders away from
Communism. I wanted the Peace Corps to be something very vague and unorganized,
and to a large extent it was. It did not run smoothly. The consequence was that
we were left alone.

We were not trusted by the embassy personnel or the State Department hacks - all
those whispering middle-aged aunties who couldn't speak the language. The
feeling was mutual. We felt embassy people were overpaid and ignorant, always
being fussed over by African servants. We were, we felt, independent spirits,
answerable only to our students and patients. I regarded the Peace Corps as a
sort of sponsoring organization and myself as an individual who had only the
most tenuous link with it.

I think I am typical in believing that the Peace Corps trained us brilliantly
and then did little more except send us into the bush. It was not a bad way of
running things. After all, we were supposed to use our initiative. And when I
got the boot, it seemed like the act of an absent parent, someone I hardly knew
asserting his authority over me.

That is why I do not associate my years in the Peace Corps with group
photographs and images of Mr. Kennedy showing me the way and soft-ball games
with the other volunteers. It was much more interesting. It was to me most of
all the reality of being very far from home and yet feeling completely at home
in this distant place. It was a slight sense of danger, the smell of wood smoke,
hearing the Beatles for the first time in a bar in the town of Limbe. In
America, there was a sort of revolution in progress, but it had started partly
as a result of the first Peace Corps group that had gone to Nepal. Those
volunteers returning from Katmandu had blazed the hippie trail.

In Malawi, we had all of that, too -good people, wilderness music, dusty roads,
hard-working students and a feeling of liberation. Things were on the move, it
seemed. In Malawi, I saw my first hyena, smoked my first hashish, witnessed my
first murder, caught my first dose of gonorrhea. After I lived a while in a cozy
bungalow with two servants, I moved into an African township, where I lived in a
two-room hut - cold water, cracks in the wall, tin roof, music blasting all day
from the other huts; shrieks, dogs, chickens. It was just the thing. The
experience greatly shaped my life.

When I think about those years, I don't think much about the Peace Corps, though
Malawi is always on my mind. That is surely a tribute to the Peace Corps. I do
not believe that Africa is a very different place for having played host to the
Peace Corps - in fact, Africa is in a much worse state than it was 20 years ago.
But America is quite a different place for having had so many returned Peace
Corps volunteers, and when they began joining the State Department and working
in the embassies, these institutions were the better for it and had a
better-informed and less truculent tone.

I still do not understand who was running the show, or what they did, or even
what the Peace Corps actually was, apart from an enlightened excuse for sending
us to poor countries. Those countries are still poor. We were the ones who were
enriched, and sometimes I think that we remind those people - as if they needed
such a thing - that they were being left out. We stayed a while, and then we
left them. And yet I think I would do it again. At an uncertain time in my life
I joined. And up to a point - they gave me a lot of rope - the Peace Corps
allowed me to be myself. I realized that it was much better to be neglected than
manipulated, and I had learned that you make your own life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 26, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE FALL OF MARCOS: NEXT CHAPTER FOR WASHINGTON;
FOR THE U.S. THE TOUGHEST PHILIPPINE POLICY DECISIONS MAY YET LIE AHEAD

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1092 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 25


The departure of Ferdinand E. Marcos as President of the Philippines is only a
first step toward solving the painful economic, social and political problems of
the country, politicians and academic specialists said today. All agreed that
difficult policy decisions lie ahead for the United States as well as the
Philippines.

The mounting and ultimately irresistible pressure on Mr. Marcos by the Reagan
Administration and by Congress represented a departure in American foreign
policy. Never before had the United States pushed so publicly for the removal of
the leader of a major ally. Having lost faith in Syngman Rhee of South Korea,
Ngo Dinh Diem of South Vietnam and the Shah of Iran, Washington conspired in
their departures, but it did so far more surreptitiously.

''Thank goodness, it happened on a Republican watch,'' said Richard C.
Holbrooke, who was an Assistant Secretary of State during the Carter
Administration. ''They managed to build a consensus for the policy. If a
Democrat had tried to do this, it would have split the country.''

Few people in Washington believe President Reagan would act as he did in the
Marcos case very often. What made the Phillipines different, said a senior aide
to Senator Richard Lugar, the Indiana Republican who heads the Foreign Relations
Committee, ''was the existence of a middle-class alternative to Marcos, composed
of people who talked, acted and even looked a little like your own friends.''

Big Job Ahead for Aquino

At the same time, it is clear to most people here who have followed the
situation that the new President, Corazon C. Aquino, faces problems that would
daunt people with far more experience of statecraft than she. The expectation
here is that she will encounter enormous difficulties, and that the United
States will come under pressure to involve itself ever more deeply to try to
alter the course of history in that impoverished nation.

''Her task is to turn a movement into an administration, and many Filipinos tend
to see it as our task, too,'' to help, said Stanley Karnow, a journalist and
historian who is working on a book and a television series about the
Philippines. ''Campaigning is poetry, and we know she's good at that, but
governing is prose, and we have no evidence about her skills in that area.''

According to White House and congressional sources, the primary American goals
in the Philippines in the next few months will be to create a stable Government,
a more aggressive war against the Communist New People's Army, an attack on the
feudal economic structure and a reawakening of the entrepreneurial skills which,
the Administration believes, could ultimately make the Filipinos as prosperous
as the South Koreans and other Eastern Asian people.

Representative Stephen Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who heads the House Foreign
Affairs Commitee's subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs, said Mrs. Aquino
was ''going to need all the help she can get.'' He said he would back a
substantial increase in United States aid.

Some Legislators Cautious

Other legislators agreed, but a few were more cautious. One Democrat said the
right mix of aid was important, saying, ''They'll need weapons if they're going
to campaign effectively against the guerrillas, but we have to insist that they
rebuild the officer corps as a condition of military aid, and we have to give
them economic aid, too, and insist that they go to work on the inequities that
feed the Communists.''

Robert Dole, the Senate Majority Leader, said aid should be made tied to an
unequivocal pledge by the new Government to allow the United States to keep
Clark Air Base and the Subic Bay Naval Station in the Philippines.

''Now that we're in the post-Marcos era,'' he said, ''we need to find out what
the new Government thinks of us before we offer anything.'' He called upon the
Adminstration to review contradictory statements made by Mrs. Aquino about the
bases during her campaign.

Although the United States Ambassador in Manila, Stephen W. Bosworth, appears to
have developed good relationships with Mrs. Aquino and her aides, there is
considerable uncertainty here about the shape of her Government. Administration
officials are eager for Mrs. Aquino to choose people from outside the circle of
wealthy families to which she, Vice President and Prime Minister Salvador H.
Laurel and Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile, all belong.

Internal Politics a Concern

Washington is also worried about the stability of the coalition that carried
Mrs. Aquino to power. Her relations with Mr. Laurel, who had wanted to run for
President, were bumpy during the campaign. Mr. Enrile, who also has presidential
ambitions, was a loyal Marcos lieutenant for 20 years until he rebelled last
week.

''She has to hold all these people together while trying to weed out the Marcos
people who remain in power in the provinces,'' a State Department official said.
''And she has to do it in a country where corruption, extreme wealth and extreme
poverty were ways of life long before Ferdinand Marcos came onto the scene.
Don't expect miracles.''

The situation facing the United States appears to have more parallels to that in
South Vietnam after the assassination of Mr. Diem than to any other recent
revolution.

In Iran and Nicaragua, governments backed by the United States fell and were
replaced by governments that became hostile to this country and denied it any
influence. In South Vietnam, as in the Philippines, a corrupt and repressive
government that had done little to combat a Communist insurgency was replaced by
another anti-Communist regime for which the United States initially held very
high hopes.

Comparison to Vietnam

But through the middle 1960's in Saigon, one pro-American Government succeeded
another, each of which was unable either to mobilize the non-Communist part of
the populace or to beat the insurgents.

Pessimists in Washington fear that something similar could happen in the
Philippines. If it does, there will undoubtedly be appeals for help - for
weapons first, then perhaps for military advisers and finally maybe even for
American troops. The stakes would be even higher: the security of the big bases,
which some recent independent studies have described as virtually irreplaceable
and strategically vital to the United States in the Pacific.

A great deal rests on Mrs. Aquino's shoulders, and policymakers here were just
beginning tonight to try to work out how the United States can most effectively
ease her heavy burdens.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 26, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN PLANS SPEECH TONIGHT TO WIN SUPPORT FOR MILITARY SPENDING

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1072 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 25


To combat waning public support for military spending, President Reagan plans to
argue in a televised speech that there is a link between a successful arms
control agreement and continued increases in military spending, Administration
officials said today.

The speech, which is to be delivered Wednesday at 8 P.M., is an Administration
effort to convert the Mr. Reagan's personal popularity into political influence
on Capitol Hill and to shift the context of the current debate over the military
budget.

The leader of the Democratic majority in the House, Jim Wright of Texas, will
deliver a televised reply to Mr. Reagan's address, Democratic officials say.

While critics of military spending increases have argued that Pentagon
expenditures need to be reduced to help lower the Federal deficit, the
Administration intends to draw a connection between support for the military and
the prospect of avoiding conflicts with other nations.

Peace and Defense

A White House official said: ''This is not a defense of the Defense Department
budget. It addresses issues of defense and peace and draws a bridge between the
two,''

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger is seeking a $311.6 billion budget for
the Defense Department for the fiscal year 1987, which will begin Oct. 1. He has
also endorsed a plan that would give the Pentagon the authority to spend more
than $1.7 trillion over the next five years.

But critics argue that the military buildup is already largely an accomplished
fact and that the major barrier to an agreement to limit nuclear weapons is the
Reagan Administration's antimissile research program.

Moreover, some experts who have been involved in the planning and execution of
the President's military buildup question whether the Administration can summon
sufficient public support for further increases in military spending.

They say the Administration should be making efforts to alter its military
planning priorities in light of the apparent changed political situation.

''Zero real growth is probably the largest number that you can get a consensus
on,'' said Lawrence J. Korb, a former Assistant Defense Secretary who is now an
executive in the military industry. Mr. Korb said the Pentagon could adequately
protect the gains it had made without obtaining real increases in military
spending, ''provided that the money is put in the right places.''

Reagan's Past Successes

By any measure, the Reagan Administration has been generally successful in
winning Congressional and public support for its spending requests.

The military budget has increased more than 50 percent on the basis of
statistics that eliminate the effects of inflation over the past five years, As
a result of these increases, the Pentagon is now spending more on the military
than it did at the height of the Vietnam War, if an adjustment is made for the
effects of inflation.

In increasing military spending, the Administration has established a number of
spending priorities. One key priority has been spending on new weapons. The
budget to procure arms has more than doubled since 1980.

Within this spending category, strategic nuclear weapons clearly have been
favored.

Because of the rising costs of the weapons that the Pentagon is buying, this
infusion of procurement funds has not led to an important increase in the number
of weapons in the military.

Concern About Deficits

The growing concern over the deficit has clearly produced a change in the
Pentagon's political fortune. Faced with a sharp rise in the Federal deficit,
Congress approved a military budget for the fiscal year 1986 of $278.4 billion,
as against $286.8 billion the previous year. It marked the first time in 15
years that there was a decline in the military budget.

This year the Pentagon has requested a $311.6 billion budget. But a new law
requiring that the Federal budget be balanced by 1991 has cast a pall of
uncertainty over this request.

Estimates of the size of the reduction that could be caused by the budget
balancing law vary. But according to the Congressional Budget Office, a
reduction of $49 billion in the Administration's military spending reguest for
1987 would be required if Congress took no action on raising or cutting other
spending.

The Supreme Court may yet rule that some provisions of the budget-balancing law
are unconstitional. But military experts on Capitol Hill say the most the
Pentagon may realistically expect is to maintain its current budget, once the
effects of inflation are discounted.

Some observers say that this changed political situation will force the Pentagon
to back off from some of its most cherished objectives, such as building a
600-ship Navy or increasing the number of the Air Force's tactical air wings to
40.

Some Crucial Questions

The prospect of reduced or frozen military spending also raises other questions.
One key question is whether the Pentagon can afford to pursue a sizable research
program on the President's Strategic Defense Initiative to build a space-based
antimissile system without hurting other military programs.

Congress approved $2.8 billion in spending for the the research program last
year, but the Pentagon is projecting an $8.9 billion budget for the program by
1991. Spending on the program now accounts for 8 percent of the Defense
Department research budget. But by 1990, it would make up almost 20 percent of
that budget.

Another key question is whether the emphasis on the purchase of new weapons
could take a toll on other programs, such as operations and maintenance. Plans
for munitions for war reserve stocks have also been slowed.

The growing competition between procurement and operating funds is evident in
the Air Force's recent budget plans, experts said.

The Air Force has not cut back its budget for F-15 and F-16 jet fighters. But it
has substantially shaved its spending requests for 1987 for spare parts and
modifications to existing aircraft.

''The Air Force intends to make that up next year,'' said Mr. Korb. But, he
added, ''What happens if it does not get 3 percent real growth next year?.''

These potential shortfalls are likely to be cited by Mr. Weinberger and other
staunch supporters of increased military spending as an argument for continued
increases in military expenditures. But to critics, they show that the time for
some difficult adjustment in spending priorities has arrived.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graph of budget; graph of military spending

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 27, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Talks on the Missing

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 63 words

DATELINE: BANKGOK, Thailand, Feb. 26


A United States military team arrived in Hanoi today to resume talks on American
servicemen listed as missing in action in Vietnam and to set a date for the
return of 14 sets of American remains, military officials said. In Laos, a joint
United States-Lao team continued digging for remains in the wreckage of an
AC-130 warplane shot down in southern Laos in March 1972.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 27, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS SAY ARMS PLAN WOULD REQUIRE A TAX RISE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 26


Representative Jim Wright, the House majority leader, said this evening that it
would be impossible to continue President Reagan's proposed military buildup and
balance the budget unless there was a tax increase.

Mr. Wright's remarks were the official Democratic reply to Mr. Reagan's
nationally televised speech on the military budget this evening.

Mr. Wright, a Texas Democrat, also said the President's insistance on cutting
many important domestic programs, including education and Medicare, to pay for
his military buildup is ''a misplaced priority.''

Mr. Wright did not advocate a tax increase in his talk. He and other Democratic
leaders have said they would not support an increase in taxes unless it were
proposed by Mr. Reagan, who has repeatedly vowed not to do so.

G.O.P. Echoes Wright

But some Republicans in the Senate, including Pete V. Domenici of New Mexico,
chairman of the Budget Committee, are arguing that a tax increase will be
necessary if the President wants to get his proposed 8 percent increase in the
1987 Pentagon budget on top of a rise to make up for inflation, Other
Republicans were unswayed by Mr. Reagan's argument. Senator Charles E. Grassley,
Republican of Iowa who is a member of the Budget Committee, said the President's
appeal ''will not fly. At the grass roots, people see a bloated defense budget
as the reason for $200 billion deficits.''

Mr. Grassley noted that Congress has appropriated $62.5 billion in Pentagon
funds that is not ticketed for any specific weapons.

''Even if we cut their budget by $60 billion, it wouldn't hurt because they have
that huge slush fund,'' Mr. Grassley said.

Senator Mark Andrews, Republican of North Dakota, said the Pentagon should be
prepared to take its share of reductions. ''We could have a strong and effective
defense and still cut $30 billion to $35 billion,'' he said.

A Reagan ally on the issue, Senator Strom Thurmond, Republican of South
Carolina, conceded, ''We may not be able to get as much as the President
wants.''

Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan who is a member of the Senate Armed
Services Committee, said after the President's speech: ''I agree that we are
stronger than ever. And we are stronger, even though Congress has cut the
President's Pentagon budget request every year. We must continue to look for
waste in his requests and go after it. There's plenty to be found.'' Mr. Wright
said that approving the President's military budget request would mean spending
almost four times as much on the military by the end of the decade as was being
spent at the height of the Vietnam war.

''Frankly, it just simply isn't possible to do this and rule out any new
revenues and balance the budget,'' he said. ''Republican leaders know that.''

Domestic Cuts Protested

Since the President began pushing his military buildup in 1981, many Democrats
have argued that it has been paid for partly by cuts in domestic programs that
are also important to the country's future.

Mr. Wright echoed this argument, saying, ''The American people know, too, that
real national security depends on certain other things equally as important to
the country's future as armaments and weapons.''

''It depends first of all on education,'' he added, ''the brain power of our
citizenry.''

But, Mr. Wright said, the President's budget proposes eliminating the GI bill
for Vietnam veterans and cutting student loan and work study programs. ''We
think that is a misplaced priority,'' he said.

Mr. Wright, in a reference to Mr. Reagan's request for $100 million in military
and nonmilitary aid to the rebels fighting the Nicaraguan Government, said the
United States is powerful enough to overthrow the Government.

He said it would cost ''a lot more than $100 million and a precious lot of
bloodshed, but we could do it.''

He added: ''But what then? The problems of Latin America would still be with us
- problems of illiteracy and malnutrition, and disease, the problems of
joblessness.'' Mr. Wright did not, however, oppose the President's request.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 27, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM REAGAN TALK ON ARMS BUDGET, AND DEMOCRATIC RESPONSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1852 words


Following are excerpts from the speech on military spending by President Reagan
last night in Washington and of a response by Representative Jim Wright of
Texas, the House majority leader, as recorded by The New York Times:

Reagan's Speech My fellow Americans, I want to speak to you this evening about
my highest duty as President - to preserve peace and defend these United States.

But before I do, let me take a moment to speak about the situation in the
Philippines. We've just seen a stirring demonstration of what men and women
committed to democratic ideas can achieve. The remarkable people of those 7,000
islands joined together with faith in the same principles on which America was
founded - that men and women have the right to freely choose their own destiny.
Despite a flawed election, the Filipino people were understood. They carried
their message peacefully, and they were heard across their country and across
the world.

We salute the remarkable restraint, shown by both sides, to prevent bloodshed
during these last tense days. Our hearts and hands are with President Aquino and
her new government as they set out to meet the challenges ahead. Today the
Filipino people celebrate the triumph of democracy and the world celebrates with
them.

Tonight, the security program that you and I launched to restore America's
strength is in jeopardy, threatened by those who would quit before the job is
done. Any slackening now would invite the very dangers America must avoid and
could fatally compromise our negotiating position.

Our adversaries, the Soviets, respect only nations that negotiate from a
position of strength. American power is the indispensable element of a peaceful
world; it is America's last, best hope of negotiating real reductions in nuclear
arms. Just as we are sitting down at the bargaining table with the Soviet Union,
let's not throw America's trump card away.

Our defense problems five years ago were immense, and drastic action was
required. Even my predecessor in this office recognized that and projected
sizeable increases in defense spending, and I'm proud of what we've done.

Now the biggest increases in defense spending are behind us. And that's why,
last summer, I agreed with Congress to freeze defense funding for one year, and
after that to resume a modest 3 percent annual growth. Frankly, I hesitated to
reach this agreement on a freeze because we still have far too much to do. But I
thought that Congressional support for steady increases over several years was a
step forward.

But this didn't happen. Instead of a freeze, there was a sharp cut - a cut of
over 5 percent. And some are now saying that we need to chop another 20, 30, or
even 50 billion dollars out of national defense.

This is reckless, dangerous and wrong. It's backsliding of the most
irresponsible kind, and you need to know about it. You, after all, paid the bill
for all we've accomplished these past five years. But we will have a way to go.
Millions of Americans actually believe that we are now superior to the Soviet
Union in military power.

Defense Cuts Imperil Peace

Over the next few months, you'll be hearing this debate. I'd like you to keep in
mind the two simple reasons not to cut defense now. One, it's not cheap. Two,
it's not safe. If we listen to those who would abandon our defense program, we
will not only jeopardize negotiations with the Soviet union, we may put peace
itself at risk.

Arbitrary cuts only bring phony savings, but there's a more important reason not
to abandon our defense program: It's not safe.

As a consequence of their enormous weapons investment, major military imbalances
still exist between our two countries.

Today the Soviet Union has deployed over one-and-a-half times as many combat
aircraft as the United States, over two-and-a-half times as many submarines,
over five times as many tanks and over 11 times as many artillery pieces.

We have begun to close some of these gaps, but if we are to regain our margins
of safety more must be done.

Some argue that our dialogue with the Soviets means we can treat defense more
casually. Nothing could be farther from the truth. It was our seriousness about
defense that created the climate in which serious talks could finally begin.

Now that the Soviets are back at the table, we must not undercut our
negotiators. Unfortunately, that's exactly what some members of Congress have
done. By banning any U.S. tests of antisatellite systems, Congress not only
protected a Soviet monopoly, it unilaterally granted the Soviets a concession
they could not win at the bargaining table.

You've heard me talk about our Strategic Defense Initiative, the program that
could one day free us all from the prison of nuclear terror. It would be pure
folly for the United States not to press forward with S.D.I. when the Soviets
have already invested up to 20 years on their own program. Let us not forget
that the only operational missile defense in the world today guards the capital
of the Soviet Union, not the United States.

These are the practical decisions we make when we send a defense budget to
Congress. Each generation has to live with the challenges history delivers. And
we can't cope with these challenges by evasion.

We want to make this a more peaceful world. We want to reduce arms. We want
agreements that truly diminish the nuclear danger. We want real agreements,
agreements that really work, with no cheating. We want an end to state policies
of intimidation, threats, and the constant quest for domination. We want real
peace.

I will never ask for what isn't needed; I will never fight for what isn't
necessary. But I need your help.

We've come so far together these last five years; let's not falter now. Let's
maintain that crucial level of national strength, unity and purpose that has
brought the Soviet Union to the negotiating table and has given us this historic
opportunity to achieve real reductions in nuclear weapons and a real chance at
lasting peace. That would be the finest legacy we could leave behind - for our
children and for their children.

Wright's Response Hello, as House majority leader, I've been asked to give a
Congressional perspective on our national defense, global security and
particularly, freedom in our hemisphere and how we make all this fit into our
national budget. There are some facts that we all need to know.

Democrats have supported a strong defense always, and we always will. There are
times when only the President can speak for all of us in the councils of the
world, and when he does we want him to succeed.

We have cheered him on as he went to the summit with Mr. Gorbachev. We have
supported his position in the Philippines. We oppose military dictatorship and
the suppression of political liberties anywhere in the world and particularly in
our hemisphere, whether it be in Nicaragua or Chile.

We do have some very fundamental differences over spending priorities and the
amount of debt that we are willing to place upon the backs of our children.

We think the deficits themselves pose a danger to our national security. We know
that it adds to the debt to double military spending and cut taxes at the same
time.

We believe that even the Pentagon should be held to strict standards of
accountability in spending taxpayers' money.

And we believe that true national security depends on a lot of things in
addition to just military weapons.

Let's consider for a minute just how much we have already spent on defense. In
the past five years, bipartisan majorities in Congress have doubled the rate of
military spending -from $146 billion in 1980 to $292 billion this year. This is
the most massive military spending buildup that the nation has ever undertaken
in peacetime. 60,000 Nuclear Warheads But today the United States and the Soviet
Union together have 60,000 nuclear warheads with a total destructive capacity
more than one million times that of the bomb that destroyed Hiroshima. We have
enough weapons to kill each other off eight or 10 times over.

Most authorities agree that the United States enjoys strategic parity, but not
strategic superiority. Let's get one thing real clear: Nobody has suggested that
we cut our defense. The only question is how much we can afford prudently to
add.

If Congress were simply to rubber stamp the President's entire Pentagon budget,
we'd be spending almost four times as much on the military by the end of this
decade as the nation spent during the height of the Vietnam War. Frankly, it
just simply isn't possible to do this and rule out any new revenue and balance
the budget. Republican leaders know that.

Let's look at what's happening here at home. While borrowing to finance this
unprecedented buildup in arms, the Administration demands that we reduce our
investment in education, we cut Medicare and Medicaid, cut job training for
displaced workers, reduce clean air and clean water programs, law-enforcement
programs, retirement benefits, G.I. Bill of Rights for Vietnam veterans and the
whole gamut of domestic government on which people depend.

The American people know that real national security depends on certain other
things equally as important to the country's future as armaments and weapons.

It depends first of all on education - the brain power of our citizenry. Three
years ago the President's own Commission on Education reported on what it called
''A Nation at Risk.'' And here's what it said: ''If an unfriendly foreign power
had attempted to impose on America the mediocre educational performance that
exists today, we might well have viewed it as an act of war.''

And yet, three years later, the President's budget asks that we zero out the
G.I. Bill of Rights for our Vietnam veterans and that we cut student loans and
work-study grants, which make it possible for young Americans of modest means to
get an education. Now we think that is a misplaced priority.

Problems in Latin America

We worry about Communism, - we don't seem to worry about the conditions that
breed Communism. Even if we didn't have to worry about the problems of Cuba and
Nicaragua, there still would be challenges that would stagger us in Latin
America.

The problems of Latin America are the problems of illiteracy, and malnutrition,
and disease, the problems of joblessness and the bondage of debt that amounts
almost to servitude and a growing sense of hopeless disillusionment with
society.

In the last century, patriots like Bolivar and San Martin patterned their
popular people's movements after us. We were the inspiration and the example,
and we have a residue of good will if we'll build upon it.

If we would reap the respect of our neighbors throughout the world, and
particularly to the south, we'd have to cultivate a sustained interest in them
as people, and their very real problems, not just that of a fire engine that
rushes in to put out a fire and then rushes out just as swiftly to ignore the
combustibles that lie everywhere upon the tattered landscape of a civilization
cruelly battered by a history of neglect.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 27, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Against Normalizing U.S. Relations With Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 542 words


To the Editor:

John Balaban's one-sided ''Normalizing Relations With Vietnam'' (Op-Ed, Feb. 3)
contains factual errors and reflects a highly romanticized interpretation of
recent events. First, Mr. Balaban underestimates both the number of those
''missing in action'' in Indochina (by approximately 20 percent) and the number
of Vietnamese troops in Cambodia, which total 140,000 to 160,000 rather than
100,000.

Second, when speculating about Hanoi's motives for occupation, one might well
question why Vietnam, with a population of 52 million and a well-trained,
well-equipped army of 600,000 in 1978 (and 1.2 million in 1986, making it the
third largest army in the world), was ''forced'' into ''necessary'' retaliation
against a nation of 5.5 million and an army of 60,000 relatively poorly equipped
guerrillas.

Further, one might question why, in Laos, where Vietnam faces no Khmer Rouge, it
maintains a 40,000-man army and controls virtually all decisions of the Laotian
Government.

Third, the account of the hardships imposed on Vietnam by its ''unwanted''
occupation of Cambodia conveniently ignores the enormous inputs of Soviet
economic and military assistance, and the substantial and systematic rice trade
from Cambodia to Vietnam that is made possible by the occupation. Fourth, a more
balanced interpretation of the Vietnamese ''promise'' to leave Cambodia by 1990
might consider Hanoi's actions since 1975. For instance, while loudly
proclaiming a policy of clemency in the name of national reconciliation, the
regime sent more than two million people to re-education camps, where thousands
still languish today. In addition, at least 65,000 persons were the victims of
peacetime political executions in the name of ''blood debts owed to the
people.''

No doubt, Vietnam, which has repeatedly rejected all compromises that might lead
to the restoration of Cambodian sovereignty, would prefer cost-free suzerainty
over a compliant Cambodia, without the ugly necessity of occupation troops or
the inconvenience of Western and Japanese trade embargoes. The crucial point
here is that most Cambodians do not want Pol Pot, Heng Samrin, whose government
Vietnam installed, or the Vietnamese occupiers, but a government of their own
choosing.

United States normalization with Vietnam before an agreement restoring Cambodian
sovereignty would be considered an unfriendly act by most of our Association of
Southeast Asian Nations allies and might fracture our fragile relationship with
China, without solving the fundamental problem - whether an independent Cambodia
will be allowed to exist.

Mr. Balaban's distressingly uncritical acceptance of everything told him by
Vietnamese leaders, his apology for Hanoi's domestic and international actions
and his poorly documented insistence that ''we have little to lose and
everything to gain by normalizing relations'' are stated in complete disregard
of U.S. policy interests, and far more important, of the right of the Cambodian
people to self-determi-nation. JACQUELINE DESBARATS KARL D. JACKSON Berkeley,
Calif., Feb. 13, 1986 The writers are, respectively, an associate research
social scientist and an associate professor of political science at the
University of California, Berkeley.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOLD, GROWING COMMUNISTS DRIVE: A SERIOUS CHALLENGE FOR AQUINO

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2635 words

DATELINE: BACOLOD, the Philippines, Feb. 26


Six members of the New People's Army, the Communist fighting force, were waiting
for Col. Gilfredo Geolingo, the police chief here, when he drove from his house
Tuesday.

The gunmen, members of a recently formed unit called the Armed City Partisans,
riddled his car with automatic weapons fire, killing the colonel and his driver.
Then they calmly drove off down the main street in a truck.

''He owed a blood debt to the people,'' said Ka Joyce, or Comrade Joyce, the
senior Communist Party political commissar for the island of Negros, of which
Bacolod is the capital.

'Repressing the People'

''He persisted in repressing the people despite repeated warnings and was
responsible for many salvagings,'' Ka Joyce said, using a Filipino term for
atrocities by Government soldiers and the police.

The bold daylight killing, in a major city, reflects the rapid growth of the
Communist insurgency in the Philippines in the last few years.

Until about 1980 the New People's Army, the military arm of the Communist Party
of the Philippines, was considered only an annoyance, a small band of guerrillas
fighting in isolated mountainous areas. In the opinion of many Filipinos and
American diplomats, it has now emerged as the country's dominant long-term
problem.

There is wide agreement that the Communists have already created a new power
center in the Philippines, in some ways rivaling the country's traditional major
institutions: the Government, the Roman Catholic Church and more recently the
army. Unless the Communists suddenly reverse political course, authorities here
say, they will pose a serious threat to President Corazon C. Aquino's efforts to
revive the economy and restore democracy.

With a flexible strategy loosely based on Mao Zedong's precept of using the
countryside to surround the cities and exploiting widespread popular discontent,
the Communists have fashioned a nationwide network that mixes so-called
liberated zones in the villages with safe houses, secret party cells and
clandestine couriers in the cities.

All figures about the Communists are somewhat hazy and should be treated with
caution. But by one American estimate, the New People's Army controls 20 percent
of the archipelago's 40,000 villages. The Communists have installed shadow
governments in a number of towns that remain nominally under the Government,
including some close to the large American naval base at Subic Bay on the Bataan
Peninsula. By American count, there are now 20,000 guerrillas. The Communists
say they have 30,000 men under arms.

''We could have 10,000 more, but there is a shortage of arms and a long waiting
list,'' Ka Joyce said.

The National Democratic Front, a Communist umbrella organization of peasant,
worker, church and women's groups, claims a membership of one million. And
Bayan, a legal united front organization that many Filipino moderates assert is
really controlled by the Communists, has another 2.3 million members.

In the last few years, especially since the popular protests after the
assassination of Mrs. Aquino's husband, Benigno S. Aquino Jr., in 1983, the
Communists' organization in the cities has developed as fast as their older
activities in the countryside.

'Going to the Hills'

Many of the nation's brightest, most dedicated and often wealthiest young people
have rushed to join them, including students, professors, doctors, business
executives, priests and even beauty queens. ''Going to the hills'' to join the
New People's Army became a fashionable trend in the years of President Ferdinard
E. Marcos's rule, much like radical chic in the United States in the late
1960's.

''The N.P.A. may have a higher percentage of really smart leaders than any other
Communist movement,'' an American military analyst said.

Some Filipinos believe that the Communists will not succeed. They point to the
example of this week, when the unpopular, ineffective Marcos Government was
peacefully ousted by hundreds of thousands of people supporting Mrs. Aquino. The
phenomenon, they contend, suggests that moderates in the Philippines retain
great appeal and power.

''I think the Communists will now wither away,'' said Joker Arroyo, a civil
liberties lawyer who defended many men accused by Mr. Marcos of being Communists
and who has been appointed executive secretary in President Aquino's new
Government. ''They are containable.''

'Armed Struggle' to Go On

But the Communists assert they will continue their basic strategy of ''armed
struggle.''

''You may see some different faces in the Government, but the same repressive
system remains in place,'' said Ka Joyce, who was one of the founding members of
the Communist Party in 1968.

It is too early to tell which assertion will prove more correct. It is not even
certain whether Mrs. Aquino will honor her campaign pledge to begin a six-month
cease-fire with the New People's Army. Her senior military advisers have called
for stepping up the war.

According to the Philippine military, the New People's Army killed 144
Government officials and 1,203 civilians last year, although the poorly trained
army of 230,000 men may have lost nearly 5,000 men killed or wounded, an
American official believes.

Taxes Paid to Rebels

With the insurgency growing rapidly, the Philippine military has been unable to
protect large parts of this nation of scattered islands.

A Manila businessman said he regularly pays taxes to the New People's Army on
his timber land in Mindanao. ''It started about three years ago,'' he recalled.
''They write polite handwritten letters asking for 'help for the cause.'

''They do their homework very well, and don't ask for too much, because if they
overtaxed us and put us out of business, the workers would lose their jobs and
the N.P.A. would lose its mass base.''

He is assessed the equivalent of 50 cents for each cubic meter of log
production, well below his selling price of $70 per cubic meter. He also makes
contributions of food and shoes, according to the letters he receives, which are
forwarded by workers in his company who are Communists.

'Too Dangerous Not to Pay'

Last year the New People's Army overran the outpost of the paramilitary
Philippine constabulary in the town where his company is situated and killed all
20 soldiers, including the commanding officer. ''So it is too dangerous not to
pay them,'' the businessman said.

''It is really a revolutionary situation, when you add in the poverty,
corruption and military atrocities,'' said Antonio J. Fortich, the Bishop of
Bacolod.

By the estimate of one of his parish priests, who is a Communist, 40 percent of
the priests and 60 percent of the nuns in the Bacolod area are Communist
sympathizers, and many belong to a shadowy illegal organization called
Christians for National Liberation.

The Communists' progress has been made easier by the army's resorting to
kidnappings, beatings and killings.

The Rev. Ireneo Gordoncillo, a priest in Bacolod who keeps track of military
abuses, said he did not monitor incidents of violence by the New People's Army.
''Probably the army does,'' he said. ''I only document those cases which people
bring to me to try to get justice.''

Random Brutality

One of the questions being asked with increasing frequency in recent months is
whether, as the New People's Army expands and feels more secure, it too has
resorted to random brutality.

''I think they are beginning to change,'' said Bishop Fortich, whose
200-year-old house was burned by the army last year because it suspected him of
collaborating with the New People's Army. ''I have peasants coming to me to say
they are terrified of the N.P.A. now, that they are killing civilians, not just
soldiers and police. And they are starting to tax their own supporters more
heavily.''

The Lawyers' Committee for Human Rights, a New York-based organization,
contended in a report last December that the Communists were responsible for a
growing number of killings of Government officials, beatings of people who
refused to pay their taxes and the slayings of villagers they suspected might
inform on them.

Ka Joyce denied the charge. ''I watched 'The Killing Fields' on my VCR and it
scared me too,'' he said, sitting in the home of a wealthy local businessman who
has befriended the Communists. ''What the Khmer Rouge did was despicable. What
is the point of joining the revolution, of fighting for democracy, if you are
going to do that sort of thing?''

In Revenge for Atrocities

He insisted that the only killing the New People's Army did was in revenge for
Government atrocities. Last September, for instance, 27 demonstrators were shot
and killed by soldiers in front of the city hall in the town of Escalante. Gen.
Fidel V. Ramos, now Chief of Staff in Mrs. Aquino's new Government, ordered an
investigation, but no one has been prosecuted.

So the New People's Army compiled its own list of the guilty, Ka Joyce said.
Three men have been killed so far, one this month as he got off a bus in Bacolod
to buy cigarettes. The rebel group has also put up posters in the central market
in Bacolod, saying, ''Wanted, Dead or Alive,'' for the Mayor of Escalante, the
provincial Governor and the army general in command at the time of the massacre.

For some reason, the Government has not taken the posters down. Ka Joyce, who
now lives a virtually normal existence in Bacolod - staying in one home for long
periods of time and traveling by public transportation -thinks it is because the
army is ''very sloppy.''

In this predominantly Roman Catholic country, where the reverence for clerics
was demonstrated over the last few days by their ability to stop troops loyal to
President Marcos from attacking rebel officers, the Communists have benefited
enormously from having priests and nuns allied with them.

'A Moral Voice'

''It gives them a moral voice and a way to reach the people they wouldn't
otherwise have,'' said the Rev. John Carroll, the director of the Institute for
Church and Social Issues at the Ateneo de Manila University, a Jesuit-run
school.

But the Communist Party of the Philippines, which was formed by a group of 11
young professors and students who broke away from the old Moscow-oriented
Partido Komunista Ng Pilinpas, founded in 1930, has made mistakes of its own.
Impressed by the Cultural Revolution in China, the party tried to carry out
Mao's theories in the Philippines, only to discover that the country's islands
were too small to allow for safe base areas, like Mao's cave headquarters at
Yenan.

''We thought it would be easy, just plug in the Maoist model,'' Ka Joyce said.
Instead, under the leadership of Jose Maria Sison, a brilliant philosophy
teacher at the University of the Philippines, the Communists gradually devised a
strategy to take advantage of the dispersed nature of the country.

The concept was to spread out all around the Philippines and prevent the
Government forces from concentrating in one area, as they had been able to do
against the earlier Communist Huk army in central Luzon in the late 1940's.

''The key was to be flexible, not to try to hold a base area when the enemy
advanced,'' Ka Joyce said.

Buildup in Mindanao

At the same time, the Communists built up their forces in Mindanao, the least
developed part of the Philippines, drawing Government troops away from the
cities and chewing them up in a kind of operation reminiscent of North
Vietnamese tactics in the Central Highlands of Vietnam.

In the last few years, with Mao's policies on the eclipse in China and Peking
supporting the continued presence of American bases in the Philippines as a
buffer against Soviet military expansion, the Philippine Communists have begun
to study the Sandinistas in Nicaragua.

''Nicaragua is a Catholic country like the Philippines, and the Sandinistas made
good use of a broad united front combined with armed struggle,'' Ka Joyce said.

The Philippine Communists' efforts to build a united front has run into trouble
in the last year, however. Last spring, when Bayan was formed, some Communists
manipulated the voting for the Executive Council by secretly distributing two
different lists of names, according to Mr. Arroyo, President Aquino's executive
secretary. As a result, their own candidates won the choice spots, he charged,
including the appointment of the relatively unknown Lean Alejandro, 25 years
old, as secretary general.

Mr. Arroyo and a number of other moderates then pulled out of Bayan in protest.

Boycott of Election

Mr. Arroyo and other supporters of Mrs. Aquino were further alienated when Bayan
and the Communists decided to boycott the presidential election Feb. 7 because
she refused to accept their demand for a platform that included the removal of
the American bases from the Philippines, a far-reaching land program and a
repudiation of the Philippines' $26.5 billion foreign debt.

''The Communists have become very dogmatic,'' Mr. Arroyo asserted. ''It's a
pity, because they have fought longer and suffered many more casualties to get
rid of Marcos than the rest of us.''

But around Bacolod, in Negros, the Communists have enjoyed a major success,
their fastest growth of any area in the Philippines.

The 300,000 sugar cane workers here have long been among the poorest people in
the country, living on haciendas run like feudal baronries. When the world
market price for sugar collapsed in 1980 and then Mr. Marcos handed over control
of the sugar industry to several of his cronies, the island's economic plight
worsened.

The average wage of those sugar cane workers still employed is 15 pesos a day,
about 60 cents at the black market exchange rate, or less than the amount
required to buy enough rice to feed a typical family of six, said Jerry Dagoob,
the deputy secretary general of the National Federation of Sugar Workers.

Widespread Malnutrition

A study by Unicef last fall found that 64 percent of the children in Bacolod
were suffering from malnutrition.

A local priest who is a member of the outlawed Christians for National
Liberation said that confronted with these problems, ''an analysis teaches us
that a moderate line isn't adequate.'' He added, ''We educate people through the
Bible to realize their plight, and then they can see the need for militant armed
struggle to get rid of the imperialist rule that is the root of the problem.''

The priest, the offspring of a wealthy Manila family who dresses in designer
sports shirts and shoes, said he drew his inspiration from the liberation
theology evolved by Catholic priests in Latin America. ''The biblical reference
is in Exodus, when Yahweh hears the cries of the Israelites in bondage in Egypt
and sends Moses to free them from the Pharaoh,'' he said.

The priest said he sometimes met with New People's Army leaders, helped arrange
medical treatment for guerrillas and passed on messages for party members.

Gains on the Island

Amid this poverty and with help from clerics, the New People's Army has made
rapid strides on Negros.

Six mayors of towns in the southern part of the island have abandoned their
posts and are now living in Bacolod. Rebel organizers hold nightly teach-ins in
the houses of sugar workers virtually within the city limits, said Jose Maria
Locsin, a wealthy plantation owner of Chinese descent whose ancestors received a
land grant from the Spanish throne two centuries ago.

Out in the canefields that run in a long wave of green from Bacolod up to
Kanlaon, a 4,000-foot active volcano, Bernie Jayman, an organizer for the sugar
workers' union, believes a real revolution, not just a transfer of power from
Mr. Marcos to Mrs. Aquino, is inevitable. ''In time,'' he said, glancing up at
the mountain, ''the social volcano will erupt too.'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of rebel (page A13); photo of boy and brother (page A13)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MANILA AFTER MARCOS: HOW THE OVAL OFFICE HELPED;
REAGAN SENT MARCOS SECRET MESSAGE 12 HOURS BEFORE WHITE HOUSE'S PLEA

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1400 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 27


Twelve hours before the White House publicly called on President Ferdinand E.
Marcos to step down, President Reagan sent a message to the Philippine leader
that said that he, his family and close associates would be welcome to live in
the United States, Administration officials said today.

Mr. Reagan's message Sunday afternoon, reflected a consensus that emerged among
key policy makers at a previously undisclosed meeting Sunday morning at the home
of Secretary of State George P. Shultz. At that time, State, Central
Intelligence Agency and Defense officials agreed Mr. Marcos had to go, but could
not be left in limbo as the Shah of Iran had been.

Mr. Reagan's personal message was designed to assure Mr. Marcos that he would
not become an international wanderer if he left the Philippines without
bloodshed, and was believed by American officials to be a major role in
persuading a very reluctant Mr. Marcos to finally leave on Tuesday.

Amplifying and in some cases correcting the record on what happened in the
hectic few days leading up to Mr. Marcos's departure from the Philippines
Tuesday, the officials said Mr. Reagan sent two personal messages to Mr. Marcos
on Sunday. The first, disclosed that day by the White House, was sent by Mr.
Reagan from Camp David and said ''I appeal to you'' not to use force to try to
remain in power.

Safe Haven Offered

The second, and more important message, offering Mr. Marcos a safe haven in this
country, was drafted after a White House meeting that afternoon with his senior
advisers, Administration officials disclosed today.

It was at that session that Mr. Reagan said ''I agree'' to Secretary of State
Shultz's conclusion that Mr. Marcos could no longer rule the Philippines and
that the time had come to invite him to the United States in a dignified and
respectful manner, and not to treat him as poorly as the Carter Administration
had treated the Shah of Iran.

A participant in those meetings said today that senior American officials were
determined that Mr. Marcos should be given every courtesy as an American ally
through five Administrations. ''We were all thinking about the Shah's miseries
and agreed that this would not happen to Marcos.''

But Mr. Marcos, he said, was aware not so much of the Shah's fate, but rather
that of another former American ally, Ngo Dinh Diem, who was president of South
Vietnam, until he was assassinated during a coup in 1963. ''Marcos had Diem on
his mind at all times,'' one official said. ''He was very concerned about how he
would leave his palace. He wanted to make sure he did not leave with a bullet.''


Shultz Meets at Home

Mr. Shultz had met at his home in Bethesda, Md., on Sunday morning with top
aides to hear the report of Philip C. Habib, the special representative who had
just returned. At that meeting, after a lengthy discussion, officials said, Mr.
Shultz won the concurrence of the other participants to these conclusions that
would be presented to Mr. Reagan later that day:

* Mr. Marcos's ability to govern with the consent of his people had ended.

* If he uses force to try to crush the opposition forces then led by Defense
Minister Juan Ponce Enrile and the deputy chief of staff, Lieut. Gen. Fidel V.
Ramos, this would sharply reduce the chances for a successful outcome.

* It was of great importance to the United States that force not be used.

* It would be very damaging to United States standing in the world if Mr. Marcos
was treated like the Shah.

Gathered at Shultz's House

Those at Mr. Shultz's house besides Mr. Habib were Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger; Adm. William J. Crowe Jr., chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff;
Robert M. Gates, deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency; Adm. John
Poindexter, White House national security adviser; Michael H. Armacost, Under
Secretary of State for political affairs; Paul D. Wolfowitz, Assistant Secretary
of State for East Asian and Pacific affairs, and Richard L. Armitage, Assistant
Secretary of Defense for international security policy.

In 1979, when the Shah of Iran fled his country, he was first offered safe haven
in the United States, but decided instead to go to Morocco. But when he decided
that he wanted to come to the United States after all, President Carter told him
that he was not welcome. That created a political controversy with Henry A.
Kissinger and David Rockefeller criticizing the Carter Administration for
treating the old American ally as, in Mr. Kissinger's words, ''a Flying
Dutchman,'' a legendary ship that was doomed to sail forever.

Eventually, after staying in the Bahamas and Mexico, the Shah was permitted to
enter the United States for medical treatment, a move which led to the seizure
of the American Embassy in Teheran, Iran. The Carter Administration then
virtually forced the Shah to go to Panama, from where he went to Egypt, before
he died in 1980.

Mr. Reagan who was at Camp David last weekend, was told at about noon on Sunday
of reports that troops loyal to Mr. Marcos might use force. He then dictated a
personal message to Mr. Marcos that was flashed to Ambassador Stephen Bosworth,
who read it to Mr. Marcos. In that message, Mr. Reagan made a strong appeal to
Mr. Marcos not to use force.

Reagan Meets With Aides

From about 3 P.M. to 4:30 P.M. on Sunday afternoon, after Mr. Reagan had
returned to the White House, he met with Mr. Shultz and other top aides, most of
whom had been at Mr. Shultz's house earlier in the day. After Mr. Shultz
outlined the conclusions of the morning meeting, there was some questioning by
Donald T. Regan, the White House chief of staff, of the recommendations, to make
sure all the alternatives had been considered, a participant said.

Finally, Mr. Reagan agreed to the conclusions and stressed that he wanted Mr.
Marcos to feel welcome in this country if he chose to come here. A personal
message was drafted that said that Mr. Reagan ''looked forward to President
Marcos's working out a scenario for a transition government.'' It said that Mr.
Marcos, his family and close associates would be welcome in the United States.
It was sent to Mr. Bosworth who read it to Mr. Marcos.

At that time, Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, was refusing to say
whether Mr. Reagan believed Mr. Marcos should step down, despite repeated
questioning from reporters. He said that because of the possibility of violence
being used by the Marcos forces, the United States would cut off military aid if
that happened.

Meanwhile, Mr. Shultz and Michael H. Armacost, the Under Secretary of State for
political affairs, summoned Blas F. Ople, Mr. Marcos's Minister of Labor to the
State Department at about 7 P.M. on Sunday.

Contents of Message Disclosed

Mr. Ople said today that Mr. Shultz ''took me into his confidence'' and
disclosed the contents of the Reagan message to Mr. Marcos.

''The message was very skillfully phrased so as to avoid giving offense,'' Mr.
Ople said in an interview. ''The gist of it was that President Marcos should now
phase himself out in favor of a transition government and the United States
would facilitate his safety and his medical services for himself, his family and
associates.''

He said he tried to phone Mr. Marcos immediately but could not get through. At
about 2 A.M. on Monday, he sent the message through the Philippine Embassy
telex. He said that at 5 A.M., he was telephoned by Mr. Marcos.

The Public Statement

''He said he got the message and that it matched the message he had received
from Bosworth,'' Mr. Ople said. ''He started to argue against it. He felt deeply
hurt by the betrayal of his friends in the United States.''

At just about that time, the White House issued a public statement that it was
time for a ''peaceful transition'' -the first time it had publicly called on Mr.
Marcos to step down.

That touched off a series of phone calls from Mr. Marcos and his family to the
United States and to the American Embassy in Manila. Mr. Marcos telephoned
Senator Paul Laxalt on Monday afternoon to see if Mr. Reagan was really seeking
his resignation and he was told that he was. Mrs. Marcos telephoned Nancy Reagan
to see what she felt. Mrs. Reagan, according to her spokesman, expressed ''our
concern for the Marcoses' safety and told her that if they wanted to come to the
United States, they certainly could.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Nixon Events

BYLINE: By Wayne King and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 246 words


In addition to several speaking engagements, former President Richard M. Nixon
is going to devote himself in the next few months to sketching out his seventh
book, which will concern foreign affairs and will ''outline a strategy for using
the remaining years of the 20th century to lay the groundwork for an era of
peace in the 21st.''

At the moment, Mr. Nixon is recuperating from a severe viral infection that
required his recent hospitalization in Miami. In 1985 he received 414
invitations for speeches, interviews or other appearances from news
organizations, Republican groups and candidates, colleges and universities,
among others.

All this was gleaned from a five-page, single-spaced memorandum prepared by John
H. Taylor, Mr. Nixon's administrative assistant, and sent to some Washington
reporters. Mr. Taylor, noting that 1986 is ''the 40th anniversary of President
Nixon's entry into politics and his election to the House of Representatives,''
provided a preview of the year ahead as well as a summary of the former
President's 1985 activities.

Among last year's major Nixon events were the publication of his sixth book,
''No More Vietnams,'' his voluntary termination of Secret Service protection and
a monthlong trip around the world that included a luncheon given on the
India-Pakistan border by the Khyber Rifles and a heliocopter flight to the Pegu
pagoda in Burma ''where he rang the same ceremonial bell he had rung on his
first visit in 1953.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FIRST FAMILY'S FOIBLES: A DRAMA IN TWO ACTS

BYLINE: By GEORGIA DULLEA

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1237 words


When Patti Davis, elder child of President and Mrs. Reagan, signed a contract to
write a semiautobiographical novel about coming of age as the daughter of a
Republican with ''hardy good looks and a persuasive voice'' who becomes Governor
of California and then President of the United States, she did not mention the
fact to her parents.

''Actually, they found out in the press,'' the 33-year-old author was saying the
other day. ''Five minutes after I got a book deal I read about it, and so did
everybody else.''

Now Miss Davis is embarking on a publicity tour for ''Home Front'' (Crown,
$15.95), the revealing book she has written with Maureen Strange Foster. The
tour opens in New York on Monday and winds up three weeks later in Seattle, with
no scheduled stops in Washington.

'I Still Haven't Heard'

Weeks have passed since she wrapped a copy of the book and mailed it to her
parents, she said, ''but I still haven't heard whether they read it or not.''
Then, realizing the irony, she laughed and said, ''I'll probably find out in the
press.''

After years of shunning the White House limelight, both of the Reagans'
children, Patti and Ron, have gone public in their father's last term with
irreverent impressions of the First Family. Both have been accused of
capitalizing on family connections; the daughter denies the charge, the son
cheerfully pleads guilty.

''People are saying, well, this is just an autobiography and all she did was
change the names, but that's not true at all,'' Miss Davis said in a telephone
interview from Santa Monica, Calif., where she lives with her husband, Paul
Grilley, a yoga instructor.

No Tear Gas

Like the book's heroine, she has differed with her parents on significant
issues, including nuclear power, abortion, premarital sex, marijuana and the
Vietnam War. But unlike the heroine, she said, ''I was too young to be in an
antiwar-movement demonstration, and I've never been around tear gas, ever.''

Describing her book as ''a blend of fact and fiction,'' she said her technique
was ''to take conflicts and dilemmas I went through in speaking at antinuclear
rallies and opposing my father'' and superimpose the antiwar movement.
''Suddenly,'' she said, ''the conflicts become less ominous, easier to handle
when I gave them to another character. I could have her deal with them in ways
that maybe I hadn't.''

Miss Davis, who uses her mother's maiden name in her acting career, said her
agent was discussing the possibility of a television movie based on the book,
with her in the starring role.

''As an actress,'' she said, ''it's the best role that's come my way, and I'd be
a fool to give it up to somebody else.''

Asked about reports that she and her co-author received a six-figure advance for
the book, Miss Davis sighed and said: ''I don't really talk about money. I just
think that's so private.''

In any case, she said, her motive in writing the book was not money. Nor was it
an attempt to capitalize on her position. ''The way to capitalize would have
been to write an autobiography and sort of an expose. This is a part of my life,
and I haven't done anything sensational with it. I hope I've done something
creative and entertaining.''

By contrast, her 27-year-old brother Ron, a ballet dancer turned contributing
editor of Playboy magazine and correspondent for ABC Entertainment, publicly
boasts about trading on the family name. But he disapproved of ''trashing my
folks in a mean way,'' he has said.

In his opening monologue as a guest host of NBC's ''Saturday Night Live'' a
couple of weeks ago, he joked that he was there ''because my father is President
of the United States'' and went on to take part in several skits that poked fun
at his parents.

One skit, a takeoff on the movie ''Risky Business,'' showed him dancing through
the White House in shirttails and skivvies after a telephone call in which he
assured his mother and father, played by two male comics, that nothing untoward
would occur while they were away at Camp David.

The following Monday there was a review from the White House. A spokeman quoted
the Reagans as saying: ''He was funny. He was at ease. We enjoyed it.'' After a
press conference on Tuesday, the President was asked about his younger son's
acting debut and replied, ''Like father, like son.''

There has been no White House review of ''Home Front,'' although the First
Lady's press secretary, Elaine Crispen, has been asked about it on two
occasions. Mrs. Reagan has the book but has not read it, she replied.

''Home Front'' is described on its jacket as a ''candidly autobiographical novel
about growing up in the public eye during the other Vietnam War - the war at
home.'' Two of its central characters are a ''genial but ideological father''
and ''a strong-willed woman fiercely loyal to her husband's dream: the
Presidency.'' The book's heroine ''becomes not only an estranged daughter but a
political libability.''

As the book opens, the First Family is moving into the White House and the young
son is saying: ''So this is the company housing they gave you, huh, Dad?''

Ducking in and out rooms to inspect the furnishings, the mother exclaims: ''Good
grief, I just can't wait to redecorate.''

'I Didn't See It'

Later in the book, the daughter, unable to express her political views to her
father, writes him a poem. ''Poem?'' the father says. ''Gee, you know, there are
so many other things on my desk, I guess I didn't see it.''

Miss Davis refused to say how closely fact paralleled fiction. She conceded,
however, that she shared the heroine's desire to climb into the limousine's
front seat so as to be mistaken for the chauffeur's daughter. She said she also
shared the heroine's anger and frustration at not being able to speak out when
she disagreed with her father on issues because it would hurt him politically.

All four children in the First Family - Patti and Ron as well as Maureen, who is
Mr. Reagan's daughter by his first wife, Jane Wyman, and Michael, his adopted
son - have publicly differed with their father. But perception in recent years
has been one of increasing closeness.

One sign that Patti Davis had grown closer to her parents was seen when she was
married in Los Angeles in August 1984. It was the first of his children's
weddings that Mr. Reagan had attended since being elected President. He was in
California when Ron got married in New York in 1980 and at Camp David when
Maureen was married in California in 1981.

Miss Davis said that she still feels close to her parents and that the book
helped her to work through some of the hurts and pains of growing up in the
public eye.

''At one part in the book the daughter really clarifies her feelings to her
parents,'' she said. ''The father says, 'These people in the movement -they're
just using you,' and the daughter says: 'Maybe they are using me, but how is
that any different from what you're doing? Either way I'm being treated as an
appendage of you. Where do you end and I begin?' '' That, Miss Davis says, is
the question the book asks but does not answer completely.

''At the end of 'Home Front' they're all under the same roof and still
talking,'' she said. ''They still have their differences, but there's a
tolerance there. I very deliberately didn't wrap everything up in ribbons
because I don't know that there's any more resolution to these problems than
just that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Patti Davis and Ron Reagan (Roger Ressmeyer;AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

AT THE MOVIES

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1020 words


IN making documentary films, according to Joyce Chopra, who has until now
specialized in them, ''You are excited by what you already see, and you accept
it as a given.'' In fiction film making, ''you make up an entire world.'' Miss
Chopra did the latter in directing ''Smooth Talk'' (review on page C17), her
first fiction feature, about the coming-of-age of a 15-year-old girl named
Connie (Laura Dern) at the hands of a mysterious and possibly dangerous stranger
(Treat Williams). Her biggest worry in making the transition to fiction was not
having to work with actors, but the matter of staging. ''With a documentary, you
go to the situation and cover the scene, you don't have to decide where to
move,'' she said. ''But this time, I had to ask myself, 'How do you break a
scene down? Where do you put the camera, and why?' ''

The two Joyces involved in ''Smooth Talk,'' Miss Chopra and the writer Joyce
Carol Oates (from whose story ''Where Are You Going, Where Have You Been?'' the
film is adapted), have never met. ''She really did not want to be a part of it,
and it actually relieved me, too,'' Miss Chopra said, although the author has
since conveyed her liking for the film.

In any case, her absence left Miss Chopra and the screenwriter, Tom Cole, to
flesh out the details of a story that is, in fact, quite streamlined. Miss Oates
used only a few opening pages to describe Connie's life with her family, whereas
Miss Chopra -who has a daughter, Sarah, nearly Connie's age - made the girl's
home life a significant part of the film. A scene in which the daughter
complains that she doesn't want to be hugged by her mother grew out of an
incident between Miss Chopra and 14-year-old Sarah, for example. Miss Chopra
discussed the film with Sarah regularly, and she also drew upon ''Girls at
Twelve,'' a film she made about adolescents some years ago. ''I borrowed many a
moment out of that documentary,'' she said.

Miss Chopra's earlier history includes ''Joyce at 34,'' which she made at that
age 14 years ago; she was also co-founder, in 1958, of the Club 47, the
Cambridge, Mass., coffeehouse that helped start the careers of such ''unknowns''
as Joan Baez. It has been 15 years since she first read the Oates story on which
her film is based, in a collection of O. Henry Award-winning fiction. ''It just
stayed in my brain,'' she said. ''I knew that if I ever did a dramatic film,
this was what I'd like to do.'' Director Filming In Philippines This may not
have been everyone's idea of the perfect week to visit the Philippines, but
Oliver Stone, director of the new film ''Salvador,'' was undeterred in his plans
to get there. His flight to Manila was delayed from Sunday to Wednesday, still
Mr. Stone embarked for the set of his next film, ''The Platoon,'' which is set
in Vietnam in 1967. A group of young actors, among them Charlie Sheen, Tom
Berenger, Willem Dafoe and Kevin Dillon, will go through two weeks' worth of
basic training in preparation for the shooting, which begins in mid-March.

Half the crew arrived ahead of the director and, as he reported, watched F-5
Phantom jets flying over their hotel. ''They're happy as larks, they say it's
fun living through their first coup,'' Mr. Stone said. So their attitude is not
unlike that of the protagonist of ''Salvador,'' a photojournalist, played by
James Wood, who ventures to El Salvador in 1980 in search of good surfing,
available women and some slight means of making a living. His thrill-seeking
evolves into commitment during the course of the film, which depicts such key
events as the assassination of Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero and the murder of
four American nuns.

Not surprisingly, Mr. Stone - who wrote ''Midnight Express'' and ''Scarface,''
and directed ''The Hand'' - had no luck selling ''Salvador,'' which opens next
Wednesday, to a major studio. One executive, he said, even pronounced the film
''a hateful piece of work.'' But Mr. Stone subsequently raised $4 million from
British and Mexican sources and has thus far sold the film in a number of
foreign locations. It will play in Brazil, Venezuela and other South American
countries, but thus far, a run in El Salvador seems highly unlikely.

Based on the experiences of a journalist named Richard Boyle, the film takes
some liberties with the facts: It places Mr. Boyle at the scene of the
Archbishop's assassination, though he was not there, and has him accompanied by
a San Francisco disk jockey named Dr. Rock (played by James Belushi), who did
not, in fact, go along, and compresses some events. This was necessary, Mr.
Stone said, because ''otherwise we would have had 'Shoah.' ''

Fassbinder Film a Play

Rainer Werner Fassbinder's film ''The Bitter Tears of Petra Von Kant''
originated as a play, and it is now a play again. Directed by Andre Ernotte and
starring Caroline Kava in the title role, it will open an Off Broadway
engagement this Wednesday at the Puerto Rican Traveling Theater, 304 West 47th
Street. Tickets are $10, and performances are either in Spanish or English,
depending upon the day. The number for details is 354-1293.

Disney Options 'Novel'

Walt Disney Pictures, with its ever more ambitious production schedule, has
optioned the upcoming book, ''The Good Novel,'' by Sue Miller, which Harper and
Row will publish on May 1. The novel, about a divorced woman whose loyalties to
her daughter come into conflict with a romantic entanglement, is Miss Miller's
first.

Celebrities Plug Videos

''I watched the entire long version of 'Once Upon a Time in America' and didn't
stop it and didn't eat anything. I thought 4 1/2 hours without food was pretty
good, in your own home.'' This confession, from the producer and actress Amy
Robinson, is part of a clever new set of television commercials for New Video
stores, which rent and sell cassettes of hard-to-find films in Manhattan. Among
those heard talking about films in the commercials, which begin appearing this
weekend, are John Sayles, Amos Poe and Susan Seidelman, who says, ''Since I've
been watching movies at home, I pay less attention in the movie theater.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 10, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An item in the At the Movies column in Weekend Feb. 28 about an option taken by
Walt Disney Pictures on a new book by Sue Miller misidentified the title of her
novel. It is ''The Good Mother.''

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: HAUNTING WITH A DIFFERENCE IN 'HOUSE'

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 422 words


THE title character in ''House'' is big, ominous and Victorian, and naturally
enough it has a mind of its own. However, this is not the usual haunted-house
movie, if only because the place still manages to look relatively cheery, and
because its way of inflicting mayhem is unpredictable. First it abducts a little
boy. Then it persuades a nice old lady, the boy's great-aunt, to hang herself.
Finally it entraps the lost boy's father, a Stephen King-type author named Roger
Cobb, into moving in and trying his luck. Somehow, the house decides to draw
upon Roger's experiences in Vietnam to drive him crazy.

''House,'' which opens today at Loew's State and other theaters, isn't exactly
consistent about this or anything else, but it has a style that is unexpectedly
snappy. Scares are not its strong suit, but it has a trim, bright look and
better performances than might be expected. William Katt, looking weathered and
sounding very Robert Redfordlike as Roger Cobb, brings some conviction to his
role, and George Wendt is funny as a nosy next-door neighbor named Harold. When
Roger comes flying out of the house one day dressed in military fatigues and
goggles, Harold calmly remarks to his dog, ''Hmmph. Writing looks like fun.''

As directed by Steve Miner, who directed the second and third ''Friday the
13th'' films, ''House'' has its cute side; for instance, the chief monster has a
bright red manicure (which stays on the hand even when it takes off on its own
and starts walking) and wears a silly little smile. And the same inexplicable
force that haunts the bathroom medicine cabinet manages also to make a prize
swordfish come alive. It is never clear whether these events, eventually
connected with a Vietnam buddy of Roger's, have anything to do with the things
that drove his Aunt Elizabeth (Susan French) to suicide. Is the Vietnam friend
peculiarly undiscriminating? Or does the house develop a brand-new ghost every
time a different tenant moves in? Not a Home HOUSE, directed by Steve Miner;
screenplay by Ethan Wiley, story by Fred Dekker; director of photography, Mac
Ahlberg; edited by Michael N. Knue; music by Harry Manfredini; produced by Sean
S. Cunningham; released by New World Pictures. At Loews Orpheum, Third Avenue at
86th Street; Loews State, Broadway at 45th Street and other theaters. Running
time: 93 minutes. This film is rated R. Roger CobbWilliam Katt Harold
GortonGeorge Wendt Big BenRichard Moll SandyKay Lenz TanyaMary Stavin Chet
ParkerMichael Ensign JimmyErik Silver/Mark Silver

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 28, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'SMOOTH TALK,' FROM JOYCE CAROL OATES TALE

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1034 words


CONNIE WYATT (Laura Dern), 15 years old, leads two lives. At home, she's the
gawky, alternately sarcastic and sullen, younger daughter who refuses to wash a
dish or to speak civilly to anyone in the family. Like the Marin County (Calif.)
house the Wyatts live in, Connie is unfinished, sort of empty and isolated,
surrounded by a weedy landscape. She spends endless hours washing her hair and
playing her tapedeck at ear-splitting volume. Says her exasperated, not unfond
mother, ''I look into your eyes and all I see are trashy dreams.''

With Laura and Jill, her best friends, Connie is something else, tall (instead
of gawky) and beautiful, the kind of blonde who elicits whistles. She wears
lipstick and knows exactly how far to pull down her blouse to display her figure
without appearing gross. Cruising the shopping mall or hanging out at the
drive-in restaurant on the highway, Connie is a giggly teen-age siren, the one
who speaks first to new boys. She's the ultimate 15-year-old sophisticate.

She could also be heading toward disaster, as certainly as a 4-year-old behind
the wheel of a Maserati.

Taking Joyce Carol Oates's short story ''Where Are You Going, Where Have You
Been?'' Joyce Chopra, the director, and Tom Cole, who wrote the screenplay, have
made ''Smooth Talk'' a remarkably fine film about the muddle of emotions that
separates the child from the adult.

Though Miss Chopra and Mr. Cole have expanded the story, and supplied
information Miss Oates saw fit to leave out, ''Smooth Talk'' is as spare and
lean as the source material. In this age of movies designed to satisfy
teen-agers' fantasies about themselves, ''Smooth Talk'' has the shock value of
''The Grapes of Wrath'' seen among a bunch of not-great screwball comedies of
the Depression era. It's funny, but there's also something menacing about it,
like the high, thin clouds that always seem to be neutralizing the light but not
the heat of the Marin County summer sun.

''Smooth Talk,'' which opens today at the 68th Street Playhouse, is not a big
movie. Though feature-length, it has an unconventional, short-story shape.
Everything that happens in the first part of the film is a set-up for the
astonishing penultimate sequence that, as written, directed and acted, takes the
breath away. More about that can't be said without revealing the movie's eerie
secret.

What can and should be talked about are the achievements of everyone connected
with ''Smooth Talk.'' The film is the first fiction feature to be directed by
Miss Chopra, whose earlier work includes the documentary ''A Happy Mother's
Day,'' directed with Richard Leacock, and ''Medal of Honor Rag,'' Mr. Cole's
Vietnam play, which she produced for television's American Playhouse.

In this collaboration, the director and the writer demonstrate a kind of
discipline very rare in movies, especially a debut work. Miss Chopra and Mr.
Cole don't waste a frame of film establishing the edgy relationships among the
members of the Wyatt family, who live in a curious, uneasy calm.

Katherine (Mary Kay Place), Connie's mother, is understandably biased toward her
older daughter, June (Elizabeth Berridge), who, at 24, is a hard-working,
colorless, live-at-home frump, at least to Connie. Harry Wyatt (Levon Helm),
Connie's father, is too pleased with himself for having acquired a nice old
farmhouse in the country to worry much about the secret life of his younger
daughter.

It's apparent the Wyatts bought their house at a good price only because it
needed fixing up, but they seldon get around to doing anything about it. A
running source of irritation for Katherine is the way Connie can spend hours at
the shopping mall and never remember to buy the house-paint and brushes she has
promised.

Connie and her pals aren't looking for paint and brushes at the shopping mall.
They're looking for boys, though they only make their serious pickups early in
the evening at the drive-in, when they're supposed to be at the movies.

It's at the drive-in that Connie first attracts the attention of Arnold Friend
(''A. Friend,'' as he eventually introduces himself). Arnold (Treat Williams),
however, isn't a boy. Arnold isn't 18, as he tells Connie. He's closer to 30 -
crude and self-assured and, to anyone over the age of 15, about as erotic as the
sticky counters and smells of rancid grease at Connie's favorite drive-in. To
Connie, however, he's every trashy dream come true.

Miss Dern, who played the blind girl in Peter Bogdanovich's ''Mask,'' is
smashing as the sexually voyaging Connie, but Mr. Williams, in what is a
comparatively brief role, comes very close to stealing the picture from her.
Miss Berridge, who was miscast as Mozart's screechy child-wife in ''Amadeus,''
does very little as the pathetically ''nice'' older sister and creates a
full-scale character.

Equally good are Miss Place and Mr. Helm, as well as Sarah Inglis and Margaret
Welch, who play Connie's best friends. They are the sort of teen-agers who do
their best to be just like everyone else and - somehow, mysteriously - are
revealed to be idiosyncratic individuals, much to their own embarrassment.

Pay attention also to the unusually appropriate soundtrack score, for which
James Taylor was music director and which includes a couple of his own works as
well as those of Richard Taylor.

I don't want to oversell ''Smooth Talk.'' It's not ''Gone With the Wind.'' It's
a small, exceptionally successful movie to be discovered on your own.

''Smooth Talk,'' which has been rated PG-13 (''Special parental guidance
suggested for those under 13''), contains some rough language and seriously
threatening situations. Circe of the Drive-In SMOOTH TALK, directed by Joyce
Chopra; screenplay by Tom Cole, based on a story by Joyce Carol Oates; director
of photography, James Glennon; edited by Patrick Dodd; music by James Taylor,
Bill Payne, Russell Kunkel and George Massenburg; produced by Martin Rosen;
released by Spectra Films. At 68th Street Playhouse, at Third Avenue. Running
time: 92 minutes.

This film is rated PG-13 Arnold FriendTreat Williams ConnieLaura Dern
KatherineMary Kay Place JuneElizabeth Berridge HarryLevon Helm JillSarah Inglis
LauraMargaret Welch

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Laura Dern and Treat Williams

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 1, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

OLOF PALME, ARISTOCRAT TURNED SOCIALIST, DOMINATED THE POLITICS OF SWEDEN

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1765 words


Prime Minister Olof Palme of Sweden, who was shot and killed on a street in
Stockholm last night, was the dominant figure in Swedish politics in the 1970's
and 1980's and was a forceful, often acerbic voice on the world stage as well.

First elected chairman of Sweden's Social Democratic Party and Prime Minister in
1969, Mr. Palme led his faltering party in two consecutive general elections
before losing at the polls in 1976 to a coalition of non-Socialists in a defeat
that ended 44 years of Socialist government in Sweden.

But in 1982, after leading his party as the opposition to a series of
non-Socialist governments in Sweden, Mr. Palme once again led the Social
Democrats back to power and, re-elected last fall to another three-year term,
had remained at the helm until his assassination.

Like much in the character of his nation, the 59-year-old Mr. Palme was
something of a paradox: an aristocrat turned Socialist, perhaps the most
left-wing of the Western leaders, head of a neutral nation of 8.3 million people
but seemingly more at home in the international arena.

Opposed U.S. Over Vietnam

He infuriated the United States with his outspoken opposition to American
involvement in the Vietnam War. He often spoke out for nuclear disarmament and
urged a nuclear-free Europe, starting with Scandanavia. He often seemed to favor
the Soviet Union in East-West disputes and, despite criticism from many of his
countrymen, was less than adamant even when Soviet submarines were reported to
have intruded into Swedish waters.

In 1980, he and Austria's Chancellor, Bruno Kreisky, and the Spanish Socialist
leader, Felipe Gonzalez, formed a three-member mission to Teheran in an
unsuccessful effort to seek a solution to the United States-Iranian hostage
crisis.

Mr. Palme also served unsuccessfully as a United Nations peacemaker in the long
border war between Iran and Iraq, making several trips into the region to
discuss proposals for winding down the fighting. Though he had many critics, his
admirers called him a man with a ''world conscience.''

At home, Mr. Palme used high taxes to create a society generous with medical,
educational and recreational benefits. He scoffed at calls for tax cuts, more
competition and less welfare spending as a prescription for a society of
''egoism and sharp elbows.''

An Eagerness for Debate

A slight, slender, blue-eyed man with a formidable intelligence and an eagerness
for debate, Mr. Palme spoke fluent English, French, German and Spanish and some
Russian, in addition to the Scandanavian tongues. He could inspire his followers
with visions of Socialist life, but he also had a hectoring manner that many
people took for condescension and arrogance.

''I was born in the upper class, but I belong to the labor movement,'' Mr. Palme
once said. ''I got there by working for the working class on its own terms, by
joining the movement working for freedom, equality and fraternity among
people.''

Born on Jan. 30, 1927, the youngest of three children of Gunnar and Elisabeth
von Knieriem Palme, an upper-class family in the Swedish capital, the future
leader was often in ill health as a child. But he was a good student, learning
several languages at an early age.

After graduating a year early, at 17, from one of Sweden's best private schools,
Sigtuna Humanistiska Laroverk, in 1944, he went through military service as as a
draftee and rose to become a cavalry lieutenant. He won a scholarship to Kenyon
College in Ohio, where he studied politics and economics, earned straight A's
and received a bachelor's degree in 1948.

A Dedicated Traveler

Always a dedicated traveler, Mr. Palme after graduation hitch-hiked around the
United States for four months, visiting 34 states on a $300 shoestring budget
that took him into pockets of poverty in a land of plenty. It was a shocking
experience for the young aristocrat.

He recalled having seen ''how poor some people were in the world's richest
land.'' The advanture marked a turning point in his life, and the comment was
virtually a theme for what was to become the socialist ideology of his political
life.

Continuing to travel, he found himself in Prague in 1949. There, he married a
Czechoslovak student simply to help her leave for the West. The couple left for
Sweden immediately after their December wedding and later were divorced as
planned. Mr. Palme and his second wife, Lisbeth Beck-Friis, were married in 1956
and had three children, Joakim, Marten and Mattias.

Mr. Palme earned a law degree from the University of Stockholm in 1951. By then,
he had already been a member of the Social Democratic party for a year. ''I
shall remain a Social Democratic party worker for the rest of my life,'' he said
at the time.

Prime Minister's Secretary

Beginning his climb to leadership, Mr. Palme was elected president of the
National Swedish Union of Students in 1952 and became personal secretary to
Prime Minister Tage Erlander in 1954. It was an assignment that blended
speechwriting and schedule-making with service as a close confidant and adviser.

Two years later, in 1956, Mr. Palme was elected to his first eight-year term as
a member of the upper house of the Riksdag, the Swedish Parliament, where he
distinguished himself by his flair for oratory and debate and particularly by
his work on legislation affecting student welfare, adult education and
international cooperation.

Mr. Palme joined the Cabinet of Premier Erlander, as a minister without
portfolio, in 1963, and two years later he became Minister of Communications.

In this point, among other things, he supervised the switch in the traffic flow
in Sweden from the left side of the road to the right and, though he took a
permissive attitude toward sexual content, he ordered strict enforcement of
prohibitions against the depiction of violence in motion pictures.

Switched Portfolios

In 1967, Mr. Palme switched portfolios, becoming Minister of Education and
Religious Affairs. He promoted reforms that included strengthening Marxist
curriculums, and he raised hackles among many conservative Swedes by allowing
himself to be interviewed in the controversial film ''I Am Curious (Yellow).''

A year later, he marched with the North Vietnamese Ambassador to Moscow in a
Stockholm demonstration against the American role in the Vietnam War. He soon
became known outside Sweden as a major critic of the United States involvement
in Vietnam, eventually likening President Richard M. Nixon's order for the
bombing of Hanoi to the acts of Adolf Hitler and giving asylum to American draft
deserters.

When Prime Minister Erlander announced his retirement in September 1969, Mr.
Palme, with the leader's blessing, was unanimously elected to succeed him at a
Social Democratic Party convention. Though Sweden has been a parliamentary
democracy since 1917, the hereditary monarch remains the ceremonial head of
state, and Mr. Palme was sworn in as Prime Minister by King Gustav VI on Oct.
14, 1969.

He was Europe's youngest Prime Minister at 42, and he faced a host of problems:
rising unemployment, wildcat strikes, spreading additions to drugs and alcohol,
a growing balance-of-payments deficit and increasing polarization between the
Swedish left, which dominated the communications media, and conservative
business and banking interests that dominated the economy.

Social and Labor Revisions

Through a series of compromises with opposition parties, Mr. Palme managed to
stimulate industrial growth, increased exports and pushed through Parliament a
series of social and labor revisions.

At the same time, he continued to address the world. He strongly criticized
white minority rule in South Africa, was a vehement opponent of Chile's military
Government and collected money on street corners for groups opposed to the
Franco regime in Spain. But his support for Hanoi lost some of its appeal after
Vietnam invaded Cambodia, and he and his party began to falter in the
mid-1970's.

Under the burden of a dismal economic situation, and the world's highest taxes,
Sweden in the 1970's ended 44 years of Social Democratic rule, which had created
a model system of health, welfare and other benefits and had given it the
world's highest living standard. Turning Mr. Palme out of office, Sweden elected
a non-Socialist coalition Government in 1976.

During the ensuing six years, Mr. Palme continued to lead his party in
opposition and was especially involved in international politics. In May 1980,
for example, he, Mr. Kreisky and Mr. Gonzalez flew to Teheran to seek a solution
to the United States-Iranian crisis.

U.N. Envoy in Iran-Iraq War

As a special United Nations envoy, Mr. Palme began a lengthy attempt to find a
solution to the Iran-Iraq war in November 1980, shuttling between Baghdad and
Teheran with proposals that were ultimately turned down.

He returned to the task in 1981 and 1982 with similar results. Critics called
his efforts quixotic, but others praised him for trying. A longtime supporter of
third world nations in their battles with the industrialized world, Mr. Palme
was a member of a commission that studied ways of narrowing the gap between rich
and poor, and he was chairman of an international group that urged the major
powers to get stalled disarmament talks started again.

Unable to persuade Sweden to make a decisive break with its socialist past, the
coalition of liberals and moderates was turned out of office in 1982.

Mr. Palme, having clung to the leadership of the Social Democrats in the hiatus,
regained the nation's leadership in a campaign in which he promised more jobs
and a healthier economy.

Mr. Palme called on the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Pact
in 1982 to establish a nuclear-free zone in Europe. Two years later, he convened
a European disarmament conference in Sweden, calling for an East-West dialogue
and denouncing the nuclear arms race.

With the opposition demanding tax and spending cuts and a breakup of Government
monopolies, Mr. Palme was re-elected last September in a close vote. Since then
the biggest challenge to the Palme Government has come from naval officers who
have complained that he did nothing about the intrusion of Soviet submarines
into Swedish waters.

The officers asserted that Mr. Palme had been more interested in good relations
with the Soviet Union than in preserving Swedish security. Some suggested that
the problem was so acute that Sweden, which has been neutral throughout its
modern history, even during World War II, should join NATO.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SWEDISH OFFICIALS PURSUE 2 THEORIES IN PALME SLAYING

BYLINE: By JOSEPH LELYVELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1458 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM, March 1


High police officials said tonight that they lacked firm leads in their hunt for
the assassin of Prime Minister Olof Palme.

Investigators were said to be working on two hypotheses. One was that Mr. Palme
- who was shot twice from behind Friday night as he walked home from a movie
with his wife - was the victim of a psychopath. The other was that he had become
the target of exile or refugee groups bent on revenge for difficulties with
Swedish authorities.

''They are breaking into every Croat and Kurdish apartment in Europe,'' said a
former official with good police contacts. A Croatian terrorist who is in jail
for the killing of a Yugoslav diplomat here in the early 1970's, was recently
denied a pardon, and a national police alert early this morning indicated that
members of a group seeking independence for the Yugoslav republic of Croatia
might be among the suspects in the killing.

Seeking Plausible Motives

The police have also been cracking down on Kurdish groups involved in factional
clashes in Sweden. The focus on such relatively obscure incidents showed how far
the police had to search to discover plausible motives for the shooting, which
has left the country in a state of stunned disbelief.

The dearth of firm evidence became apparent tonight when an embarrassed police
official, Kenneth Karlsson, had to retract an earlier police version of evidence
given by Lisbeth Palme, the Prime Minister's wife, who was grazed by a bullet as
she bent over her husband's crumpled body.

Revised Version

Mrs. Palme was originally reported to have told the authorities that she thought
the assailant resembled a man she had seen lurking near her home. But Mr.
Karlsson, who was understood to have offered the revised version on Mrs. Palme's
insistence, acknowledged that she had said nothing about a resemblance.

What she had done, he said, was to recall two men whose behavior near her
residence seemed suspicious when she noticed them three weeks ago.

Either way, it seemed apparent that the killer must have stalked the Prime
Minister, whose whereabouts were unknown to his own security men.

For the last 12 hours of his life, Mr. Palme was without guards, having
dismissed his security men at 11 in the morning. Holger Romander, the head of
the national police, said at a news conference that the Prime Minister had a
phone number he could call if he wanted protection. The police did not know he
was at the movies, Mr. Romander said.

They also did not know that he was the victim when they rushed to the scene of
the shooting Saturday night, he said. The casual security arrangements grew
directly from the view that the slain Prime Minister and most Swedes seemed to
share a view of their country as an outpost of order and sanity in a chaotic
world. And today that view, damaged as it was, still colored their mourning.

Mr. Palme's Social Democratic Party, which has governed Sweden for 48 of the
last 54 years, moved rapidly to nominate Acting Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson
as its new leader. At a news conference in a paneled rotunda in the Parliament
building, Mr. Carlsson, a 51-year-old political strategist who had functioned
like most other Cabinet members in Mr. Palme's shadow, was described as a
unifier.

The deep sense of loss brought by the death of a man whose forceful personality
had dominated Swedish politics for a generation existed alongside a sense of
horror that the kind of sudden violence so often seen elsewhere could have
penetrated into what Mr. Palme himself often called ''our quiet little corner of
the world.''

Some Suspect Refugee Groups

As they gathered to stand and stare behind metal barricades that the police had
thrown up on the busy main throughfare where Mr. Palme was shot, many Swedes
clung to the idea that no Swede could have been responsible for so heinous a
crime.

Popular suspicion quickly focused on refugee groups from other continents and
foreign political movements whose representatives have had relatively easy
access to Sweden.

Mr. Carlsson, who becomes only the fifth leader the party has had in its 88-year
history, was expected to be confirmed as Prime Minister without opposition. The
new leader's whole career in politics has been concerned with domestic issues.

Ever since 1968, when he joined demonstrations here against the American role in
Vietnam, Mr. Palme had been Sweden's voice on foreign policy matters. Even in
the six years he spent in opposition, after his party lost power in 1976, he
continued to play a prominent role on the international scene, serving on
commissions on disarmament and undertaking a role as a United Nations mediator
in the Iran-Iraq conflict.

His passing, diplomats here suggested, would inevitably lead to a lowering of
the Swedish profile on such questions.

Bullet Recovered at Scene

The police said a 9-millimeter bullet had been recovered at the scene. They were
also reported to have recovered a bag of clothes from the subway that
corresponded to descriptions of what the assassin had been wearing.

Anna Hage, a 17-year-old trainee nurse who was sitting in a parked car nearby,
tried to apply heart massage techniques she had learned. As she approached the
wounded man she had no idea who he was, she later said, but Mrs. Palme cried
out: ''It's my husband! Don't you see who I am?''

Miss Hage said she felt Mr. Palme's pulse start and then stop. He was bleeding
heavily from the mouth.

The place where he fell, in front of an art supplies shop on a main north-south
artery called Svenvagen, was more than two blocks from the movie theater where
he had seen a new Swedish comedy and about a 15-minute walk from his home in the
part of Stockholm known as Old Town.

Flowers Placed at Site

The metal barricades kept the crowds that gathered near there today at a
distance of a block. But the police accepted bouquets of flowers, mainly roses
from members of the crowd and carried them to the spot where Mr. Palme fell. As
the afternoon wore on and the pale winter sun sank in the sky, a mound of roses
was gradually raised at the site where overnight a small pool of blood had
frozen and congealed.

Many of the bouquets carried messages, expressing bewilderment. ''Who has killed
our dove of peace?'' one of these asked. ''Why should a true democrat be
murdered?'' asked another. Small cans with kerosene-soaked wicks, normally used
for camping or outdoor entertaining, made do as candles for the dead.

Elsewhere Swedes waited patiently on long lines to sign books of mourning that
were opened in front of photographs of the dead man at his office and party
headquarters. Often they inscribed personal comments of bereavement, for
instance one that said, ''It's very empty without you, Olof.'' As far as anyone
could determine, Mr. Palme's assassination was the first such slaying of a
political or state figure in Sweden since King Gustav III was killed at a masked
ball in 1792. That assassination provided the plot for the Verdi opera ''A
Masked Ball.''

The rare acts of terrorism that have occurred in Sweden have grown out of
foreign conflicts, deepening Swedish suspicions about the likely motives behind
the assassination. In addition to the killing of a Yugoslav diplomat by a
Croatian terrorist, hostages were taken at the West German Embassy by the
Baader-Meinhof group.

An international news agency in London reported that it had received a call
today attributing the Palme assassination to what was called the Holger Meines
command of that same terrorist organization. But there was no sign that the
authorities here regarded the call to be a serious lead. Theories Involving
P.L.O.  Sweden recently expelled a member of the Palestine Liberation
Organization and arrested two others for suspected terrorist activities,
provoking a visit here last week by two senior P.L.O. representatives who are
believed to have expressed concern that the movement's access to Stockholm was
being curtailed.

On this basis alone there were those who theorized that the slaying might
somehow be linked to Palestinian factional rivalries.

In none of these cases could anyone suggest a reason for a group of refugees or
a foreign movement to want to provoke the heightened security consciousness in
Sweden that is now likely to follow the murder of the Prime Minister.

Sweden also has some tiny neo-Nazi factions of its own that have sometimes
threatened violence, but they are not known to have attempted murder.

And, although Mr. Palme had retained his nominal role as a mediator in the
Iraq-Iran war, he himself had made no visits to the area for many months. There
had also been no suggestions that either side in the conflict felt aggrieved
over the role he had played.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a women watching her children sign condolence book in honor of
Prime Minister Olof Palme (AP); Photo of Hans Holmer, Stockholm Police
Commissioner, speaking with reporters (AP); Photo of Ingvar Carlsson the acting
Prime Minister of Sweden (AP); Photo of police officers in stockholm arranging
flowers near spot where Prime Minister Olof Palme was assassinated (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PEACE MARCHERS SET OFF ON A CROSS-COUNTRY TREK

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 27, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 665 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, March 1


Waving American flags, balloons and banners, with some carrying children on
their shoulders, 1,200 people marched away from City Hall here today on a walk
to promote nuclear disarmament that they hope will take them 3,235 miles to
Washington.

The march began after arally and concert and a sendoff speech by Mayor Tom
Bradley. The marchers first campsite was on the Los Angeles campus of the
California State University, 12 miles away. The marchers plan to cover 15 miles
a day on their cross-country trek, and hope to complete it in nine months.

The demonstrators, some of whom sold their homes and left school and jobs to
join what is billed as ''The Great Peace March,'' were walking with a torch lit
from the commemorative flame at Hiroshima.

But march organizers say more people and money are needed to complete the walk.
They had hoped to attract 5,000 marchers. They also said they had $4 million and
needed about $10 million more to complete the march.

Days before the start of the march, David Mixner, director of PRO-Peace, the
committee set up to organize the march, conceeded that the marchers might never
reach their destination.

'What We're Doing Is Risky'

''I think what we're doing is risky, whether we can raise the money, if the
people can make it across the country, and whether anyone will know we're out
there,'' Mr. Mixner said from behind his desk, a cardboard box on the campsite
in Griffith Park, where marchers had been gathering for the last three weeks.

The effort has received little support from corporate donors, he said.

Mr. Mixner is a 39-year-old political activist who organized Vietnam protests in
the 1960's and worked on Gary Hart's Presidential campaign. A year ago Mr.
Mixner turned over his political consulting business, Mixner-Scott Inc., to his
employees to devote his time to PRO-Peace.

''Our greatest problem is fund-raising,'' Mr. Mixner said. The majority of the
money has been donated from church groups, friends and some celebrities,
including Paul Newman and Barbra Streisand, Mr. Mixner said.

PRO-Peace hopes to attract 3,800 more marchers by the time the group reaches
Denver in June, but many people are having trouble raising the $3,235, or $1 a
mile, that it is expected to cost to support them on the road. PRO-Peace
requires that each marcher give or raise that amount for the committee to take
part.

The marchers range in age from 9 months to 78 years. Many are college students
who have delayed their educations. Others are families who have uprooted their
children from school and abandoned their homes in order to march.

''My whole life is changed, the food's different, the water's different and my
house is a tent in a field,'' said 38-year-old Don Leith. He and his 13-year-old
daughter Prudence have each spent about $1,000 for equipment, beyond the money
each had to raise to participate.

'She's Getting an Education'

Mr. Leith gave up a gardening business in order to make the walk while his wife,
Faith, remains behind, to work as an editor at The Orange County Register, so
that the family does not lose its house in Whittier, Calif. His daughter will
attend the eigth grade while she marches through a special, accredited program
in conjunction with a California middle school.

''She'll have tutors and teachers, but she's getting an education she could
never get in school,'' Mr. Leith said.

Jerry Eisner, a 68-year-old volunteer worker for PRO-Peace who is a marcher,
left his insurance business in Brooklyn to join up. ''For the first time, this
operation is really going to have an impact on people,'' he said. ''The problem
with the peace movement is that it hasn't qualified for much attention.''

Morris and Dona Ridgeway from Santa Cruz, Calif., will pull their 3-year-old
son, Adam, along the route in a little red wagon. ''We are doing it for our son
and his future,'' Mrs. Ridgeway said. ''It's about time they put a bunch of real
people out there to get the message across.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WORLD LEADERS REMEMBER MAN OF PEACE

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 831 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


Tributes continued to come in today from world leaders shocked and saddened by
the assassination of Prime Minister Olof Palme of Sweden.

In Washington, the White House said President Reagan and Vice President Bush had
sent letters of condolence to Mr. Palme's wife, Lisbeth, who was wounded in the
attack, and that Mr. Reagan had also sent a message to King Carl XVI Gustaf of
Sweden.

Secretary of State George P. Shultz, in a message to Sweden's Acting Prime
Minister, Ingvar Carlsson, called Mr. Palme ''a leader of world stature, who
represented with dignity and strength the views of the Swedish people and many
others throughout the world.''

In a public statement issued by the White House on Friday night, Mr. Reagan
praised Mr. Palme as ''a man who made compassion the hallmark of Swedish
policy'' and said the world would remember him ''for his devotion to democratic
values and his untiring efforts to promote peace.'' Called a Friend of the U.S.
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, described Mr. Palme as
both a personal friend and a valued friend of the United States ''who never
lacked the courage in the worst of times to challenge America to live up to its
best ideals.''

Mr. Palme was an outspoken critic of the Vietnam War whose forceful oppositon to
United States policy there often angered American officals.

Mr. Kennedy's statement praised the Prime Minister for helping to end the war
and for being ''an eloquent pioneer for social justice whose good works and
progressive ideas carried far beyond the borders of his own land.''

Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger called Mr. Palme a warm and loyal
friend whose death would be a great loss to the world.

''He was somebody with whom I very often disagreed, but greatly respected,'' Mr.
Kissinger said. ''He was a world-class figure.''

At a news conference at the Swedish Embassy here, the Ambassador, Count Wilhelm
Wachtmeister, said he was deeply touched by the condolences offered by President
Reagan and other American officials.

''This is a stunning and terrible shock for our country,'' said Ambassador
Wachtmeister. ''People are crying in the street,'' he said, adding that the
tragedy had affected Swedes much the way President Kennedy's assassination
affected Americans.

'A Terrorist Attack'

In Moscow, where delegates to the Soviet Communist Party Congress stood in
silence for a minute in tribute to Mr. Palme, the Soviet press agency Tass
described his killing as ''a terrorist attack.''

The Tass article said the attack was the result of his work on behalf of the
campaign for peace, disarmament and East-West cooperation.

Pope John Paul II condemmed the assassination and said in a telegram to Carl XVI
Gustaf that he prayed that God would persuade people to renounce acts of hatred
and work together to establish peace.

Queen Elizabeth II of Britain sent the King a message expressing her shock and
her sympathy for Mr. Palme's family and the Swedish people.

Friends in House of Commons

Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said the Government of Britain was appalled at
the slaying. And in the House of Commons, where many members were friends of Mr.
Palme, the news of his death was a particularly heavy blow.

''It's an absolute tragedy,'' said George Foulkes, the Labor Party's spokesman
on foreign affairs. ''He is the last person you would have expected to have been
assassinated.''

David Owen, the leader of Britain's Social Democratic Party, said the world had
lost someone whose contributions to peace would be extremely hard to replace.
''Whether in disarmament between East and West or in trying to use the United
Nations to settle conflicts in the third world, he was tirelessly pursuing the
cause of reason and dialogue,'' Mr. Owen said.

Mr. Owen served on the Independent Commission on Disarmament and Security
Issues, a panel of diplomats from 16 nations that was headed by Mr. Palme and
established in 1980 to seek ways to end the nuclear arms race.

Day of Mourning in India

Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India, who worked closely with Mr. Palme in
campaigning for nuclear disarmemnt, declared Sunday a national day of mourning
in India. Mr. Gandhi said that he had lost a good friend and that the world had
lost one of its wisest statesmen.

''That such a man of good will should be be felled by the bullets of hatred is a
matter of great sadness,'' Mr. Gandhi said.

Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany called the assassination a ''cowardly
ambush.''

President Francois Mitterrand spoke of an ''old and loving relationship'' he had
enjoyed with Mr. Palme. And in Greece, Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou called
Mr. Palme ''a symbol of all that is decent in the world.''

Other tributes to the slain Prime Minister came from China, South Africa, Latin
America, East Germany, Yugoslavia, Australia, Africa and the Middle East. The
Governments of Portugal and Nicaragua ordered three-day mourning periods for Mr.
Palme.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of swedes attending a memorial service for Prime Minister Olof
Palme in Stockholm (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Gives Reports On Missing Americans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 9, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 112 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 1


Vietnam has handed over reports on 49 cases involving Americans missing in
action in the Vietnam War and repeated its promise to repatriate more remains of
American servicemen, a United States officer said today.

The officer, Lieut. Col. Paul Mather, who returned from the excavation of a
crash site in Laos, said an American-Laotian team had dug up the AC-130 gunship
it was seeking. The gunship was shot down in March 1972 with 14 American airmen
aboard. Colonel Mather said at a news conference: ''We got some specific
information back on these 49 cases they've investigated. I can tell you they
have found remains and some of those remains will be repatriated.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OF POWER AND HOT BUTTERED POPCORN

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 54, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 958 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


As a topic for cocktail circuit chatter, it probably does not rank with the
impact of the new deficit-reducing law or the Democrats' chances to regain
control of the Senate this fall.

Still, the new movie ''Power,'' the saga of a slick and manipulative political
consultant played by Richard Gere, is fueling some discussion in Washington
about the image of the image-makers.

Some real-life consultants here tend to wince at their portrayal, although Matt
Reese, a veteran in the trade, says none have objected to the physical role
model presented by Mr. Gere.

It is not the first time Washington has winced at the movies. Kept on the short
leash of electoral politics, this city pays attention to its popular image, and
Hollywood's rendition of the business of Washington - politics - is often less
than ennobling. A strain of suspicion toward politics, and those who practice
it, has run through the movies for many years, some film scholars say.

Maybe the cynical view of organized power comes from the hustings, where
suspicion has dwelt for ages. Or maybe, muses Stephen D. Mamber, a film
professor at the University of California at Los Angeles, it comes from the film
makers' experience with the studio executives. ''They think that power anywhere
is the same as power in Hollywood,'' he said.

Whatever the reason, politicians in American films have rarely been treated with
the kind of respect afforded, say, United States Marshals. And in recent years,
some scholars say, movies have become ever more pessimistic about this city and
what it represents.

Consider the distance between Jimmy Stewart in ''Mr. Smith Goes to Washington''
and Robert Redford in ''The Candidate.''

''Mr. Smith,'' the 1939 movie directed by Frank Capra, is the touchstone of
Washington films. A populist naif, played by Mr. Stewart, is appointed to the
Senate, where he prevails over corruption and cronyism by holding fast to the
ideals of the Founding Fathers. It is a fundamentally optimistic film, although
even in 1939 Mr. Smith needed the help of a shrewd Capitol Hill secretary.

''There was always this sense that politics was a corrupt function but that one
could somehow cure it or heal it,'' said Harry Keyishian, a professor at
Fairleigh Dickinson University. ''Basically, the commonweal itself was pure. All
you needed to do was revive its ideals.''

In contrast, Mr. Keyishian said, later films like ''The Candidate'' foreclose
the option of staying pure and in politics. In that 1972 film, a young lawyer,
portrayed by Mr. Redford, runs for the Senate and is progressively sucked into
the world of compromise by the prospect of power. Mr. Smith is long gone, as, in
many cases, are the square-jawed G-men who guarded the heartland.

In more innocent times, when a film character looked over his shoulder and said,
''I can't talk, they're listening,'' it was understood that ''they'' were the
Russians or the Nazis, says Howard Suber, a professor of film at U.C.L.A. In
contemporary times, ''they'' are often understood to be the Central Intelligence
Agency or some other arm of the Government, he adds.

''It's like the old silent films when the guy comes on with a handlebar
mustache,'' said Mr. Suber, who first noticed the emergence of such ''paranoia''
films in the Vietnam War era.

Jack Jorgens, director of the media center at American University, argues,
''Movies aren't really out to capture the statistical truth about the number of
dedicated bureaucrats working here.''

'Certain Kind of Fear, Certain Kind of Doubt'

A film like ''Three Days of the Condor,'' which Mr. Jorgens considers one of the
best films of this genre, ''captures a certain kind of fear, a certain kind of
doubt,'' he said.

''It's like Washington is always telling us things are in control, trust us,
don't be impatient,'' he said. ''And meanwhile, all hell is breaking loose.''

Given that image of Washington, in which moral ambiguity swirls like mist around
the public buildings, as suggested in the film ''All the President's Men,'' it
is perhaps unsurprising that some film buffs in the capital look back fondly on
the earlier movies.

David L. Parker, a curator in the film and broadcasting section of the Library
of Congress, says he has seen ''Mr. Smith'' 12 times and ''could see it again,
because of the spirit that's expressed.'' But Mr. Parker remembered showing that
film to a college class he was teaching around 1969 and discovering a very
different reaction.

''They thought I was trying to sell them the Vietnam War,'' he said. ''They
hated this movie.'' The moving scenes of Mr. Smith with the symbols of
democracy, to their eyes, were an attempt to excuse the Government, he said.

Mr. Parker added, however, that he had also watched a young, presumably
sophisticated Washington audience fall under the Capra-Smith spell within
minutes of the film's opening. He did not say whether they appeared to be
identifying with the wide-eyed Mr. Smith or his secretary, played by Jean
Arthur.

Raoul Kulberg at the University of the District of Columbia, who is a storehouse
of arcane facts on Washington films, said his personal favorite is ''The Day the
Earth Stood Still.'' In that 1951 movie, a Martian lands in Washington to plead
the cause of peace.

Does it matter what image of Washington and of politics comes across on the
screen?

Mr. Suber at U.C.L.A. finds the recent images disturbing, signifying a ''crisis
in belief.''

Robert Squier, a political consultant, worries that a view of politics as
inherently corrupt ''gives permission'' to people to remain uninvolved. Mr.
Squier never had Mr. Smith as a client, but the consultant noted that his
message was very different - that one man, in fact, could make a difference.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of James Stewart in ''Mr. Smith Goes To Washington,'' Robert
Redford in ''The Candidate,'' Richard Gere in ''Power''

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
'OUTRAGE' GIVES A NEW TWIST TO VIGILANTISM

BYLINE: By John J. O'Connor

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 966 words


Buying a handgun in another state, Dennis Riordan, a white man, drives up to New
York City's Harlem, gets out of his automobile and murders a black man named
Charlie Johnson. Driving directly to a police station, Riordan announces, ''I
just killed a man at Lenox Avenue and 117th Street.'' So begins ''Outrage,'' the
made-for-TV movie on CBS at 9 this evening.

Vigilantism is a staple of the television production line. Among weekly series,
it can be found anywhere from the cartoon antics of ''The A-Team'' to the suave
wipeouts of ''The Equalizer.'' But ''Outrage'' is less concerned with script
opportunities for violence than with raising troubling questions about the
country's overall judicial system. If it ends up being somewhat less convincing
than intended, the two-hour film, largely a courtroom drama, succeeds in being
unusually provocative as it outlines and explores certain gray areas of the law.

The sustained tone of expertise is not accidental. The script for the Irwin
Allen Production was written by Henry Denker, based on his own novel. Mr. Denker
is also a lawyer, and the fictional story is described as an amalgam of several
factual cases. Although there are a number of curtsies in the direction of
''balance,'' Mr. Denker is on Riordan's side. Just to make that much crystal
clear, the role of Riordan is filled to overflowing by Robert Preston, an actor
with a talent for being effortlessly engaging whether he is strutting around at
the head of a marching band (''The Music Man'') or mincing hilariously through a
drag routine (''Victor/Victoria''). As Riordan, Mr. Preston protests with such
calm rage, such savvy sincerity against the injustices of the world he lives in
that to find him less than admirable would border on misanthropy.

As we quickly discover at the police station, in a confession recorded on
videotape for evidence in the subsequent trial, Riordan's daughter Agnes was
raped and killed a year earlier in lower Manhattan. His wife died a month ago,
probably of a broken heart. One son is a priest in South America, the other was
killed in Vietnam. Riordan is clearly a decent, law-abiding citizen. He was even
willing to accept his daughter's death when the murderer, who was caught with
some of Agnes's jewelry in his pocket, proceeded to make a full confession to
the police. If justice was to be done, Riordan would be satisfied. He and his
wife just waited for the trial.

But, months later, after only a hearing, the District Attorney's office dropped
the case against Charlie Johnson. For technical legal reasons, a Judge Lengel
(Mel Ferrer) threw out the confession. Riordan decided: ''If the law wouldn't do
anything about a man who committed murder, then I would.'' And now he wants to
be tried in court. Spurning an insanity plea, he explains that it is ''very
important for the people to know I was sane.'' If he must go to jail for 15
years, ''it is worth it - to let the people know.''

Mr. Denker has certainly constructed an intriguing core for his story. He is
less successful with the surrounding accouterments, designed less with an eye to
rational discourse than to the demands of television drama for an obligatory
crisis or love scene every 12 minutes.

Needing someone to defend Riordan, crusty old Judge Aaron Klein (Burgess
Meredith, in one of his more cantankerous moods) enlists a former assistant
District Attorney who, after being dismissed for his unorthodox methods, is now
struggling to establish his own practice on the defense side of the business.
Played by Beau Bridges, Brad Gordon is a grown man who is still in awe of the
reputation his deceased uncle earned as a wily defense lawyer. Brad lives with
Arlene (Linda Purl), an upwardly mobile stock-market analyst who helps pay most
of the household bills.

Brad could use a big case to attract attention, and Riordan's seems tailored for
that purpose. But with the accused resolutely determined not to defend himself,
Brad needs a gimmick. He miscalculates badly when he suggests that the
prosecutor (William Allen Young), a black man and his personal friend, may have
mishandled Riordan's confession because of racial bias. Even Arlene warns him
that ''desperate is one thing, but this was despicable.'' But then a chastened
Brad wonders aloud: ''What if I can get the jury to share Riordan's outrage by
putting the system of justice on trial?''

He manages to subpoena Judge Lengel to the stand, charging before the jury that
''the people live in constant fear for their safety and for their lives. If you
represent the people, why not let them know how their judges make decisions?''
The people then learn that Charlie Johnson was released, despite his having
confessed to the murder of Agnes Riordan, because of a technicality having to do
with his already having been indicted in another case involving the rape of a
15-year-old black girl. In other words, as Brad puts it, ''a previous crime
served as a defense in a more heinous crime.''

''Outrage'' makes its point with some skill, even as it allows the prosecutor a
few moments to argue against vigilantism of any sort - ''If our freedom is to
survive, then our system of justice must survive.'' Along the way, the script
also manages to throw in a greedy literary agent, played by, of all people,
Anthony Newley, who promises Brad fame and fortune if he can get Riordan to sign
over the film and television rights to his story. This gives Riordan an
opportunity to rise to a level of righteousness transcending ideologies: ''What
kind of a world are we living in, kid? Is the almighty dollar so powerful that
people will buy and sell anything?'' Like most television products, ''Outrage''
tries to provide a little something for everybody. The difference is that it
succeeds better than most.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
TV in the Senate

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 747 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Senate of the United States has decided to experiment with televising its
proceedings. This could help restore the great debating tradition of the United
States or it could bring back vaudeville. It all depends on the rules.

It's easy to understand why the Senate reached this decision after fiddling and
fudging it for years. Ronald Reagan hasn't convinced the senators that his
policy is right, but he has convinced them that his personality and his
television techniques are dominating public opinion, and that they have to do
something about it.

Besides, the House of Representatives, without many people's noticing, has been
televising its arguments for some time, and the Senate, proud of its reputation
as the ''greatest deliberative body in the world,'' has always felt that what
the House does, the Senate can do better.

The case for televising debates here in Washington on the decisions that affect
the lives of the American people is that the voters should, at least once in a
while, have a glimpse about how these decisions are made, not only in the
Congress, but in the Supreme Court of the United States.

Warren Burger of Minnesota, Chief Justice of the United States, is fiercely
opposed to this intrusion of television on the decision process, and has given
clear warning that if the day ever comes when the television cameras come into
his Court, that will be the day he'll resign.

But there's a difference between the Court and the Congress; and an argument
could be made that for the Congress, television is not a problem but an
opportunity, as we saw in the racial struggles of the South many years ago, in
the Vietnam War and most recently in the crisis of the Philippines, when the
cameras brought the struggles into our living rooms and made us think.

There are, as we all know, troubling problems among the nations on the control
of weapons on earth and in outer space, and about the distribution of money for
weapons or for the education of our children, or about the bankruptcy of our
farmers.

The decision of the Senate to bring the cameras into its chamber suggests at
least the possibility that television could be used to help national
understanding of those problems and not merely for political interests.

We are living in a revolutionary age of propaganda at home and abroad. For the
first time we have a world economy, with the industrial nations competing for
trade and profit; the superpowers argue over nuclear weapons, and the majority
of the human race lives in hunger and hears by modern communications that their
misery is not inevitable but intolerable.

So much depends on how the United States handles all these tangles, how our
people see the coming world in which their children will have to live.
Television, which too often gives us the world of illusion, has also recently
shown us in the Philippines a vision of reality.

In the Senate it could go either way. The proceedings could be televised, each
member could take his clips, and after careful editing in the television studios
in the basement of the Senate office buildings, send them back to TV stations in
their states to demonstrate what fine senators they are and how necessary is
their re-election.

On the other hand, the Senate could, without altering many rules, set aside, say
once a month, an hour's time to debate the major questions for decision.

Even the commercial networks wouldn't be able to ignore such a surprising
meeting of the Senate, with all members present, so that the people, almost for
the first time, would be able to judge for themselves the struggle over public
issues.

It could even be that young people in the universities, who for some reason
would rather demonstrate than debate, would watch the Senate in serious
discussion and carry it on among themselves later on.

Most senators have got the main point: that politically, they're probably going
to live or die by television; but there's just a chance now that they can use it
not only for themselves or their parties, but for the education of their
constituents, and particularly for the respect of the young, whose enthusiasm
for politicians and the media, and even the democratic process, is not excessive
these days.

But it will all depend on the rules on television in the Senate. The senators
can use television for their own purposes or for the purpose of bringing the
nation together. We will just have to wait and see what sort of rules they can
agree upon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CANDIDATE SEARCH GOES FAR AFIELD

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 755 words


The budding contests for Governor and United States Senator in New York are
demonstrating some political wisdom - the stronger the incumbent, the more
likely it is that challengers will emerge from left field, or even stage left.

Harry Belafonte, better known for his calypsos than his political speeches, was
consulting last week with state Democratic leaders about seeking the party's
nomination to oppose Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, a Republican, in November. He
is to make a decision this weekend.  The 58-year-old singer is only the latest
celebrity to consider seeking his first elective office at a fairly lofty level.
Last month, Henry A. Kissinger, the former Secretary of State, briefly
considered and then rejected the idea of becoming a contender for the Republican
nomination to run against Governor Cuomo.

And in January, Arthur Levitt Jr., a Democrat who is chairman of the American
Stock Exchange and the son of the late New York State Comptroller, performed a
political Hamlet's soliloquy but decided against challenging Mr. D'Amato. One
deterrent undoubtedly was Mr. Levitt's earlier fulsome praise of the Senator,
which was resurrected by D'Amato aides.

As for Mr. Belafonte, his course could be affected by some politically inspired
shots across his bow. First came the revelation that he is a minor
traffic-ticket scofflaw. Then it was learned from the Board of Elections that he
had voted only half the time in the last 10 years from his Manhattan residence.
There also have been predictions by politicians, including other blacks who
privately do not welcome the competition, that some of his statements on civil
rights and the Vietnam War might come back to haunt him.

Early in the Democrats' search for a D'Amato challenger, two well-known
politicians, Geraldine A. Ferraro, the 1984 nominee for Vice President, and
District Attorney Elizabeth Holtzman of Brooklyn, the candidate who faced Mr.
D'Amato six years ago, declined to run.

That was when the party turned to the political amateurs and celebrities. Such a
move hardly represented a vote of confidence for two declared candidates, Mark
Green, the writer and public interest lawyer, and Franklin J. Havlicek, a
broadcasting executive. To some, they have been made to look like second
choices. And predictably, they do not necessarily buy that theory.

Mr. Havlicek, with uncustomary humility for a candidate, said, ''I would hope
the Democratic Party would find a stronger and better-known candidate than I.''
Mr. Green said he could understand why the party ''would want to encourage the
best possible people to run.'' But unlike Mr. Havlicek, Mr. Green said he would
battle Mr. Belafonte in the September primary if the singer steps into the
spotlight from stage left.

On the Republican side, Mr. Kissinger, who has stayed center-stage through
speaking and television engagements, toyed last month with the idea of
challenging Governor Cuomo. He had hoped to ruminate quietly, but was pushed
into a quick and public decision by a calculated and not particularly friendly
Republican leak.

Earlier, three businessmen, J. Peter Grace, David Mahoney and Peter Dawkins,
decided not to run after being sounded out by state Republican leaders. Mr.
Dawkins, it developed, did not even meet the five-year residency requirement.
And even earlier, State Senator Roy Goodman, the Manhattan Republican chairman
and a veteran politician, talked like a candidate - possibly to increase his
political exposure outside his borough. But other Republican leaders do not
consider him a serious prospect.

Potential Candidates

That leaves as potential Cuomo challengers three veteran Republicans and a
maverick Democrat, none well known outside his home turf. They are: Westchester
County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke; Douglas Barclay, a wealthy former State
Senator from the Syracuse area; James L. Emery of Geneseo, the administrator of
the St. Lawrence Seaway and the unsuccessful candidate for Lieutenant Governor
four years ago, and Mayor James D. Griffin of Buffalo, a renegade Democrat.

Mr. Griffin, who was re-elected on the Republican and Conservative lines last
November, has appeared eager to run, but the three Republicans generally are
considered reluctant dragons.

There is, it seems, a political malaise hanging over the top offices, the kind
of vacuum that makes candidates out of local officeholders and such celebrities
as actors, singers and athletes, all of whom would need roadmaps to find
Amsterdam, Batavia and Canandaigua.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Harry Belafonte with Daniel Patrick Moynihan (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
Swedish Premier Assassinated on Stockholm Street

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity, Milt Freudenhelm and Richard Levine

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 291 words


Olof Palme, the Prime Minister of Sweden and an internationally prominent
left-wing activist, was shot and killed by a gunman Friday night on a brightly
lit street corner in downtown Stockholm. He had dismissed his security guards
and was walking with his wife after attending a movie premiere.

The assailant escaped, apparently in a car driven by an accomplice; the police
said they had no evidence of a motive. In a call to a news agency in London,
however, a terrorist group called the Holger Meins Commando claimed
responsibility.

It was the first assassination of a Swedish head of government or state in more
than 200 years. The last European leader killed while holding office was the
Prime Minister of Spain, Luis Carrero Blanco, in 1973, who died in a car-bombing
attributed to Basque separatists.

Mr. Palme, who was 59 years old, led his Socialist Party for 17 years, serving
as Prime Minister from 1969 to 1976, when he lost an election, and regaining the
office in 1982. Educated at Kenyon College in Ohio, he was a frequent and sharp
critic of United States policies. In 1968 he marched alongside a North
Vietnamese diplomat in a demonstration against the American war in Vietnam, and
he campaigned vigorously against deployment of American nuclear weapons in
Europe.

He was faulted for muting criticism of the Soviet Union, even when Soviet
submarines were repeatedly sighted in Swedish waters. But Sweden, which
proclaims itself a neutral nation, remained Western-oriented in trade, culture
and democratic institutions.

President Reagan sent condolences, denouncing the murder as ''a senseless act of
violence.'' He praised Mr. Palme for ''his devotion to democratic values and his
untiring efforts to promote peace.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Olof Palme

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 744 words


March 2, 1986 Fiction

* 1 THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket, $3.95.) The life and loves of a
black woman told through her letters.

* 2 IF TOMORROW COMES, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $4.95.) A con woman plies her
trade among the ultrarich.

* 3 FAMILY ALBUM, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $4.50.) The Thayers, a couple with
five children, cope with the crises of contemporary America.

* 4 THE CLASS, by Erich Segal. (Bantam, $4.50.) What happened to five members of
Harvard's 1958 class.

* 5 THE LONELY SILVER RAIN, by John D. MacDonald. (Fawcett, $4.50.) Travis McGee
must solve a debutante's murder and other puzzles.

* 6 ILLUSIONS OF LOVE, by Cynthia Freeman. (Berkley, $4.50.) A romantic triangle
that moves from Italy to Manhattan to San Francisco.

* 7 THE CLAN OF THE CAVE BEAR, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $4.95.) The adventures
of a woman at the dawn of the human race.

* 8 STRONG MEDICINE, by Arthur Hailey. (Dell, $4.50.) A woman executive balances
ethics and profits in the pharmaceutical-drug industry.

* 9 VIRGIN AND MARTYR, by Andrew M. Greeley. (Geis/Warner, $4.95.) Two men who
loved a nun investigate her reported torture and murder.

* 10 GOLEM IN THE GEARS, by Piers Anthony. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) A tiny
artificial man rescues an imprisoned damsel in the Land of Xanth.

* 11 THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $4.95.) Continuing the saga
begun in ''The Clan of the Cave Bear.''

* 12 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine
driver brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

* 13 MAIA, by Richard Adams. (Signet/NAL, $4.95.) The experiences of two
teen-age girls as slaves in a carnal and corrupt land of fantasy.

* 14* THE GENERALS, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $3.95.) The sixth volume of the
''Brotherhood of War'' series carries the saga into Vietnam.

* 15* THE FINISHING SCHOOL, by Gail Godwin. (Avon, $4.50.) A girl's relationship
with an older woman unintentionally leads to her mentor's downfall. Nonfiction
General

* 1 OUT OF AFRICA AND SHADOWS ON THE GRASS, by Isak Dinesen. (Vintage/Random
House, $4.95.) Two memoirs of colonial Kenya.

* 2 THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach. (Dell, $3.95.) How the author of
''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' sought a true love.

* 3 PETER THE GREAT, by Robert K. Massie. (Ballantine, $5.95.) A biography of
the Russian Czar that served as the basis of a recent television series.

* 4 ISAK DINESEN: The Life of a Storyteller, by Judith Thurman. (St. Martin's,
$4.95.) A biography.

* 5 THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

* 6 ''SURELY YOU'RE JOKING, MR. FEYNMAN!'' by Richard P. Feynman. (Bantam,
$4.50.) A Nobel laureate in physics recounts his misadventures.

* 7 LOVE, by Leo Buscaglia. (Fawcett, $3.95.) A celebration of life's ''largest
experience.''

* 8* RUSTY'S STORY, by Carol Gino. (Bantam, $3.95.) The dreadful experiences of
a young woman whose epilepsy was diagnosed as mental illness.

* 9 NUTCRACKER, by Shana Alexander. (Dell, $3.95.) The case of a woman who chose
her son to kill her wealthy father. Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

* 1 THE ARTHUR YOUNG TAX GUIDE 1986. (Ballantine, $8.95.) Aid from an accounting
firm.

* 2 J. K. LASSER'S YOUR INCOME TAX. (Simon & Schuster, $7.95.) The 1986 edition.

* 3 RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico. (Rand McNally,
$5.95.) For 1986.

* 4 THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1986. (Newspaper Enterprise Association,
$5.95.) Its 118th year.

* 5 VALLEY OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson. (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $5.95.) A
collection of syndicated ''Far Side'' cartoons.

* 6 THE FAR SIDE GALLERY, by Gary Larson. (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $8.95.)
More ''Far Side'' cartoons. The listings above are based on computer-processed
sales figures from 2,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with
more than 40,000 retail outlets, including newsstands, variety stores,
supermarkets and bookstores. These figures are statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. The number of
titles within the two subdivisions of nonfiction can change from week to week,
reflecting changes in book buying. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates
that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are
barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND OPINION;
DID YOU PROTEST THE WAR, MOM?

BYLINE: By LAURA WILETSKY; Laura Wiletsky lives in Commack.

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 20, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 890 words


BEING a college student at midlife surrounded by many students half my age has
prompted me to reminisce about the ''carefree'' days of my youth. My apathy 20
years ago embarrasses me. Where was I when the world was going on? I now ask
myself.

How could I have been unaware and unconcerned about Vietnam?

How could I not be moved by the injustices that spurred the civil rights
movements?

I can still hear the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s impassioned plea ''I have
a dream'' as he tried to seize the consciousness of America during his historic
march on Washington. But in 1963 his ''dream'' was not my concern.

I was ''working in the city,'' a phrase in those days implying glamorous jobs in
fancy offices, meeting important people and going to exciting places. In my
case, it was also an accurate job description.

My first job was working for a large corporation on the 48th floor of its
offices in Manhattan. I greeted foreign visitors who were purchasing chemical
patent rights. I can only imagine now some of the uses of those chemicals.

Were those quiet scientists and lawyers buying formulas promising wealth at the
expense of innocent victims? Could recipes for sprays that raped the land and
maimed the people have been among the prizes they stuffed in their bulging
briefcases? I now wonder.

Outwardly, I had a very sophisticated image - the latest hair style, trendy
clothes. Inwardly I was naive and uncaring about anything except my own little
world. My biggest concern was where to go on Friday nights. I had excellent
opportunities to advance my career then, but I couldn't be bothered. I didn't
consider it ''in'' in take work seriously.

I didn't have any personal stake in Vietnam - no boyfriend sending letters from
strange-sounding places like Saigon or Khe Sanh. The young men I knew had
fathers who bought their sons spots in the reserves or had college deferments.
Today, there are male teachers trapped in careers chosen solely as an
alternative to military service.

Vietnam claimed the life of my friend's husband. Her life was shattered during a
bleak December in the mid-60's. Her 22-year-old husband was a Green Beret, the
unit publicized as the Army's elite by military recruiters eager to sign up
idealistic young men looking for a chance to be heroes.

Patriotic thoughts that he died a hero helped sustain my friend during that
first winter as a 21-year-old widow. In the spring, she carefully packed away
her wedding album in her mother's attic and a year later married a young man who
worked in her office. The agonies of Vietnam still did not seep into my
conscience, however. Vietnam was as far removed from my mind as it is from the
shores of America.

Kent State University was just an Ohio college. College students getting shot as
they went to class didn't concern me - I wasn't one of them. My 12-year-old
daughter, Lainie, was visibly shaken when she recently saw the film that
recreated the horror of that tragic incident.

''Were you alive then?'' she asked me. I now ask myself, was I?

One of my main concerns then was choosing the right Corning Ware pattern -
either plain white or with blue flowers. My other major dilemma was deciding on
the shape of my engagement ring - round or oval.

During the height of the urban riots I passed through Harlem on the Penn Central
train from Westchester County. In the mornings I would stare out at all those
run-down buildings and watch groups of men hang out on street corners. Sometimes
I could actually peer into the dismal apartments - but only for a brief moment.
The train would whiz by, and those images would be quickly forgotten. That was
as close as I got to social unrest. At night, I rarely wanted to look out at
that bleak world again.

The men riding those trains never seemed to take their heads out of the papers
in the morning and usually slept at night while heading back to their suburban
retreats. They chose to totally ignore the unpleasant reality right outside
their windows. But then again so did I. At the peak of the civil rights
movement, I was doing public relations for the United Negro College Fund. I was
working for a good cause - as a paid employee. That, however, was my
justification for not doing anything on a personal level for civil rights. At
work I was making arrangements for President Lyndon Johnson to be honored for
his ''outstanding contributions to civil rights.''

At that time I was not concerned enough about the civil rights of American
soldiers in Southeast Asia. I was planning a European vacation while they went
looking for ''Charlie'' in rice paddies sprinkled with land mines.

There was no one making arrangements to honor our warriors for their
''outstanding contributions'' upon their return home. Yet for almost 50,000 men
that contribution was their lives. Many open wounds remain today for those who
survived the statistics.

I wonder, as I walk about the college campus today, if students are any more
socially conscious now than I was then. Today's headlines focus on Nicaragua and
South Africa. Twenty years ago it was Vietnam and Selma. The issues are the
same, only the geography is different.

I hope it doesn't take 20 years for this generation to wonder, as I do now,
where they were when Ethopia, MX missiles and acid rain were among the issues of
their youth.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of demonstrators in Manhattan protesting the Vietnam War in 1969

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A PLACE FOR THE HOMELESS TO CALL HOME

BYLINE: By ALBERT J. PARISI

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 1, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1136 words

DATELINE: PERTH AMBOY


WHEN Ruth Hardwick starts her day, her concerns are like those of any other
restaurateur: making sure the tables are properly set, the coffee urn is full
and brewing, the sugar bowls are filled and there are plenty of eggs on hand for
the breakfast rush.

But at this aging eatery at 176 New Brunswick Avenue, the price of a meal is
whatever the customer can afford, dessert is a Bible that can be wrapped up and
taken and the tip, said Mrs. Hardwick, is ''letting me hear your story and
letting you know that here there's a shoulder to cry on and that people care.''

The restaurant is called Charity, and it was capitalized out of pain: the
$50,000 life-insurance benefit Mrs. Hardwick got when her daughter, Walterine,
died.

''It warms the heart to know down deep that it is always better to give than to
receive,'' said Mrs. Hardwick, a fragile but spry 70-year-old who says she has
learned that putting beliefs to work is a way of re-establishing faith, even
during the most difficult of times.

The restaurant opened last September in conjunction with the Perth Amboy
Deliverance Center, a church group headed by the Rev. Horace Wright. Its aim,
Mr. Wright said, is to feed those who have nowhere else toturn - the indigent,
the homeless, the lonely and the ''lost souls who need the comfort of a family
group, from which all life begins or is renewed.''

''To be poor in America is a terrible thing,'' said Mrs. Hardwick. ''We are all
helping those poor folks in other countries, but right here, if you look around,
there are people reaching their hand out for a crust of bread, poor folk eating
from cans of dog food and thankful for that, children going without and too many
folks just looking the other way.''

Mrs. Hardwick and church officials say that the number of poor is growing at a
disproportionate rate in this urban Middlesex County area.

Charity, on the site of a Spanish restaurant that went out of business, serves
nearly 200 meals a day. It, too, may go out of business because the $800 rent
and other monthly bills of about $700 must be paid, and funds are running short.

The last of the insurance money was spent in January, and the restaurant's debts
are now $5,000 and climbing.

Mrs. Hardwick, who lives in Toms River - she is driven here six days a week by a
church volunteer - believes Charity will survive ''because the good Lord told me
as much.''

''And who but He would know best?'' she asked.

The restaurant has had its share of grand-opening pains. Two months of
renovation work by church volunteers were needed before the first meals could be
prepared and served, and utensils, tables, chairs and kitchen equipment had to
be bought before food stocks were even considered.

Most supplies today are donated by businesses in the area.

Mrs. Hardwick, whose husband, James, died in 1983, used to own a boarding house
in Newark, and she cared for aged residents for nearly four decades, part of the
time with the help of her daughter. Saving what she could, she financed her
daughter's education at Howard University in Washington.

Walterine, she said, joined the Army and made it a career. At age 44, she was
the recreation director at a military installation in West Germany. Last
February, she died of heart failure. (Mrs. Hardwick has an adopted son, David
Castonguay, a Vietnam veteran, who lives with her.) ''We're doing the Lord's
work here,'' Mrs. Hardwick said, ''but the gas and electric company, the
telephone company and the fuel oil company know only that we're a business, and
they expect the bills to be paid on time.''

An ancient dumbwaiter between the main dining room and basement kitchen is
unusable. A contractor renovated it last year, but when a cable snapped he
refused to make further repairs until church members paid an outstanding $2,000
balance. Since then, food trays have been carried up a long flight of stairs by
volunteers.

Donations in the form of checks have been arriving daily, but stemming the tide
of bill collectors has been difficult, Mr. Wright said, because checks take six
to eight days to clear ''and most people want their money yesterday.''

Church officials say that the restaurant could close this month if new sources
of funds are not found.

In recent weeks, word has spread in the community that the restaurant is on
''hard times,'' Mr. Wright said.

''People coming in for meals have been donating what they can, either in pocket
change or canned food that they can and sometimes can't spare,'' he said.

Hortense Smithson of Perth Amboy, a volunteer hostess who came upon the
restaurant and was moved by its purpose, said:

''What this place has done for this community is something that can't be put
into words. It can only be felt.

''A young man came in here the other day, cold and hungry. He spoke little
English, but anyone could see that he was in a bad way. He was having trouble
finding a job, and he had only enough money to pay his rent, let alone eat. But
we fed him and he thanked us.''

The man's ''tears of joy'' were payment enough, Mrs. Smithson said, adding:

''Many people don't know what it's like to suffer, but for those who have,
relieving someone else's misery makes your own suffering a little more
bearable.''

Eugene Lee, 72, of Neptune, the cook and only paid worker, says:

''Oh, I guess I could be doing other things, but I like it just fine here.''

Skillfully fileting a donated bluefish, Mr. Lee, who was a chef at a Shore
restaurant before his semiretirment, says he could earn more elsewhere, ''but I
don't think I'd be as happy.''

Speaking of her daughter, Mrs. Hardwick said that Walterine ''knew what it was
like to take care of those who couldn't care for themselves.''

''Some children are born special,'' she said. ''I didn't need to teach her to
share 'cause that sort of thing came natural to that child.

''There are times when I ask Walterine for guidance, and I know that in my heart
I'm doing what she would have wanted me to.

''All these people being comforted is due to the grace of our Lord, but in a way
it's my memorial to Walterine, her strength and good will living on.

''People say I'm crazy, 'You be a crazy old woman for not taking that money and
retiring in your old age,' people tell me.

''But how can I find my rest knowing that people out there are needing and
hungry? I been doing the Lord's work and following his teachings too long to
slow down now.''

When the restaurant opened last year, critics said that it might draw an unruly
clientele. Mrs. Hardwick shakes her head at the thought.

''Some things you know in your heart,'' she said. ''People ain't gonna give you
a hard time if you reach out your hand and offer them a piece of bread.''

Donations can be sent to the Charity Restaurant, 176 New Brunswick Avenue, Perth
Amboy, N.J. 08861.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ruth Hardwick in her restaurant in Perth Amboy (NYT/William E.
Sauro)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARMS AND THE STATE

BYLINE: By ROBERT A. HAMILTON

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 1, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1613 words


THE arms industry has always been an important part of the state's economy, but
officials are now asking whether it has become too important.

Since the 70's, arms spending has brought between $5 billion and $6 billion a
year to Connecticut, creating an estimated 97,000 direct jobs and hundreds of
thousands more indirectly.

''We're aware of the need to diversify our economy so we aren't hit in the neck
each time there's a fluctuation in defense spending,'' the director of marketing
for the State Department of Economic Development, David Driver, said.

Last week, diversification was promoted on two fronts, by Federal and state
legislators.

United States Representative Sam Gejdenson, whose Second District is the most
heavily reliant on defense spending, with one out of five jobs in arms
industries, sponsored a conference on diversification. He established several
committees to investigate how arms companies could diversify.

In Hartford, a hearing was conducted on a bill before the General Assembly to
pay for a $50,000 study of diversification.

''The future economic stability of Connecticut may depend on making sure that
all our eggs are not in one basket,'' Mr. Gejdenson said. ''What does
diversification mean? It means helping defense-dependent companies to use their
existing technology to produce nondefense products.

''It means working with local economic-development officials to devise regional
economic-development plans to encourage nondefense-dependent business to come to
Connecticut.''

State Senator Joseph H. Harper Jr., Democrat of New Britain, a co-sponsor of the
bill to pay for the diversification study, said that although defense contracts
were helping the economy now, ''they've also demonstrated a great proclivity
toward worker displacement over the last couple of years.''

But not everyone believes a few committees and a state study are going to solve
the problem.

''We're shipbuilders - we design and build ships,'' the vice president for
finance and strategic planning at the Electric Boat division in Groton, Arthur
Barton, said. ''It's not going to be easy for us to all of a sudden decide to go
into making ketchup or something.''

The shipbuilding and weapons industries in Connecticut have long been important
to American security, and the state has come to be known as ''the arsenal of the
nation.''

But rather than defense contracts slowing after the end of the Vietnam War, as
happened in most states, the pace picked up or held steady. Last year, almost $6
billion in defense contracts was awarded to about a thousand Connecticut
companies. The bulk of the money went to three.

The United Technologies Corporation, the parent of Pratt & Whitney Aircraft,
Sikorsky Helicopter and Norden Systems, netted almost $2.5 billion in contracts.
It employed 53,800 people.

Second was Electric Boat, part of General Dynamics, which won submarine
contracts worth $1.4 billion and employed 19,600.

Third was Avco-Lycoming of Stratford, which makes engines for such equipment as
tanks, and won contracts worth $647 million. It has 4,500 workers.

After those three, the spending levels dropped dramat-ically. The fourth largest
was the Kaman Corporation of Bloomfield, which landed $141,700 in contracts.

Defense spending here averages $2,000 per capita, the highest in the country and
three times the national average. About 21 percent of the work comes from the
Army, another 21 percent from the Air Force and 56 percent from the Navy,
defense statistics indicate.

''There's quite a diverse number of companies in Connecticut that we in the
Commerce Department consider to be defense industries that other people wouldn't
even consider to be defense-related,'' according to an arms specialist in the
Federal Commerce Department, David Henry.

In Windham County, where there are few companies recognized as arms industries,
the Defense Department last year spent almost $10 million on such materials as
textiles, cable, heating and air-conditioning systems, house furnishings and
hospital supplies, Mr. Henry said.

Proponents of diversification contend that the skills used in making armaments
could easily be transferred to peacetime production. In other parts of the
country, the Raytheon Corporation used its military-radio technology to make
microwave ovens. McDonnell-Douglas has a subsidiary that sells computer services
to health-care institutions. And the GTE Corporation developed civilian markets
for its military fiber-optic technology.

Not everyone agrees there is a pressing need for arms industries to develop
nondefense products.

''We happen to be the major employer in the Groton-New London area,'' Mr. Barton
of Electric Boat said. ''But that's no different than the mills that were up in
Fall River.''

If the era of the defense contractor ends, Mr. Barton said, other uses for the
plants will be found, just as the Fall River mills were converted.

Diversification, he added, is often not successful. He cited the attempt of the
Grumman Corporation of Long Island to make buses for New York City.

''I have to question whether Electric Boat would be successful,'' if it tried to
diversify, Mr. Barton said.

Finally, he said, other products would not require as many workers. At various
times, Electric Boat has manufactured truck bodies, bridges, tunnels,
bowling-pin setters and drilling rigs.

''These jobs require 100, 200 people, and we faced a lot more competition,'' Mr.
Barton said. ''Whether you like defense or don't like defense has nothing to do
with it. The question is how do you create jobs for people who are displaced?''

The Rev. Kevin D. Bean of St. Luke's Episcopal Church in Darien, however, said
arms dollars would be better spent in other areas. He quoted a study by the
Congressional Budget Office that concluded that with the same $1 billion of
military spending shifted to civilian manufacturing, at least 4,000 additional
civilian jobs could be created above the number of jobs created by military
contracts and the armed services.

With Pentagon critics trying to slash the arms budget, ''we will continue to see
defense workers being most vulnerable to displacement,'' according to Mr. Bean,
who is chairman of the Economic Conversion Task Force of the Connecticut
Campaign for a U.S.-U.S.S.R. Nuclear Arms Freeze.

The question of what to do with arms workers, who are trained to perform such
tasks as high-pressure submarine welding, plagues proponents of diversification.

''A pipefitter at Electric Boat could not be a plumber on the outside,'' said
Thomas Kiddy, president of the Metal Trades Council, which represents 11,000
Electric Boat workers. ''The skills involved are altogether different.''

According to executives of companies that are trying to diversify, management
must change when switching from defense to commercial contracts.

The Defense Department publishes five-year plans in which it outlines what its
needs will be, according to Gerry Lamb, president of Ship Analytics in
Stonington, a maker of computer simulators for the Navy that recently began
commercial production.

''You don't know what the opportunities are in the commercial world,'' he said.
''You don't know waht the needs are. So you take a chance when developing a
product that there will be a market for it.

The Defense Department, Mr. Lamb added, pays for product development, and it
owns the design, so the Government can copy it or maintain it.

''That's a perfectly rational approach,'' Mr. Lamb said. ''It's just different
from the commercial world. In the commercial world, it's my design - and my
risk.''

A. Theodore Mollegen Jr., president of Analysis & Technology Inc. of Stonington,
which manufactures military and commercial electrical systems, said there was a
powerful motivation for companies to leave arms production.

''Why are we interested in diversification?'' Mr. Mollegen asked. ''We're
interested in making a profit. Profits, he said, are typically greater on
commercial contracts.

To aid companies interested in diversification, Mr. Gejdenson set up several
committees last week to examine past successes.

''We'll probably be most successful working with the small companies, the ones
that have a greater ability to be flexible,'' he said.

At the state level, Mr. Harper's bill had a hearing last week. Mr. Harper said
it had the strong support of Senate and House Democrats. The bill would
appropriate $50,000 to set up a panel to study ''possible forces on long-term
nonmilitary employment in the state.''

''In the past, we've had some difficulty getting the concept across,'' Mr.
Harper said. ''But every time diversification comes up, we pick up more
support.'' United Technologies: The state's biggest defense contractor, with
$2.5 billion last year, employs 53,800 people. Pratt & Whitney division, with
plants in East Hartford and Middletown, makes engines for jets, among them the
F-14, F-15, at left, F-16 and F-18. Sikorsky division, in Bridgeport, Shelton,
West Haven and Stratford, makes Black Hawk, Seahawk and Super Stallion
helicopters. Norden division in Norwalk makes electronics for military aircraft
and missiles. Groton's Electric Boat: Second largest defense contractor in the
state, with $1.4 billion last year. A division of General Dynamics, E.B. employs
19,600 people and makes fast-attack submarines and the Trident ballistic missile
submarine, shown here. Avco-Lycoming: $647 million in defense awards last year
made it the third largest military contractor in Connecticut. It employs 4,500
people at its plant in Stratford and makes engines for the M-1 Abrams battle
tank, at left, and for amphibious assault hovercraft.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of the arms industry's various products; Graph of arms spending
breakdown; Photo of United States Representative Sam Gejdenson; Photo of Arthur
Barton, Electric Boat; Photo of David Henry, United States Commerce Department;
Photo of The Rev. Kevin D. Bean, Connecticut campaign for a U.S.-U.S.S.R.
Nuclear Arms Freeze

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 955 words


THE DREAM OF DELIVERANCE IN AMERICAN POLITICS. By Mona Harrington. 308 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.

MONA HARRINGTON, a lawyer and political scientist, asks a familiar but important
question at the opening of her intriguing study, ''The Dream of Deliverance in
American Politics.'' Why have so many Americans lost confidence in their system?
Her answer is not much more startling. The American Dream has failed, she
believes, because we have allowed ourselves to be seduced by what she calls the
''myth of the deliverance from evil,'' which, she argues, over the course of the
past century or so, has been promoted by three primary but irreconcilable
interest groups within the American economy.

The first of these groups is made up of ''those engaged in small or locally
based (including agrarian) enterprise,'' which she calls ''localist'' because
''it seeks to place authority at the grass roots, in common, ordinary people
making decisions about their daily business privately in their local
communities.'' Their historical paradigm is, of course, the man known as ''the
Great Commoner,'' William Jennings Bryan.

The second group consists of ''capital managers,'' whom Mrs. Harrington calls
''functionalists,'' because ''they would vest authority in functional experts,
people trained and experienced in carrying out important social functions.''
''The key figure - philosopher and practitioner - of the new functionalist
politics'' that rose in the 1930's ''was Herbert Hoover.''

The third group is composed of industrial wage earners, for whom she uses the
term ''majoritarian'' because ''it is the conviction of this group that the
proper locus of authority is the great majority of the country's people, counted
not locally but nationwide.'' The ultimate majoritarian, she writes, was
President Franklin D. Roosevelt, whose major New Deal programs were ''firmly
rooted in wage earner or majoritarian beliefs concerning what was going wrong
and what system of authority would put it right.''

As Mrs. Harrington, currently executive director of the Alliance of Independent
Scholars in Cambridge, Mass., attempts to show in her incisive history, each of
these groups, alone or in combination with one or two of the others, has claimed
to offer deliverance from evil in both domestic and international politics. Yet
each has failed because none has ever fully acknowledged the profoundly
conflicting claims of the others.

This reading of 20th-century American history brings out patterns that lend a
new shape to familiar events. For instance, many who lived through the McCarthy
era of Communist-hunting experienced it as an outburst of irrational hysteria.
But Mrs. Harrington makes the point that ''in localist belief, honest trade and
other exchange across national borders should be possible without elaborate
governmental arrangements; there was no need for links between the United States
and other nations to be contrived, financed, and expensively protected.'' Yet in
the post-World War II era ''a bipartisan coalition was pushing through Congress
program after program setting up extensive linkages around the world. Why? The
answer for localists, given no explanation that made sense to them on the
surface of things, was to assume that the explanation lay under the surface'' -
in McCarthy's Communist conspiracy.

Elsewhere she makes the point that the ''tone'' of President Eisenhower's
warning against the military-industrial complex ''was calmer than the earlier
localist warnings of William Jennings Bryan against the 'merchants of death' and
the 'professional man-killers' '' that he had written in his weekly newspaper,
The Commoner, prior to World War I, ''but the concern about the 'misplaced
power' of special interests undermining the general public interest, and the
loss of power to an 'elite' uncontrollable by the ordinary citizen, was the same
as Bryan's - as were the spirit and the words of Eisenhower's closing prayer
that 'all peoples will come to live together in a peace guaranteed by the
binding force of mutual respect and love.' '' In short, Eisenhower was to a
surprising degree a localist President.

Indeed, Mrs. Harrington's analysis becomes a game that we learn to play so well
that we begin to anticipate its outcome. We can foresee her account of the
Vietnam War as a case where the three groups cooperated until they recognized
that their objectives were in conflict. We can predict that she will call Jimmy
Carter, with his belief in expertise, a functionalist President, while Ronald
Reagan, with his dream of military invulnerability, must be a localist leader.

''The Dream of Deliverance'' is stimulating as an intellectual exercise and a
useful way to objectify recent history. But its appeal begins to wear a little
thin when you try to translate the formula into a program for the future. The
author herself is not particularly helpful, writing in her conclusion, ''Beyond
the Myth of Deliverance'': ''What can change, what must change if we are to
escape from the cycle of self-delusion, misconception of problems, and seriously
inadequate policies, is the way each group understands its purposes. And since
the system of understanding held by each derives from the myth of deliverance,
it is our attachment to the myth that must change. We must give it up. We have
always asked how we can achieve a condition of mutual gain. We must now begin to
ask how we can decently allocate the pain of unavoidable loss.''

Yet this country has always lived and died by its myths, as the author herself
has just finished demonstrating at length. To give up one set of myths, we are
going to need an alternate set. That is something that only chance and history
can supply.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mona Harrington (Eliza Gagnon)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 4, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE PALME STYLE: A STRONG TILT TO FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By BARNABY FEDER

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1092 words


As the hunt continues for the killer of Olof Palme, the slain Prime Minister is
being remembered as a man who balanced a clubhouse feel for domestic politics
with a passion to be recognized as a leading international spokesman for
European Socialism.

For 17 years, Mr. Palme's sharp features and sharp tongue held center stage in
Sweden's television news programs and newspapers, whether his party was in
power, as it was for all but two of those years, or in opposition.

Fascinated with the charisma and the contradictions of the aristocrat's son
turned champion of the working class, Swedes were never sure, however, how well
they knew him.

Indeed, ''Who Is Olof Palme?'' was the title of a best-selling biography
published two years ago by a reporter who had known him most of his life.

Angered U.S. in 1960's

Starting with the Vietnam War years, when Mr. Palme enraged the United States
and captured worldwide attention by welcoming American deserters and draft
dodgers, he repeatedly identified Swedish foreign policy with disarmament,
friendly relations with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe and backing for
Socialist or Communist-led revolutions from Indochina to Nicaragua.

Mr. Palme also urged Denmark and Norway to leave the North Atlantic Treaty
Alliance in favor of a neutral, nuclear-free Scandinavia and campaigned against
NATO's deployment of medium-range missiles in Britain, West Germany, Italy and
the Netherlands. He further disturbed the United States and its allies by
joining the ranks of European Socialist leaders who championed the cause of
recognition for Yasir Arafat and the Palestine Liberation Organization.

But, thanks to Mr. Palme's outspoken nature, Swedish foreign policy sometimes
seemed more antagonistic to the United States than it really was. During the
Vietnam War, for instance, even as he criticized American involvement, prompting
President Nixon to recall the American Ambassador, Mr. Palme's Government
refused to grant official political refugee status to the nearly 1,000 Americans
who arrived in Sweden. Americans said they were told that one could not be a
refugee from a free country.

Mr. Palme's internationalism appealed to two popular threads of Swedish
thinking. The concept of social solidarity - embodied domestically in the Social
Democrats' longstanding drive to eliminate differences in wealth and access to
privileges or services - fit comfortably with his calls to support national
independence movements that preached Socialism. And his views on disarmament
matched the widespread Swedish view of the nation as a peaceful land trapped
between two violence-prone superpowers.

Served in the Army

Although sympathetic to pacifists, Mr. Palme served in the army and never
opposed the view of the vast majority of Swedes that a strong military was
needed to defend the nation's neutrality. He supported the domestic arms
industry and its efforts to sell exports to nonaligned nations.

The political heir of the late Tage Erlander, who led Sweden during the post-war
decades in which it became the very symbol of the modern welfare state, Mr.
Palme - in the view of many political commentators - never managed to replace
his mentor in his countrymen's hearts.

Mr. Palme's forays into international politicking bothered many Swedes. A
growing number of Swedes said Mr. Palme was too quick to criticize the United
States and too quiet about such matters as human rights in the Soviet Union, the
Soviet military campaign in Afghanistan, the crushing of the Solidarity labor
union in Poland, and, above all else, the repeated incursions of Soviet
submarines into Swedish waters.

In addition, the dismal human rights record of some countries that have received
large amounts of foreign aid from Mr. Palme's Government, most notably Vietnam,
embarrassed many of his countrymen.

Development of Welfare State

Critics also charged that Mr. Palme indulged his passion for foreign policy to
mask a lack of interest in domestic affairs. More accurately, his domestic
interests were concentrated on developing Sweden's welfare state at a time when
economic problems had forced business concerns to the top of the national
agenda.

Under Mr. Erlander and his longtime Finance Minister, Gunnar Streng, who worked
closely with the Marcus Wallenburg, the country's leading industrialist, Sweden
blossomed into a prosperous industrial state. The large profits generated by
private industry were taxed heavily to finance the rapidly expanding social
services.

It was Mr. Palme's fate to preside over the Social Democrats in an era when the
strains of earlier growth, coupled with the shock of skyrocketing energy costs,
tore apart the old consensus politics. Since 1976, when Mr. Palme led the Social
Democrats to their first defeat in 44 years, the country's political balance has
hung by a thread.

Under Mr. Palme, the Social Democrats have clung to their belief that the
welfare of society must come before the individual freedom, despite polls
showing more and more Swedes feel they have reached the limit of how much they
will pay for such solidarity.

Government-Business Conflict

More controversially, Mr. Palme backed a trade union drive to divert a
percentage of corporate profits into union-controlled trust funds to be used to
buy shares in companies. Mr. Palme's opponents charged that this was a
repudiation of the longtime national concensus that Socialism would not extend
into business operations.

Mr. Palme left the country's economic policy largely in the hands of Kjell-Olof
Feldt, a tough Finance Minister who earned the respect of business executives
while offending many Social Democrats with his budget-cutting efforts and his
refusal to bail out failing companies to save jobs.

Sweden's election last September showed Mr. Palme at the height of his political
powers. But a year earlier polls showed him and the Social Democrats trailing.
To make matters worse, civil servants went on strike to demand higher pay and
money flooded out of the country as financiers began to doubt the Government's
will to carry out the budget deficit reductions needed to control inflation.

But Mr. Palme settled the strike with minimal concessions and rallied his party,
which remains one of the most effective political organizations in Europe.
Perhaps the image that will stay with most Swedes is the picture of him that
September night, the triumphant, domineering survivor of modern Swedish
politics, ready to stride once more on the international stage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 4, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MAYOR MASTERS THE ART OF WALKING SAFE LINE BETWEEN REBELS AND ARMY

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1095 words

DATELINE: SAMAL, the Philippines, March 3


Unlike most local Filipino politicians, Mayor Emiliano Forbes has no bodyguards.
After dark in this town on the Bataan Peninsula, along the route of the infamous
World War II death march, he even personally greets strangers at his gate.

But what makes Mr. Forbes's lack of security precautions truly striking is that
Samal, by his own calculation, is a ''hotbed'' of activity by the New People's
Army, the military wing of the Philippine Communist Party.

In front of the whitewashed City Hall and outside the 16th-century Roman
Catholic cathedral, there are bright red slogans on the walls proclaiming ''Long
live the N.P.A.,'' accompanied by drawings of the hammer and sickle.

Just last Tuesday a barrio captain -a chief of one of the villages that make up
this town of 40,000 people - was shot to death by the paramilitary Philippine
Constabulary when he was seen riding on a motorbike with a suspected N.P.A.
agent. And rebels conduct nightly teach-ins around town and collect taxes from
the residents.

Somewhat Casual Attitude

In the face of these troubles, Mr. Forbes's casual attitude toward his safety
reflects what some knowledgeable Filipinos and Americans believe is an
accommodation the Mayor has made with the Communists.

''The Government flag is still flying, but someone else is in charge,'' said an
American official with experience in Vietnam.

''It is not yet a shadow Government, but it is something pretty close to that,''
said the Rev. Tony Dumaual, the parish priest in the neighboring town of Orani.
''The mayor is quite affected by all the N.P.A. activity, and he has to make
certain compromises.''

The Mayor denies there are such accommodations on his part.

The situation in Samal particularly concerns Government officials and American
diplomats because it is literally within sight of the capital, 30 miles across
Manila Bay. It is also just 25 miles from the large American Subic Bay Naval
Base and about the same from Clark Air Base.

Growth of Insurgency

The Communists' ability to infiltrate Samal, and a string of other towns along
this rugged, mountainous peninsula jutting into the South China sea, is one of
the clearest indications that their insurgency has grown well beyond the early
stages of a simple guerrilla jungle war.

Whether they will be able to capitalize on their position here after the ouster
of Ferdinand E. Marcos and his replacement by the new Government under President
Corazon C. Aquino, is unclear.

Father Dumaual said he believed that ''the left has been a bit derailed by the
recent events, at least for the moment.'' The Communists' decision to boycott
the presidential election that led to Mr. Marcos's downfall and then sit out the
enormous popular demonstrations that kept Mr. Marcos from using military force
against his opponents cost the Communists influence, Father Dumaual said.

''It has now come out that the majority of the people want peaceful change, not
armed struggle,'' he said.

Policy Under Review

In fact, one ranking Communist said today that the party's leadership had met
over the last few days near Manila to determine a policy toward Mrs. Aquino. A
decision, and possibly a public announcement of that policy, are expected by the
end of the week, the source said.

In Samal, Mayor Forbes, a slight, balding man of 60 years, does not acknowledge
any compromises with the rebels. ''This is not true, I was for President
Marcos,'' he said, sitting on the patio of his ranch-style house facing Samal's
main street.

But he does take pride in having been the first Bataan mayor to publicly join
demonstrations against a nearby nuclear power plant that Mr. Marcos ordered
built and that Communist-led organizations have been protesting for several
years. ''It is an enormous waste of money at a time when so many of our people
are poor,'' Mr. Forbes said of the $2.1 billion plant. ''If there is an
accident, we will be the first victims.''

Last summer, guerrillas blew up 40 of the plant's steel transmission towers just
south of Samal.

Opposed to Military Abuses

Mayor Forbes also says, ''I have always stood for the rights of my people to be
free of abuses by the military.'' Before he became Mayor in 1979, he said, the
constabulary troops in Samal stole rice, chickens and clothes from the poor, and
Government soldiers sometimes shot innocent civilians.

''Now I have told them, they must first get permission from me before arresting
anyone,'' he said. For Filipinos, accustomed to an unchecked military, that is
an almost unheard of action.

But his policy has not stopped killing by the rebels. Last week a military
doctor and a civilian Government employee were assassinated by guerrillas in a
Samal village while giving a lecture on drug abuse.

Samal is too close to Manila for the guerrillas to have yet started many of
their own policies, such as communal farming, as they have in some other areas,
said a local Communist Party member.

Rebels Aid Tenant Farmers

But Mr. Forbes noted that the N.P.A. did actively intervene ''to protect the
rights of the small tenant farmers against the large landlords whenever there is
a conflict.'' Rebel propaganda teams also openly campaign in the town for the
closing of the two American bases, which they regard as part of the ''American
imperialism'' controlling the Philippines.

Government agents have had a hard time trying to infilitrate Samal, Father
dumaual said. Recently a military intelligence officer, dressed as an ice cream
vendor, began asking the children who followed him questions about where certain
people lived. Father Dumaual said the children reported their suspicions to the
guerrillas, and the next time the vendor appeared, he was shot.

In Abucay, the town just south of Samal, Mayor Maxima de la Fuente conceded,
''It is very hard to be Mayor in an area like this. On one side you have the
army, on the other the N.P.A. You have to be very careful how you act.''

Until last summer, when the Government sent in a detachment of 36 marines who
have built an outpost in front of her house, the Mayor said she often had to
cooperate with the Communists.

''If they asked me for help when one of their men got arrested,'' she recalled,
''I would help get him out.''

Now the rebels have sent her a warning to get rid of the marines, who have
slowed down their activities, she said.

''It was only a first warning,'' Mrs. de la Fuente said. ''If they were really
serious, they would send a second warning, with a black ribbon around it. Then
the third warning is fatal.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 4, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ISSUES AND DEBATES;
DOES MARCOS DESERVE U.S. ASYLUM?

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1251 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 3


The Reagan Administration's decision last week to grant refuge in the United
States to former President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines has drawn
virtually unanimous approval and very little criticism in Washington. As the
decision was formulated, it was apparently not the subject of any serious
disagreement within the Administration, and it has received bipartisan support
in Congress, where Democrats as well as Republicans have been praising the
Administration's handling of the crisis.

The opposition has been generated mostly in the expatriate Filipino community,
where some people have argued that Mr. Marcos should not be rewarded with
sanctuary for abusing his position in Manila.

Mr. Marcos, his family and an entourage of associates were flown from the
Presidential palace by helicopter to Clark Air Base, and from there to Guam and
Hawaii, after crowds of Filipinos and military units rallied to demand his
removal. The surge of protests followed an election Feb. 7 marked by fraud and
violence, in which many Filipinos believed Corazon C. Aquino had been cheated
out of victory by Marcos forces.

The Reagan Administration played a major role in getting Mr. Marcos to refrain
from using violence against his opponents and then to depart. Since his
departure, Mr. Marcos has been housed in ''Distinguished Visitors Quarters'' at
Hickam Air Force Base in Hawaii.

The Background

The question of safe haven for deposed leaders is less one of principle than of
politics, officials admit, a fact dramatized by the different treatments
afforded Mr. Marcos and Jean-Claude Duvalier, the Haitian dictator who fled his
country on Feb. 7.

Both men were urged by the United States to abdicate and were flown out on
United States planes. But Mr. Duvalier was taken to France, which agreed to
receive him temporarily, and was not offered refuge in the United States.

The difference, a senior State Department official explained, lay in the
assessment that the United States owed something to Mr. Marcos that it did not
owe Mr. Duvalier. The Haitian leader was seen as a ruthless dictator with a
great deal of blood on his hands. Mr. Marcos was a longtime ally in a vital
region of the Pacific.

Past decisions on safe haven have had similar political content. Lon Nol, the
Cambodian leader who fled Phnom Penh as it fell to Khmer Rouge forces in 1975,
was welcomed in the United States; he died in California last year. Nguyen Van
Thieu, the former South Vietnamese leader, has chosen to reside in England, but
other Vietnamese officials have taken up residence in the United States.

In 1979, the Carter Administration initially welcomed, and then shunned, Shah
Mohammed Riza Pahlevi of Iran. Figuring that a pro-Western government might be
installed in Iran if the Shah left, the Administration offered to let him come
to the United States in January 1979. He chose Morocco instead, miscalculating
that he might be able to return to Iran. A few months later, the Carter
Administration denied him access, fearing that the United States Embassy in
Teheran would be mobbed, which indeed it was after he was admitted for medical
treatment in New York in October 1979. The Americans seized in the embassy
takeover were held hostage for 444 days.

For Sanctuary

The decision to grant sanctuary to Mr. Marcos had both a long-term justification
and an immediate, tactical purpose, Administration officials explain.

Mr. Marcos, while viewed as both corrupt and guilty of political arrests and
killings, had been endorsed by five American administrations, had permitted
American military bases in his country and had sent a military detachment to
help the United States effort in Vietnam. Washington felt a sense of obligation
to him, based on a long alliance.

Accepting Mr. Marcos has also been justified by the Administration as essential
to the Reagan Administration's effort during the peak of the crisis to persuade
him to leave his position peacefully, without conducting a violent attack on the
dissident military factions and the enormous crowds of civilians who had rallied
in favor of his rival, Mrs. Aquino. The tactic has gained bipartisan support.

''If the price we had to pay to avoid massive bloodshed and even civil war in
the Philippines was to offer Mr. Marcos asylum in the United States then it was
a price worth paying,'' said Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of New
York and a leading American critic of the Marcos regime.

Mr. Solarz cautioned, however, that Mr. Marcos should be subject to civil legal
action.

''While we promised him sanctuary, we did not promise him immunity from civil
proceedings that might be initiated to recover his ill-gotten wealth,'' Mr.
Solarz said. ''I think that's an important distinction to make. When this was
discussed with him there was no mention to him about insulating him from
American courts.''

Against Sanctuary

A State Department official who attended a symposium held in Washington last
Thursday evening said that several Filipinos in the audience had declared their
desire to see Mr. Marcos subjected to criminal penalties for political killings
under his regime and to civil action to recover funds.

''There is still desire for vengeance,'' the official observed.

Representative Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, expressed
misgivings about allowing Mr. Marcos to remain indefinitely in the United
States. ''I have a concern about the United States appearing as a haven for
thieves and bandits,'' he said in an interview. ''Political asylum in the United
States was intended to protect the innocent and not to shield the guilty, to be
a refuge for the oppressed, not a means of escape for those who are oppressors.
That is a poor precedent and and a poor signal to the world.''

According to Armin Alforque, who is handling relations between the transition
team at the Philippine Embassy and the Filipino community in the United States,
''there is some community opposition'' to granting Mr. Marcos refuge.

For example, Oliverio Suazo Divino, a city planner in Washington, declared in an
interview: ''The offer was insulting to the Filipinos because it implied the
Filipino system of justice could not dispense even-handed justice. The Aquino
forces could have provided safe detention for Marcos.''

Mr. Suazo noted with irony that many political opponents of Mr. Marcos had
sought refuge in the United States. Accepting Mr. Marcos, he said, ''will
encourage future dictators to pillage their countries, apply for foreign aid,
seek political asylum and live happily ever after.''

The Outlook

Mr. Marcos is reported still to harbor a desire to return to the Philippines
someday, but for the time being is said to be planning to remain in Hawaii.

The Aquino Government in Manila is not believed to have any intention of seeking
his extradition to the Philippines to face criminal penalties. An extradition
treaty between the Philippines and the United States has not been ratified by
the United States Senate.

However, the new Government in Manila has begun efforts to recover the wealth
taken out of the country by the Marcos family.

In the aftermath of what is being assessed as a successful venture in the
Philippines, official Washington seems generally convinced that the practice of
giving sanctuary to autocratic leaders can be effective in inducing them to
leave office, and it appears to be a tactic that will be used again in the
future, if the occasion arises.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 4, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CITY STUDENT IN TIE FOR SCIENCE PRIZE

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 495 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 3


For the first time since 1978 two high school students, a boy from New York and
a girl from Florida, tied for first place in the annual Westinghouse Science
Talent Search competition, each winning a $20,000 college scholarship.

New York State students were awarded 3 of the top 10 prizes in the 45th annual
contest for high school seniors, one of the most prestigious in the nation for
teen-age scientists.

Wei-Jing Zhu, a 16-year-old senior at Brooklyn Technical High School who was
born in Canton, China, shared first place with Wendy Kay Chung, 17, a senior at
Miami Killian Senior High School in Miami.

Their victories underlined what contest officials said was a noticeable trend in
recent years: the success of students born in Asia or of Asian parentage. The
top five prizes were awarded to such students this year.

'Strong Family Support'

''In the early years of the search, the winners tended to be sons and daughters
of Jewish refugees,'' noted C. C. Newton of the Westinghouse staff. ''Now we are
finding that they are the sons and daughters of immigrants from Asia.''

The top 10 finalists were announced at a dinner at the Mayflower Hotel tonight.

The other top-10 finalists from the metropolitan area were: George Jer-Chi
Juang, 17, of Benjamin N. Cardozo High School in Queens, who placed fourth,
winning a $10,000 scholarship for his physics project examining the use of
ferric oxhydroxide colloids in phase conjugation devices; Jessica Louise Boklan,
17, of Roslyn High School in Roslyn Heights, L.I., sixth, winning $10,000 for
devising an algorithmic approach to the construction of reversal products, and
Mary Elizabeth Meyerand, 17, a student at Glastonbury High School in
Glastonbury, Conn., eighth, winning a $7,500 scholarship for creating an
underwater energy conservation device.

Yoriko Saito, 18, of Homewood, Ala., who arrived in the United States from Japan
three years ago, placed third, winning a $15,000 scholarship for a project in
biochemistry.

The other top 10 winners were Anh Tuan Nguyen-Huynh, 17, of Chagrin Falls, Ohio,
who came from Vietnam five years ago, who placed fifth; William Edward Bies, 17,
of Pittsburgh, seventh; Andrew Lawrence Feig, 18, of Los Angeles, ninth, and
Allen Wallis Inglig, 17, of Delaware, Ohio, 10th.

Not since 1978 had the Bronx High School of Science and Stuyvesant High School
failed to place in the top 10, a Westinghouse official said.

Mr. Zhu, whose project concerned algebraic number theory, arrived in the United
States in 1980. His parents had introduced him to mathematics at an early age.
''When I was very young, preschool,'' he said, ''they brought me puzzles and
arithmetic problems.''

Miss Chung was awarded her first prize for her research into the behavior of the
Caribbean fruit fly.

About her interest in science, she said: ''Throughout the history of man there
have been questions about what makes things work, how things tick. It's just a
natural curiosity.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Wei-Jing Zhu, George Jer-Chi Juang, Jessica Louise Bokian and
Mary Eliabeth Meyerand (NYT/Ken Heinen)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 4, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

'RUM AND COKE' SIBLINGS CREATE THEIR OWN FAMILY

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 999 words


At the center of ''Rum and Coke,'' Keith Reddin's dark comedy about the Bay of
Pigs invasion, stand the brother and sister played, to critical praise, by Peter
MacNicol and Polly Draper. Amid the play's espionage and geopolitics, these are
siblings as they might have been imagined by a fan of Graham Greene, which Mr.
Reddin happens to be.

Jake Seward is a naive spy, his sister Linda a cynical reporter, and the
pendular path of their lives underlines the play's larger statements about
ambition and disillusion. Jake goes from aiding in the invasion to trying to
leak word of it to the press, for which he is arrested; Linda, the
self-righteous outsider as a journalist, gives up a job at Time magazine to
become Jackie Kennedy's press secretary. The last time the audience sees the two
together, Linda is visiting Jake is jail.

''A good game of tennis'' is Mr. MacNicol's self-effacing description of their
interaction, which raises sibling rivalry to the level of political debate.
Simply as an acting exercise, ''Rum and Coke'' demands that Mr. MacNicol and
Miss Draper perform credibly both as children teasing each other and as adults
arguing the ethics of armed intervention.

While Mr. MacNicol won the role of Jake relatively easily - he flew in for the
audition from Minneapolis, where he was appearing in Emily Mann's ''Execution of
Justice,'' and read the script for the first time on the plane -it took the
director Les Waters several rounds of readings to find a Linda who complemented
his Jake. His choice, Miss Draper, had also appeared in Caryl Churchill's ''Top
Girls'' and Christopher Durang's ''Sister Mary Ignatius.''

Invented a Father

''It was terribly important that they be believable as brother and sister,''
said Mr. Waters, ''and Peter and Polly could hit the balance between being
serious and having a humorous side. The two of them, even in the reading, could
hit the way a brother and sister can share an inside joke and also wound each
other in the way only one's family can.''

Mr. MacNicol and Miss Draper soon realized they shared the same kind of raspy
voice and keening laugh. They invented a father for Jake and Polly - a lobbyist
or Congressman with enough connections to place his son in the diplomatic corps
and his daughter at Time Inc. And during the final week of rehearsals, when Miss
Draper mistakenly delivered her line ''They made me feel special'' as ''They
made me feel speckled,'' they had their inside joke.

Beyond their family bond, however, the characters of Jake and Linda ask
different things of the actors. Linda is the dominating older sister, equally
capable of choosing Jake's clothes and of shooing him away when he wants Time to
publish a story exposing the planned invasion.

The dominating part came easily enough for Miss Draper, the elder of two
children in her own family. ''I wouldn't be caught dead saying, 'I love you' to
my little brother,'' she said. ''All I do is tease him.''

Rationalize the Actions

But portraying a social climber who snubs her brother at a time of crisis was
something else again, and Miss Draper had to rationalize Linda's actions in
order to play them.

''It's hard to play a character whose natural inclinations aren't your own,''
she admitted. ''People who saw the play say to me, 'You sold out, you betrayed
your brother.' But I felt everything Linda did was justified. She loves glamour.
She's opportunistic. When she can't go any further at Time, she goes to Jackie
Kennedy. She doesn't betray her brother. She comes to him when she realizes he's
at a point of great danger. She knows if the story is published, Jake will be
found out as the source. She wants to protect him. The bottom line is she loves
him beyond words.''

''An actor doesn't dare admit words like 'betrayal,' '' Mr. MacNicol added,
''because you have to play that person every night. I think human beings are
basically good and basically rebel against the idea of being evil.''

And if anything illustrates Mr. MacNicol's suitability for Jake, that sunny view
of human nature does. Indeed, after playing another innocent who comes to a
shattering awareness of evil, as Stingo in the film ''Sophie's Choice,'' Mr.
MacNicol worries about being typecast.

''If there's a role of someone who has his convictions trampled underfoot, I'm
the first one they call,'' he said. ''Maybe I need to have a couple of bad
marriages or get addicted to something.''

Psychedelic Leap

The challenge of playing Jake was to make his ill-fated idealism plausible. It
was doubly difficult because Mr. MacNicol's own political memories are of the
disillusioned Vietnam and Watergate years - he was in first grade when John F.
Kennedy was assassinated - and because ''Rum and Coke'' leaps between time and
location almost ''psychedelically,'' to use Mr. MacNicol's word.

The effect is to fragment Jake's linear transition from believing in the Bay of
Pigs invasion to attempting to abort it. The disorder so frustrated Mr. MacNicol
at the start that at one point in rehearsals he threw a $5 bill onstage and
offered it to anyone who could tell him how, or why, he had gone from the
Guatemalan jungle to Manhattan's Oyster Bar in one scene.

Much of Mr. MacNicol's performance is etched in his face. By rolling his eyes
downward and tightening his cheeks, he can register Jake's tensions and
disappointments as the invasion goes awry; by turning red and popping out the
veins on his forehead, looking like a man fighting off a stroke, he turns Jake's
attempt to smoke a cigar at a C.I.A. briefing into a moment of bleak hilarity.

''Believe it or not,'' Mr. MacNicol said, ''I don't know anything yet about
this. People tell me about this vein thing, and I'm never aware of it. One of my
problems as an actor is that I carry comedy out to where it looks too real. I
had an older couple stop me on the subway one night after the show and say,
'Were you O.K. during that cigar scene? We were going to get an usher.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Polly Draper and Peter MacNicol in scene of production (Martha
Swope Associates/Susan Cook)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 6, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STUDY LINKS STATUS IN DRAFT TO RATE OF DEATH BY SUICIDE

BYLINE: By ERIK ECKHOLM

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 482 words


A new study has found that men with low draft numbers in 1970 to 1972, and thus
vulnerable to military service in Vietnam, have suffered significantly higher
suicide and motor vehicle death rates than men with higher draft numbers.

The report, drawing on what it called ''a randomized natural experiment,''
analyzed deaths among men in California and Pennsylvania who, because of year of
birth, were subject to the national draft lotteries of 1970, 1971 and 1972. In
the lottery, all birthdays were randomly assigned a number from 1 to 365. Men
with the lowest numbers were drafted first, but the Government also specified a
cutoff number, above which men were exempted.

Over the subsequent decade, men from the draft-eligible group, those whose
numbers were below the cutoff, committed suicide 13 percent more often and died
in motor vehicle accidents 8 percent more often, than those who had been
exempted by the lottery, according to the study.

''These men were equal in every other way except for their draft lottery
status,'' said Dr. Norman Hearst of the University of California at San
Francisco, an author of the study, being published today in The New England
Journal of Medicine. ''The difference in their mortality rates must be a direct
result of the draft lottery.''

Previous Studies Similar

Many previous studies have found that Vietnam veterans are more likely than
nonveterans to commit suicide and die in motoring accidents, among other
problems. But these comparisons have been flawed because socioeconomic status
and other factors differ between men who enter the military and those who do
not, factors that might partly explain the differences in death patterns.

Only about 26 percent of those with draft-eligible lottery numbers actually
entered the military. The researchers had no means of directly measuring the
impact of military service, as opposed to draft eligibility, on postwar
mortality. They calculated that if all the excess deaths occurred among those
who actually served in the military, then draftees have committed suicide 86
percent more often and died in motoring accidents 53 percent more often than men
who were exempt.

Extrapolating from the 205 ''excess deaths'' that occurred among their sample,
the researchers said that 1,250 excess deaths might have occurred nationwide
among men who had participated in the lotteries of 1970 through 1972. If the
draft had similar impacts in earlier years, before the lottery system was
established, it ''may have caused thousands of additional premature deaths,''
the authors wrote.

The rise in mortality was entirely a result of suicides and motoring accidents;
risks for most other causes of death, including homicide, did not change and, to
the puzzlement of the researchers, mortality from cirrhosis of the liver, often
a result of alcoholism, was lower among those who faced the draft.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 6, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Letters Depict Grim Deaths Of Dead Couple and Children

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 108 words

DATELINE: LEBANON, N.H., March 5


Letters apparently written by a couple who died in a fire with three children
describe how they drugged and shot the children, set their home ablaze and then
killed themselves in frustration over the treatment of disabled veterans.

The letters received today by The Valley News here and WMUR-TV in Manchester
were believed to have been written by Caroline Hull and signed by her and
Michael Dean.

Bodies believed to be those of Mrs. Hull, 32 years old, Mr. Dean, 43, and her
three children, ages 4 to 11, were found Tuesday in the charred rubble of their
home.

The handwritten letters described events as though they already had happened.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

LETTERS LINK DEATHS OF 5 TO TREATMENT OF VETERANS

BYLINE: By GENE I. MAEROFF, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: LEBANON, N.H., March 6


A man and a woman appear to have taken their lives and the lives of her three
children to publicize the couple's belief that Vietnam veterans and their
families are ill-treated.

''We the veterans, widows and children of veterans are a forgotten group,'' said
a handwritten letter bearing the names of Caroline Hull and Michael F. Dean. The
letter, which described how the deaths would occur, went to a television station
in Manchester, N.H., the day after the five people died.

Five bodies were found Tuesday in the smoldering ruins of the small house on a
country lane where Mr. Dean, 43 years old, a disabled Vietnam veteran, lived
with Mrs. Hull, 32, the widow of a disabled Vietnam veteran, and Mrs. Hull's
three children, Kenneth, 11, Jeremy, 5, and Theresa, 4.

State investigators said today that what took place at the house Tuesday morning
was ''murder, suicide, arson.''

Other Letters Received

The letter to the station, WMUR, was one of several that have been received
since the fire, signed in the names of Mr. Dean and Mrs. Hull. In addition, the
post office received change-of-address cards calling the two adult occupants of
the house ''deceased.''

Asked if the letters were authentic, Bruce Mohl, New Hampshire's deputy attorney
general, said: ''It looks like it. We are looking at and comparing the
handwriting.'' He also said forensic experts were being consulted to identify
the bodies, which were badly burned.

The letter to the television station, written as though the five were already
dead and the house destroyed, said that sleeping pills were given to the
children and the house was doused with kerosene. Mr. Dean then was to shoot Mrs.
Hull and the children, start the fire and shoot himself.

A close relative of Mrs. Hull's, who asked not to be identified, said in an
interview that she and other family members had no doubt that the plan was
followed as detailed in the letters and that the letters were genuine.

Concerned About Budget Cuts

''They were very concerned about recent budget cuts that Reagan announced for
cutting back aid to veterans and their widows and children,'' Mrs. Hull's
relative said. ''They spoke to me about this last week and asked me to write to
my Senators to vote against the cuts.''

She also said she knew from information she obtained after the fire that Mr.
Dean and Mrs. Hull sent one of the letters before they died to President Reagan.
White House officials today would not confirm whether the letter had been
received.

Descriptions of Mr. Dean and Mrs. Hull that have emerged since the fire depict a
man and woman whose lives for the last decade have been deeply touched by the
effects of the Vietnam War.

In a Veterans Administration Hospital in Boston Mr. Dean was a roommate of John
Hull Jr., of Wilder, Vt., who had married Caroline Lowery of Heartland, Vt. She
was a graduate of St. Mary's High School in Claremont, N.H., and had attended
beauticians' school.

Both Mr. Dean and Mr. Hull received disability payments from the Federal
Government.

Mrs. Hull's relative said, ''John was shot up during the war and had so much
shrapnel in his leg that he couldn't pass through a metal dectector at an
airport without setting it off.''

After Mr. Hull died in 1983, Mr. Dean, whom Mrs. Hull had apparently met through
her husband, moved into the house with Mrs. Hull and the children two years ago.

Neither Mr. Dean nor Mrs. Hull was working, according to a relative, and
veterans benefits paid to both of them were their only income.

Officials of the Veterans Administration Hospital in White River Junction, Vt.,
just across the state line, where Mr. Dean was apparently being treated, would
not disclose information about his disability. Investigators said they had been
told by two of Mr. Dean's relatives that Mr. Dean, a Navy veteran, had said he
had not been in combat while stationed in Vietnam.

'Preoccupied With Vietnam'

A spokesman for a large corporation for which Mr. Dean worked in the 1970's, who
asked not to have the company identified, said that a notation in Mr. Dean's
personnel folder said he was ''preoccupied with Vietnam.''

That preoccupation was apparently shared by Mrs. Hull in the two years they
lived together.

The letter attributed to Mr. Dean and Mrs. Hull that the television station
received said:

''My boyfriend had two tours in Viet Nam. And 10 years service to this country.
But he is not a Viet Nam Veteran that had a flash back or went off his rocker
and killed us all. We are both tired of fighting the system that our leaders
want to forget. We can't forget.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Michael Dean with Caroline Hull and her three children (The
Valley News; UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NO ILLUSIONS ABOUT NICARAGUA, PLEASE;
U.S. Aid Is Misguided

BYLINE: By John B. Oakes; John B. Oakes is the former Senior Editor of The New
York Times.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 721 words


President Reagan and Secretary of State George P. Shultz are asking Congress to
believe the only way to establish our kind of democracy inside Nicaragua is to
support the contras on the outside. Their argument makes neither moral,
political nor historical sense.

After four years of pressure from a United States-sponsored counterrevolution,
the state of democratic civil liberties and human rights under the Sandinistas
is admittedly not good. Whether it will improve, once the Sandinistas have
clinched their victory over the contras, is not certain.

What is certain is that it cannot improve so long as Ronald Reagan continues to
act as godfather to the contras, thus keeping them alive. It is beyond reason to
think that outside military pressure can force our style of liberal democracy on
the Sandinistas. The more pressure from the outside, the less freedom on the
inside. This is no less true of Sandinista Nicaragua than of any other country
under such circumstances, including our own.

It would be true even if the United States-trained, financed and armed contras
were ''the good guys'' Mr. Shultz proclaims them to be. With the assurance of
divinely revealed truth, he told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that he
knows ''who the good guys and the bad guys are.''

He must know that his ''good guys'' have been committing unspeakable crimes -
torture, murder, pillage -under our tutelage. He must know that his own State
Department has deliberately falsified the record of contra atrocities to gain
sympathy and support. He must know that the $100 million in ''covert'' military
and false ''humanitarian'' aid demanded of Congress is for one purpose only.

It is to prop up a lost cause that in four years has gained the contras minimal
popular support in Nicaragua and no international standing anywhere. If the $100
million is voted, it will be poured down the most noisome sinkhole since
Vietnam. To win that vote, the Administration is now reduced to McCarthyite
tactics: the insinuation that foes of its Nicaraguan policy are Communist
stooges or worse. Can Congress be whipped by these tactics into a policy of such
moral, military and political degradation?

Most remaining contras have retreated to the relative safety of their Honduran
bases. Now, more than ever, they threaten the stability of that fragile
democracy whose moderate military leader was recently ousted because he resisted
total American domination. Paving over Honduras with United States airfields
(the sixth in three years is under construction) and pouring in thousands of our
troops (4,000 this year) for maneuvers on the Nicaraguan border is not the kind
of aid needed by the poorest country on the American continent.

In apocalyptic terms, Mr. Reagan warns Congress of a ''strategic disaster'' if
Nicaragua is left to the Sandinistas. The disaster is at hand. It is of his own
making. It has nothing to do with his fantasy of Soviet bases or a nest of spies
within ''two days' driving time from Harlingen, Tex.'' It has a great deal to do
with the Administration's consistent rejection of the rule of law in favor of
the rule of force.

Not a single major democratic government in this hemisphere - from Canada to
Argentina - endorses United States support of the contras. Not one approves Mr.
Reagan's refusal to negotiate an agreement with the Sandinistas that would
protect both North American defense interests and Central American independence.
As they demonstrated to the eight most important foreign ministers in Latin
America who met recently with Mr. Shultz in Washington to press the peace
initiative, Mr. Reagan and Mr. Shultz couldn't care less.

The message is simple: If the Sandinistas won't negotiate with the already
defeated contras, we will overthrow the Sandinistas. The $100 million demanded
of Congress is only the first step toward that objective. A United States
invasion of Nicaragua is the second.

President Reagan was right when he said a few days ago that those who would
invite strategic disaster ''will be held fully accountable.'' Mr. Reagan himself
certainly will be, but by then it will be too late. He was saved at the very
last minute from total disaster in the Philippines - possibly by Mr. Shultz. Now
only Congress can save him from passing the point of no return in Nicaragua.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 7, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NO ILLUSIONS ABOUT NICARAGUA, PLEASE;
Repression Is a Fact

BYLINE: By Ronald Radosh; Ronald Radosh writes frequently on Central America.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 713 words


Critics of United States policy in Central America are invariably among the
first to point to human rights violations in right-wing dictatorships supported
by the Reagan Administration. But when it comes to reporting on the state of
freedom in Nicaragua, they engage in precisely the same kind of apologia they
rightfully condemn when offered by Administration spokesmen.

Such people claim that the Sandinistas' repressive rule is only a temporary
state of affairs, a reluctant effort to cope with the war forced upon Nicaragua
by United States support for the contras. In truth, this view can only be
maintained by ignoring the Sandinistas' words and the facts on the ground in
Nicaragua.

The Nicaraguan elections of 1984 were supposed to confer legitimacy on the
regime and move the country toward domestic reconciliation. Instead, nearly a
year later, in October, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra proclaimed a state of
emergency, suspending all civil liberties and political rights, including what
Managua calls the right to ''seek, receive and spread information and ideas.''
Moreover, by the Sandinistas' own admission, this new toughening had nothing to
do with war against the contras.

That war is by now no more than a nuisance to the Sandinistas. In October 1985,
Defense Minister Humberto Ortega Saavedra stated that victory for the contras
had become militarily impossible. Rebel casualties became especially heavy once
the Sandinistas began to use Soviet-supplied attack helicopters. Meanwhile, many
of the Sandinistas' military tactics bear a striking similarity to those used by
the United States and South Vietnam a decade ago - creation of free-fire zones,
the herding of peasants into protected villages and armed attack against
recalcitrant villages, especially those of the Miskito Indians.

In fact, the state of emergency was aimed not at the contras but at the
patriotic domestic opposition. A Roman Catholic newspaper and radio station have
been closed down. The Sandinistas have declared the act of striking illegal, and
labor leaders protesting wage cuts have been accused of economic sabotage and
thrown into prison. To continue to rationalize Sandinista actions is to ignore
the commandantes' own definition of their revolutionary project. In an article
printed in Managua last July, Interior Minister Tomas Borge explained the
necessity of waging war on an ideologically backward population that believed in
the Sandinistas' original promises of pluralism and democracy and resisted
imposition of a dictatorship of the proletariat. According to Mr. Borge, the
means to be used are ''coercion by the state'' and ''development of our
counter-espionage services.''

Another repressive tool is the revolutionary block committees, which engage in
continual surveillance and control rationing of scarce items. Still another is
the new revolutionary people's courts - heavily politicized tribunals that
convict people exclusively for political crimes, such as bringing in
unauthorized magazines from Costa Rica. Witnesses are often security force
personnel, and confessions are usually gained while the prisoner is held
incommunicado.

There is some indication that repressive measures take even harsher forms.
Alvaro Jose Baldizon Aviles, a Sandinista trained in police work in Moscow who
defected to the United States last year, reported that the Sandinistas have
assassinated 2,000 Nicaraguans since 1979. He backs up his charges with names,
dates and places. Yet his story has been all but completely ignored by opponents
of Administration policy.

You don't have to support the contra war - and I don't - to see what's wrong
with playing cheerleader for the Sandinistas. Far better to support their
beleaguered domestic opponents who want to restore a modicum of democracy to
Nicaragua. To cheer on the Sandinistas is to guarantee growing polarization and
help the commandantes confuse dissent with counterrevolution. To blame all of
Nicaragua's problems on the United States - to excuse growing repression as a
response to Washington's policy - is to falsify the meaning of events in
Nicaragua. It is time to take the Sandinistas at their word. Critics of United
States policy must stop acting as if the enemy of their enemy were their friend.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 8, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

JACOB JAVITS DIES IN FLORIDA AT 81: 4-TERM SENATOR FROM NEW YORK

BYLINE: By JAMES F. CLARITY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 5178 words


Jacob K. Javits, who began life in a Lower East Side tenement and, as a United
States Senator for 24 years, became one of the most respected and influential
political figures in the nation, died of a heart attack yesterday in Palm Beach,
Fla. He was 81 years old and lived in Manhattan.

Mr. Javits was on vacation in Florida when he suffered cardiac arrest in the
late afternoon, according to Lily Javits, the widow of Mr. Javits's brother,
Benjamin. The former Senator was taken by ambulance to Good Samaritan Hospital
in West Palm Beach, where he was pronounced dead at 5:29 P.M. His wife, Marion,
arrived at the hospital shortly after his death.

Although Mr. Javits had been suffering from a degenerative nerve disease for
five years, Lily Javits said he had been feeling in good health and high spirits
recently, and had traveled to New York for business appointments.

In Liberal Minority

''He had been feeling good all day,'' his sister-in-law said. ''It was very
sudden.''

A minority liberal within the Republican minority during his years in
Washington, Mr. Javits was instrumental in composing and helping to enact
legislation on foreign affairs, urban redevelopment, civil rights, organized
labor and big business.

Throughout his career, Mr. Javits was essentially an outsider, a loner whose
career nevertheless outlasted those of peers named Rockefeller, Wagner, O'Dwyer
and Lindsay.

Senator Javits, who was born of impoverished parents in the Democratic bastion
of New York City, made a career of beating Democrats - often well-known and
powerful ones - by running as a liberal Republican.

He was widely regarded, by admirers and detractors alike, as one of the most
intelligent, industrious and effective members of the Senate during his years
there, from 1957 through 1980.

Served as Representative

As a Senator, he was affable and ebullient, abrasive and brusque -qualities that
made it difficult for him to win acceptance as an insider in the exclusive
Senate club, especially when it was controlled by crusty Southern Democrats.

Throughout his career, his lack of telegenic charisma - Mr. Javits was bald for
most of his adult life and was endowed with a sharp, nasal voice -posed no
obstacle to advancement. He won four terms as a Representative beginning in
1946, one as New York State Attorney General in 1954 and four as a United States
Senator.

Mr. Javits's only electoral loss came in September 1980, when he sought his
party's nomination for another Senate term. The principal issues in the primary
campaign were the Senator's age, 76, and his health.

The Senator, as mentally alert as ever, had begun to suffer motor-neuron
disease, a chronic affliction for which neither a cause nor a cure is known. It
causes nerve damage, disrupting nerve impulses and making muscles wither. It
caused the Senator to walk slowly, sometimes haltingly, and made him look feeble
to a public familiar with his former vigor.

He was defeated by Alfonse M. D'Amato, the Presiding Supervisor of the Town of
Hempstead, L.I., a man then unknown outside his bailiwick.

Then, even as traditional support from union leaders and wealthy Republican
bankrollers began to drift away, Mr. Javits decided to run in the general
election on the Liberal Party line.

The decision was good for the Liberals, as the Senator received 629,000 votes in
the November election, the largest number the party had ever gained in a general
election. But for the Senator, it meant irrevocable political defeat.

Mr. Javits lost not only the state, but also every borough in New York City, to
both Mr. D'Amato and Representative Elizabeth Holtzman, the Democratic
candidate. Mr. D'Amato won with 2,632,000 votes to 2,541,000 for Miss Holtzman.
Many politicians in the state said that by staying in the general election, the
Senator had effectively cost Miss Holtzman the victory. Praise From Colleagues
In the Senate In December 1980, Mr. Javits's last month as a Senator, his
colleagues said their farewells to him on the Senate floor for several hours.
They knew that Mr. Javits had lost not only his seat, but also the chairmanship
of the Foreign Relations Committee, which he would have had as a result of the
Republicans' taking control of the Senate in the November election.

''He always subordinated political expediency to do instead what he thought was
best for the greatest number of people,'' said John Tower, a Texas Republican.

After the accolades, the Senator was at first hesitant to say, when asked, how
he wanted to be remembered. Then he said, ''I would like to be remembered for
the concept that changed the outlook of the country.''

Elaborating, he named three major measures of which he had been a strong
advocate: the War Powers Act, which limits the ability of a President to make
war without Congressional approval; the Erisa Act, which seeks to guarantee
private pensions, and the National Endowments for the Arts and the Humanities,
which provide regular Government subsidies for cultural projects.

Out of the Senate, Mr. Javits tried to pursue an active life. As an adjunct
professor of public affairs at Columbia University's School of International
Affairs, he told his students in a lecture in January 1981:

''I hope you have passionate opinions. I'm a politician. What I say is not holy
writ.''

In the year after his departure from the Senate, in addition to teaching, Mr.
Javits continued to travel to Washington, spending several days a month there as
an adviser to the Secretary of State, Alexander M. Haig Jr., and to some of his
old friends on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

Also in 1981, his last book, ''Javits: The Autobiography of a Public Man,'' a
528-page volume written with Rafael Steinberg, was published by the Houghton
Mifflin Company.

In the spring of 1981, Mr. Javits donated the accumulated papers of his 34 years
of public life to the State University of New York. The papers, filling some
1,300 cartons, were catalogued by archivists with Mr. Javits's help during the
next two summers.

In 1983, the papers became a permanent archive at the university's campus at
Stony Brook, L.I., and were made available to scholars. Seven United States
Senators, Governor Cuomo, leading state educators and hundreds of friends of Mr.
Javits attended a dedication ceremony at Stony Brook. Continued Activity Despite
Failing Health Despite failing health that required his hospitalization on
several occasions, Mr. Javits in recent years continued to write articles and
letters. He delivered occasional lectures at colleges and universities, gave
occasional interviews at his home on the East Side and went to physical-therapy
sessions at Bellevue Hospital.

''Politicians are probably the most underrated people in our society,'' Mr.
Javits told a commencement audience at the University of California at Berkeley
in 1983. He added that ''when scrutiny is lacking, tyranny, corruption and man's
baser qualities have a better chance of entering into the public business of any
government.''

During the last years of his life, there were many accolades for Mr. Javits.

The Federal Government's largest office building in New York State, the 41-story
tower at 26 Federal Plaza in lower Manhattan, was formally renamed for Mr.
Javits in April 1981.

In 1983, President Reagan at a White House ceremony presented Mr. Javits with
the Medal of Freedom, which has been awarded annually since 1945 to Americans
''who have made exceptionally meritorious contributions'' to the nation.

Mr. Javits was named the 1983 recipient of the Charles Evans Hughes Gold Medal,
named for the former Chief Justice of the United States, in recognition of
''courageous leadership in governmental, civic and humanitarian affairs.''

Mr. Javits returned to the United States Senate in April 1984 and there,
surrounded by 120 former colleagues and aides, he celebrated his 80th birthday
in a nostalgic reunion.

That autumn, New York City named a playground near Mother Cabrini High School
and Fort Washington Avenue in the Fort Tryon area after him.

In December 1984, New York City's new convention center, bounded by 34th and
38th Streets and 11th and 12th Avenues, was named the Jacob K. Javits Convention
Center of New York in a ceremony that Mr. Javits attended in a wheelchair.

The progressively degenerative Mr. Javits suffered from is called amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, or A.L.S., and is also known as Lou Gehrig's disease for the
New York Yankee baseball player who died of it. Mr. Javits found it increasingly
difficult to maintain a busy schedule.

Though his mental abilities were not affected, the disease left him with a
striking weakness of the muscles below his neck. He wore a supportive collar,
spent most of his waking hours in a wheelchair and took three hours each morning
to prepare for the day.

But even as Mr. Javits became increasingly incapacitated by his disease, he
continued to speak, write and testify in Congress on issues about which he had
strong beliefs.

''Since when are 108 million people a special interest,'' he said in
Congressional testimony last year against President Reagan's plan to end
deductions for state and local taxes. ''That's a hell of a nerve: I can't
understand it and I doubt if any of you gentlemen understand it.''

Last October, he testified before the House Select Committe on Aging, calling on
Congress to allow ''death with dignity'' and supporting so-called ''living
wills'' to allow the terminally ill to chose when medical life support should be
ended.

''Happily my mind is still functioning, but if it should stop, I believe I would
be dead,'' he wrote in an op-ed column in The New York Times last August.
''Birth and death are the most singular events we experience - and the
contemplation of death, as of birth, should be a thing of beauty, not
ignobility.'' Remarks to Others With Illnesses In May 1984, in remarks at New
York Hospital, where he was a patient - remarks delivered to doctors but
directed toward others who suffered incurable diseases - Mr. Javits declared:

''As long as your brain can function, you can contribute. The most positive
therapy is to perpetuate the life force, and whether the patient is a mechanic
or a U.S. Senator, he or she has a motivation which must prevail over the
illness.''

The second son of Jewish immigrants who scratched out a living on the Lower East
Side in the early 1900's, Mr. Javits reached heights in his career he had never
foreseen. As he advanced in public life, however, he made no secret of his
desire to run for mayor of New York and to be named his party's candidate for
Vice President of the United States. But neither the national nor local
Republican parties ever seriously considered him for either post.

In the last years of his fourth Senate term, Mr. Javits's interest seemed to
veer away from New York and urban problems, turning more toward foreign policy,
such as efforts to attain a peace settlement in the Middle East and to improve
relations between Peking and Washington, and toward broader aspects of national
problems, such as government planning.

A lawyer who became a millionaire over the years, he was an ardent advocate of
legislation that would provide pensions for the millions of Americans working in
private industry who were not covered by an adequate retirement plan and who had
little more than Social Security benefits to sustain them.

Early in 1979, he told a reporter, ''My first priority is world peace.''
Accordingly, Mr. Javits gave up his senior minority position on the Senate Human
Resources Committee to take a similar position on the Foreign Relations
Committee.

By this time, it was clear that he would probably rise no higher in American
politics. But he proudly told associates about the two times he had sat in the
President's chair in the Oval Office of the White House, once at the bidding of
Lyndon B. Johnson, and again at the invitation of Jimmy Carter. ''With your
brains, Jack, you should be sitting in that chair,'' President Johnson is said
to have told him.

As a Senator, Mr. Javits followed a grueling routine that helped distinguish him
from his less vigorous colleagues in Washington. The compact Mr. Javits, who
stood 5 feet 7 inches tall and weighed 170 pounds, was an early riser as well as
an indefatigable daily swimmer and paddleball player. Energy That Kept Friends
in Awe The Senator's energy kept his staff and friends in awe, as he commuted
sometimes three times a week to New York to see his three children - Joy, Joshua
and Carla - and his wife, Marion, who refused to live in Washington, a city she
found boring.

''Idle time is something he's never learned to live with,'' said John Trubin,
the Senator's best friend and former law partner. ''He has an agenda for
everything, even relaxation. He's not a guy who can sit around and schmooze.''

Moving from his office, where he commanded one of the largest Senate staffs, to
committee meetings, to the Senate floor, Mr. Javits usually kept his assistants
several steps behind him, figuratively and literally.

In the view of many of his Senate colleagues, as well as that of organizations
that monitor and evaluate Congressional performance and of journalists who
covered him for years, Mr. Javits managed to sponsor more significant and
successful legislation than almost any other Republican of his time - and more
than most of the Democrats who served around him.

There is no ''Javits Act'' or ''Javits Amendment'' by name, mostly because
Republicans were in the minority in all but four of his years in Washington,
where to the Democratic majority members generally went the spoils of
legislative label.

Still, Mr. Javits had a major role in reasserting Congressional control over the
Federal budget, in omnibus private-pension legislation and in the war-powers
bill, a historic limitation on Presidential authority to wage war.

As a member of the Government Operations Committee, Mr. Javits was instrumental
in Senate passage of legislation on lobbying, gun control and open government,
plus the bill that established Government title to the Nixon White House tapes.

In 1975, Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., Republican of Tennessee, said that ''Jack
Javits is probably the best-prepared, most knowledgeable member of the Senate.''
Mr. Baker's praise had a fulsome ring, as he gave it just after he and a
majority of other Senate Republicans had voted against making Mr. Javits the
chairman of the Republican Conference - a largely ceremonial title, but one that
the New York Senator wanted.

Mr. Javits was also snubbed by his party in 1968, when he made it clear that he
hoped for serious consideration as the Republican candidate for Vice President,
and in 1973, when he was ready to run for Mayor of New York.

If such slights hurt him, Mr. Javits never complained publicly, just as he
maintained throught his Senate career that he had never been a victim of
anti-Semitism in Washington. But apparent anti-Semitism and unusually sharp
personal animosity toward him did arise a few times at the higher levels of
government during his career. A Hostile Remark From Eastland In 1965, as a
member of the Judiciary Committee, he argued strenuously for the Voting Rights
Act, which was opposed by most of the Southern Democrats on the committee. At
one point, Mr. Javits badgered the committee chairman, James O. Eastland, and
the Mississippian glared down the table at him and said, ''I don't like you or
your kind.''

Two years later, after persuading the Republican leadership to give him a
minority seat on the Appropriations Comittee, Mr. Javits so annoyed its
chairman, Richard E. Russell of Georgia, by persisting in favor of bills to give
New York State more money, that the Senate's Southern-controlled hierarchy
shrank the size of the committee, eliminating Mr. Javits's seat.

Mr. Javits never complained. Ten years later, he said: ''I have never felt any
anti-Semitism in the Senate. I should warn you, I'm not quick to feel that sort
of thing, but not in my worst struggles with Dick Russell did I ever feel it.
The Senate is an admirable institution from that point of view.''

When apparently anti-Semitic remarks by Richard M. Nixon were disclosed in the
Watergate transcripts, Mr. Javits said it was ''irrelevant.''

While Mr. Javits had never been personally close to Mr. Nixon and frequently
criticized many of the President's policies, he supported Mr. Nixon's
Presidential candidacy in 1968 and 1972. He was not among the first Republicans
to call for Mr. Nixon's impeachment or resignation during the inquiry into the
break-in at Democratic Party national headquarters at the Watergate complex in
Washington.

While calling for a full investigation of Watergate, Mr. Javits also noted that
Mr. Nixon had achieved positive results with some of his domestic programs and
in fostering detente with both China and the Soviet Union. In December 1980,
after Mr. Javits had lost his bid for re-election, he disclosed in an interview
that in all his years in Washington, he had never had lunch with Mr. Nixon. ''I
really never got to the inside of him,'' Mr. Javits said.

Mr. Javits was also reluctant, as were other Republican Senators, to criticize
Mr. Nixon until the President was on the verge of resignation. Key members of
his staff urged him to attack the President and told him he was being too
cautious.

''Of course I'm cautious,'' the Senator said. ''But I have a good right to be.
Look at the interests for which I am trustee. The Jews of America. Republican
liberalism. My own career for a quarter of a century. I'll be the first to
confess that I'm cautious.'' The Nixon Issue In 1974 Election In June 1974, two
months before Mr. Nixon's resignation, Mr. Javits announced his intention to run
for a fourth term, still declining to criticize Mr. Nixon by name, but stating,
''I think it's one of the most deplorable episodes in American history that the
tone of the White House should be so low and so self-serving.''

Mr. Javits's reluctance to attack Mr. Nixon was one of the main issues in the
Senator's 1974 re-election campaign, in which he defeated Ramsey Clark, a
Democrat and former United States Attorney General, by only 370,000 votes.

In the 1974 campaign, as in others, Mr. Javits was castigated as being so nimble
as to seem often to be on both sides of the same issue and as being one of the
most influential supporters in Washington of some banks and large corporations.

In 1967, when Robert F. Kennedy was the Democratic Senator from New York,
Kennedy aides said privately that a favorite Javits tactic was to vote for a
Republican minority amendment concocted to eviscerate a Democratic bill. Then
after the inevitable defeat of the amendment, the aides said, Mr. Javits would
switch and vote for the overall bill, allowing him to maintain later that he had
voted in the best interest of his particular audience.

Commenting in The National Observer on the 1974 Javits campaign, James M. Perry,
a political reporter, wrote: ''He gets support from big business and big labor.
Sometimes cherubic Jack Javits knows no shame. After promising last week to work
for Spanish as the second language for every American, he said, 'Remember this,
I never have believed in catering to ethnic groups.' You've almost got to love
him for it. He gives chutzpah a good name.''

Mr. Javits, when asked, would explain that corporations and businessmen in New
York State were part of his constituency and that there was nothing unethical
about advocating some of the things they wanted in Washington. In ''Order of
Battle: A Republican's Call to Reason,'' a book he wrote in 1964, Mr. Javits
said that ''there is nothing wicked about being the 'party of business.' ''

''And if 'business' is understood as being something infinitely more than a
collection of managers, including also investors, workers, consumers and farmers
- all of whom draw sustenance from the function of business -there is nothing
narrow-minded about it,'' he continued.

'' 'Business,' properly understood,'' he wrote, ''is so central to every aspect
of our civilization that Republicans should proudly announce that they are
indeed 'the party of business.' ''

In a 1971 study by Ralph Nader, the consumer advocate, Mr. Javits, who had by
then dissolved his law practice, was said to have ''demonstrated a consistent
willingness to sponsor his law firm's clients'' while a member of the Banking
and Currency Committee. The Senator's clients had included the First National
City Bank and Penn Central.

The Senator denied any impropriety, saying: ''It was completely routine
business, and I never made a secret of it. I had mentioned it on the floor.''

In foreign affairs, Mr. Javits was a liberal on broadening relationships with
Communist countries, and an adamant supporter of Israel. He fought throughout
his career to keep United States support for the Jewish state strong. In
addition to advocating increasing American military aid for Israel, the Senator
was also a vigorous fund-raiser for Israel among private groups in this nation.

Mr. Javits was generally considered a ''hawk'' on American military spending and
was, with many other Senators, relatively slow to oppose United States
involvement in Vietnam. In February 1967, he called for the unconditional end of
the American bombing of North Vietnam, thus opposing the Administration policy
on the war for the first time.

In the autumn of 1977, as a member of the Foreign Relations Committee with
access to Israeli leaders, Mr. Javits went to Jerusalem and helped shape the
Israeli-Egyptian peace proposal that was eventually hammered out at Camp David
the next year by Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel, President Anwar Sadat
of Egypt and President Carter.

As Mr. Javits moved around the capital, and on trips back to New York, his
personal manner was sometimes friendly, almost gregarious, sometimes stiff and
pompous.

Some of his admirers thought he might have enjoyed life more if he had taken the
world, and himself, slightly less seriously.

''He doesn't need to be loved,'' his wife, Marion, said several years ago. ''He
needs to be respected.'' Back home in New York City, and upstate as well, Mr.
Javits was respected by a majority of the voters for more than 30 years. Born in
1904 On Lower East Side Jacob Koppel Javits was born in a Lower East Side
tenement on May 18, 1904. ''In New York State, that is like being born in a log
cabin,'' said the Senator, who traced his Republicanism to reading in his youth
about Abraham Lincoln.

Mr. Javits's father was Morris Jawetz, who had been apprenticed to an Austrian
rabbi as a boy, then became a tailor. He came to New York in 1890 and changed
the spelling of his surname.

He failed as a tailor and became the janitor for three tenements, including the
one at 85 Stanton Street, where Jacob was born. Morris Javits also worked as an
election-time functionary, helping the local Democratic ward-heelers produce
votes to keep the neighborhood and the city in their party's control.

The Senator's mother, Ida Littman Javits, came to New York from Russia, by way
of Palestine. Mrs. Javits, who could not read or write English until she was 55
years old, helped provide for her family by selling dry goods from a pushcart in
the street, assisted by her son Jacob, a quiet boy with red, curly hair.

Young Jacob had to sleep in the same bed with his older brother, Ben, until
Jacob's bar mitzvah at the age of 13. Ben, who started the law practice that
Jacob joined before entering politics, remained the Senator's intimate friend
and adviser.

Jacob Javits was president of his class at George Washington High School and
worked testing pipes at a factory in Elizabeth, N.J., and selling printing
supplies as he took night courses at Columbia University. He graduated from New
York University Law School in 1926 and was admitted to the bar the next year,
joining his brother in the firm of Javits & Javits.

''When I grew up on New York's Lower East Side,'' the Senator wrote in an
article in The Times in 1973, ''the furthest thing from my mind was any idea
that I would spend more than half of my working years as a public servant. There
were too many other things to pay attention to, like helping my janitor father
put bread on the table and keep the roof over our heads.

''The Lower East Side was no place for a philosopher, although it spawned a wide
range of men and women whose lives took them, intellectually and geographically,
far from the slums of our childhood. In those days, if it was a ghetto, we
didn't think of it that way. We had the feeling, if not the knowledge, that the
gates were open and that there was a way out, that nothing hemmed us in except
the limitations of our own abilities, our own good fortune.''

If, later in life, the Senator was aware that he had probably advanced further
in American politics than anyone else who grew up in that neighborhood, he never
said so. Rejected at First From the Army At the start of World War II, he tried
to enlist in the Army, but was rejected because of his age. He then volunteered
to work as a civilian in the Army's Chemical Warfare Department in Washington,
was commissioned an officer in 1942, traveled overseas to help plan the
invasions of Europe and Japan and was a lieutenant colonel when he left the
service in 1945.

Mr. Javits's first marriage, in 1933, to Marjorie Ringling, an adopted child of
the circus family, ended in divorce three years later.

''I guess we were too young,'' the Senator said years later. ''She was a
Catholic and I was a Jew, and that had something to do with it.''

In 1945, he met Marion Ann Borris while she was working as a Republican Party
researcher in New York, having failed to become a successful actress after three
years in Hollywood. She was 21 years younger than Mr. Javits. After dating
sporadically for two years, they married in 1947.

While her husband pursued a political career in Washington, Marion Javits
preferred to stay in New York, collecting art and keeping a sort of salon for
intellectuals and artists in their midtown East Side apartment. She attracted
public attention, often through gossip columns, and sometimes embarrassed the
Senator.

In 1976, the Senator and his wife held separate news conferences on the
disclosure that she had been working as a consultant to the Iranian national
airline, had received a fee of $67,500 for her work and had registered as a
foreign agent as required by the Justice Department.

This clearly distressed the Senator, a staunch supporter of Israel, partly
because Iran had voted a year earlier in favor of a United Nations resolution
condemning Zionism and equating it with racism.

At his news conference, the Senator indicated that he had asked his wife to drop
the job; at hers, she sidestepped questions, restating the independence she had
claimed throughout their marriage. Within a matter of weeks, though, Mrs. Javits
did give up the account.

After his defeat in 1980, the Senator said of his marriage, ''I didn't handle it
well.'' In the manuscript of his autobiography, he wrote, ''Congress was and is
my wife in the sense that my work there limited my marriage, rather than the
other way around.''

Commenting on that statement and the Senator's acknowledgment that, on their
wedding night, he had brought newspapers on the Washington train to read in
their room, Marion Javits said, ''There have always been papers between us.''

She added: ''I suppose he measured his work to be so much larger and
overwhelming in terms of the better work he could do that was always his first
consideration. That was the way he measured things. On the other hand, I did
not.'' Aided La Guardia In Political Club Mr. Javits's political career began in
1932, when he joined the political club of Fiorello H. La Guardia and worked for
him in his Republican-Fusion mayoral campaigns. In 1940, Mr. Javits supported
the re-election of President Roosevelt, but in 1945 he was a key campaign aide
to Jonah Goldstein, the Republican-Fusion candidate who was defeated for the
mayoralty by William O'Dwyer.

As a dubious reward for Mr. Javits's efforts in a losing campaign, the feeble
Manhattan Republican Party allowed him to be its candidate in 1946 for an Upper
West Side Congressional seat that had not been held by a Republican since 1923.

Mr. Javits won, and two years later was challenged by the Mayor's younger
brother, Paul O'Dwyer, and won again. After four terms as a House member, he ran
in 1954 for State Attorney General. Given little chance to defeat the Democratic
candidate, Franklin D. Roosevelt Jr., Mr. Javits won again - the only Republican
to carry the state in an election that made W. Averell Harriman the Governor.

This victory made influential and wealthy New York Republicans notice that the
energetic Mr. Javits was a winner, even against the bearers of prestigious
Democratic family names.

Two years later, in 1956, with the help of such wealthy liberal Republicans as
John Hay Whitney, Mr. Javits gained his party's nomination to run for the Senate
against another well-known Democrat with a growing political reputation - Robert
F. Wagner, then in his first term as Mayor of New York.

Probably helped by the Presidential candidacy of Dwight D. Eisenhower, who swept
the state by 1.6 million votes, Mr. Javits carried the state by 458,000 votes.

In his 1962 re-election campaign, Mr. Javits became the first Republican
candidate, running only on the Republican line, to carry New York City since
Calvin Coolidge, defeating the challenger supported by the Kennedy organization,
James B. Donovan.

In 1968, Paul O'Dwyer, whom Mr. Javits had defeated 20 years earlier, challenged
him again, and this time Mr. Javits won by 1.1 million votes. Only in 1974, in
the relatively narrow 370,000-vote victory over Ramsey Clark, did Mr. Javits's
popularity seem to decline.

Despite all his years as one of the strongest vote-getters of either party in
the state, Mr. Javits was excluded from the inner circle of such Republicans as
Nelson A. Rockefeller, who was first elected Governor two years after Mr. Javits
first won a Senate seat, and John V. Lindsay, the young Representative who
became Mayor of New York in 1966.

When Mr. Rockefeller, as Governor, would visit the Capitol, Senator Javits
sometimes had to tag along behind him in corridors, trying to find out what the
Governor was doing.

In the last years of his fourth Senate term, the Senator remained active in
Washington, but seemed to some close associates to be feeling increasingly alone
in the world, which had seldom seen the sentimental, softer side of his
character. In an interview in 1974, Marion Javits said: ''He just loves it when
Frank Sinatra sings, 'I did it my way.' Every time he hears the song, he
cries.''

Besides his wife, Mr. Javits is survived by his son, Joshua, of Washington, and
his daughters, Joy Javits Romero of New York City and Carla Javits of San
Francisco.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jocob K. Javits (AP); Photo of Javits with Governor Cuomo in
1984 as the new convention center was renamed for Javits (NYT) (Page 7A); Photo
of Javits with Fidel Castro in 1974 while in Cuba (AP) (Page 7A); Photo of
Javits with Richard M. Nixon and Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller at dinner in Mr.
Javit's honor in 1967 (Page 7A); Photo of Javits with his wife, Marion, and
Henry A. Kissinge

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 8, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Veteran in Murder Pact Called Psychologically Ill

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 139 words

DATELINE: LEBANON, N.H., March 7


A Vietnam veteran who took part Tuesday morning in a murder and suicide pact
that led to five deaths was psychologically disabled, the authorities said
today.

The veteran, 43-year-old Michael F. Dean, and the woman with whom he lived,
Caroline Hull, 32, mailed at least eight letters to the local news media and
relatives describing how they had decided to kill themselves and her three
children.

According to the letters, which were received after the deaths, Mr. Dean gave
sleeping pills to Mrs. Hull and her three children, Kenneth, 11, Jeremy, 5, and
Theresa, 4. Then he shot them, set the house on fire and killed himself, the
police said.

Veterans Administration officials said today that Mr. Dean was receiving a 70
percent psychological disability pension. They gave no details about his
disability or the treatment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 8, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Memorial for Palme Held in Washington

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 176 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 7


Olof Palme, the Swedish Prime Minister who was shot dead a week ago, was honored
at a memorial service today by officials and diplomats as well as prominent and
ordinary Americans.

Among them was former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, a target of Mr.
Palme's criticism of the United States war effort in Vietnam.

Walter F. Mondale, the defeated Presidential candidate in the 1984 election;
Barbara Bush, wife of Vice President Bush; Deputy Secretary of State John C.
Whitehead, and Senators Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, and
Charles McC. Mathias Jr., Republican of Maryland, were among 1,000 mourners at
National Presbyterian Church.

In a eulogy, Senator Mathias described Mr. Palme as a politician who despite
local problems ''made time for a broader constituency, the human race and
applied his thoughts to the awful fear of living in the nuclear age.''

The Senator added that whenever Mr. Palme criticized the United States, ''I
always felt it was because he knew how fine we might be, and he hated to see us
fall short.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MARXIST'S GREAT LEAP: CAPTIVITIY TO CELEBRITY

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words

DATELINE: MANILA, March 8


They call him Joma, and women bring handkerchiefs or scraps of paper to him for
his autograph.

Jose Maria Sison, the founder and former chairman of the Communist Party of the
Philippines - titles he acknowledged this week after being released by President
Corazon C. Aquino from more than eight years in detention - has become a
celebrity in two days of freedom.

''Wherever I go I am overwhelmed by the warm reception given to me,'' he said at
a party Friday night before dashing off to appear on a 90-minute television talk
show. One of the program's sponsors was McDonald's. Another was Spam.

Mr. Sison, however, remains a committed revolutionary who in his writings
regularly refers to American ''imperialism,'' hails ''the astounding
revolutionary victories of the Indochinese people of Vietnam, Cambodia and
Laos'' and calls on ''the world proletariat and the entire mankind to defeat
imperialism and bring about the dawn of Communism.''

Intends to 'Stay Legal'

Mr. Sison, a 47-year-old former professor and writer who had gone underground
before his arrest in 1977, said in an interview Friday night that he intended to
''stay legal'' under the administration of President Aquino and would probably
return to writing and teaching at the University of the Philippines. He said he
hoped Mrs. Aquino would welcome ''friendly advice.''

Mr. Sison's underground life as a Communist leader remains hazy. Defense
Minister Juan Ponce Enrile said in an interview today that he saw Mr. Sison as
an ideologue, a political cadre and organizer who believed in violent revolution
and who organized the party's armed wing. But Mr. Enrile said he had no evidence
that Mr. Sison himself was involved in any fighting.

Mr. Sison said Friday that his brother, a pathologist in Beverly Hills, Calif.,
called him Thursday to suggest that he consider an American lecture tour. ''If
the U.S. Embassy allows it, I would go,'' Mr. Sison said.

Asked if his Maoist-style philosophy of Marxist revolution had changed in any
way during his detention, he said no. ''I still believe,'' he said, ''that the
struggle must continue.''

''While there has been a democratization of the situation,'' he said of Mrs.
Aquino's rise to power, ''this is only the first step. There are still
fundamental unsolved problems: foreign domination, feudalism and bureaucratic
corruption.'' If these problems are not solved, he said, political violence will
return.

''I think the liberation of the people will depend mainly on the working class
and the peasantry,'' Mr. Sison said, explaining his hopes for the future of the
Philippines.

Interpretation of U.S. Role

Writing in the book ''Philippine Society and Revolution'' under the pseudonym
Amado Guerrero, he interpreted United States development of the Philippines in
these terms:

''U.S. imperialism improved the system of transportation and communications as a
means to tighten its political, economic, cultural and military control. U.S.
corporations derived huge profits from public work contracts. Troop movement for
the suppression of people also became faster.

''The establishment of an extensive public school system and the adoption of
English as a medium of instruction served not only to enhance the political
indoctrination of the Filipinos into subservience to American imperialism but
also to encourage local taste for American commodities. It opened the market
directly for U.S. educational materials.

''Even the campaign for public sanitation and hygiene was a means to speed up
the monopoly sales of U.S. drugs, chemicals and medical equipment.''

A Political Gamble

Foreign diplomats in Manila said Mrs. Aquino had taken a political gamble in
releasing Mr. Sison as well as Bernabe Buscayno, the former head of the
Communist fighting force, the New People's Army. Mr. Buscayno was also due to
appear on television Friday night, but he did not. At a gathering to welcome
former detainees back to Manila life, Mr. Buscayno, a man far less comfortable
with celebrity status than Mr. Sison, said he was ''a little bit confused.''

In 1969, when the New People's Army was founded, he was a military leader with
the Huk guerrillas, a pro-Soviet Communist movement among the peasants of
central Luzon. At that time the Huks had been crushed and the remaining fighters
were little more than bandits who operated protection rackets around the
American bases. Mr. Buscayno, also known as Commander Dante, brought with him a
small group of guerrillas to augment the young, middle-class university students
who supported Mr. Sison.

Few Filipinos are willing to assess the risks of freeing prisoners detained
during the Marcos regime on charges of subversion or rebellion. Most
commentators say Mrs. Aquino had no choice but to let them go, since she pledged
to do so in her presidential campaign.

The releases are proceeding slowly. On Friday a group called Task Force
Detainees, which monitors what it classifies as political prisoners, said more
than 500 remained in camps and prisons, 10 days after the Government announced
they would be freed. The group also lists more than 600 people still among the
missing from the Marcos years.

The Communist Party of the Philippines, under Mr. Sison and his successors, has
made great gains over the last few years. It has done so, diplomats say, by
taking advantage of public displeasure with the Marcos regime and through its
own intense discipline.

'Students of Insurgency'

''There is very little evidence of adventurism among them,'' a foreigner long
familiar with the country said of the Communists and their army. ''They are
thorough students of insurgency and revolution. Fighting always takes place on
their terms. They are very patient.''

Manila residents caution outsiders not to assume that changes that have swept
the capital in the last few weeks have been duplicated in the countryside,
particularly on distant islands. It may take a year or more to reform the
provincial military and police forces or aid people materially, Filipinos and
foreign residents say. During that time, they say, the New People's Army could
continue to spread its influence.

''We have just begun a new phase of our struggles,'' a recently released
detainee said Friday night. ''We cannot leave anything to spontaneity.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. STUDYING LEGALITY OF U.S. CUTBACK ORDER

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 629 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., March 8


High-ranking United Nations officials said today that they were investigating
the legality of the United States order to the Soviet missions to reduce their
personnel by more than a third.

''This thing is quite a sensitive matter and our legal counsel is studying the
matter,'' said Virendra Dayal, an aide to Secretary General Javier Perez de
Cuellar. ''We shouldn't comment rashly or at random on this one. It is too
complicated.'' Mr. Perez de Cuellar himself had no comment.  Mr. Dayal and other
United Nations officials said they believed the United States move, which will
cut the permanently assigned staffs of the missions of the U.S.S.R., the Ukraine
and Byelorussia from a total of 275 to 170 by April 1, 1988, was unprecedented.

Under the arrangements that led to the creation of the United Nations at the end
of World War II, the Soviet Union is represented not only by a delegation from
its central Government, but by delegations from the Ukraine and Byelorussia, two
of its 15 constituent republics, on the ground that these areas suffered
particularly from the German invasion during the war.

The United States has occasionally expelled individual diplomats from United
Nations missions for specific reasons, but never ordered an overall cut in the
size of a mission.

At the Soviet Mission, Anatoly N. Khudyakov, a spokesman, said:

''The decision by the U.S. Administration was arbitrary, unjustifiable and
unwarranted, unprecedented in the history of the United Nations. We consider it
a gross violation of the agreement between the United States and United Nations
headquarters. It represents a hostile action against the United Nations
itself.''

Mr. Khudyakov said the Soviet Union would consider retaliation.

The legality of the decision rests on three documents drafted soon after the
United Nations was founded in 1945, according to experts in international law.
They are the General Convention on Privileges and Immunities of 1946, the
Headquarters Agreement of 1947 and a 1947 report of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee.

None of these agreements put a specific limitation on the size of a mission to
the United Nations.

Even if the United Nations determines that the American decision is illegal,
there is nothing it can do to stop it, according to legal experts.

''If the Secretary General says that this step is a violation of the agreement,
it won't change things,'' a United Nations official said. ''The United States
controls the visa process, and there is nothing that can be done to change
that.''

The United States considers its decision consistent with its obligations under
the headquarters agreement.

Richard C. Hottelet, spokesman for the United States Mission, said:

''The Headquarters Agreement says that there shall be no United States
interference except on matters relating to national security.''

The fundamental explanation for the United States decision is protection of
national security, he said.

United States officials said the move would not be followed by reductions in
other missions, but some United Nations experts say they fear it sets a
dangerous precedent.

After the three Soviet missions, the next largest mission is the United States
Mission, with 126 staff members, followed by China, with 116.

Some diplomats say they believe the United States' decision will have the effect
of further undermining the authority of the United Nations in the eyes of the
American public.

Last year, the State Department imposed controls on the travel of New-York based
United Nations employees from the Soviet Union, Afghanistan, Cuba, Iran, Libya
and Vietnam. The restriction, limiting travel to within a 25-mile radius of
United Nations headquarters, affected about 500 United Nations staff members.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET SEES U.S. VIOLATION

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 285 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 8


The Soviet Government press agency Tass today characterized the American order
as an ''unprecedented'' and ''hostile'' move that violated the United States'
commitments as the host country for United Nations headquarters.

Apparently alluding to Washington's charges of espionage among staff members of
the Soviet missions, the Government press agency said that the action had been
taken ''under farfetched and groundless pretexts.''

''It is obviously aimed at further undermining the United Nations, Tass said,
adding, ''A whole number of countries have been voicing quite justified doubts
about the expediency of having the United Nations' headquarters in the United
States.''

Alluding to previous United States actions to curb the movements of personnel
from Soviet-bloc nations and a number of other countries, Tass said the order
was part of a series against ''socialist states and developing countries whose
policies do not suit the White House.''

It recalled that Washington had already limited the movements of United Nations
employees from the Soviet Union, Afghanistan, Vietnam, Iran, Cuba and Libya to a
25-mile radius of Manhattan.

As of Jan. 6, the United States also restricted the movements of diplomats or
United Nations staff members from East Germany, Poland, Bulgaria and
Czechoslovakia.

The Soviet Government press agency said: ''The United States, seeking to force
changes in United Nations policy to meet Washington's interests, is not stopping
short of crude pressure and blackmail or shrinking from direct violations of its
international commitments in a bid to work up an atmosphere around the United
Nations that hinders the work of this authoritative international forum.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN GUERRILLAS REPORT KILLING 200 VIETNAM TROOPS

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 5, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 78 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 8


Cambodian guerrillas said today that they killed 200 Vietnamese soldiers and
wounded 150 others in a raid on a town near Phnom Penh.

The Khmer Rouge radio, monitored in Bangkok, said the guerrillas attacked seven
targets on Friday in Kampong Speu, 30 miles west of the Cambodian capital.

The radio said the seven targets had been captured in 30 minutes.

Four Vietnamese tanks sent to relieve the garrison were ambushed and forced to
retreat, the radio said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN BRIEF: RECENT FILMS ON CASSETTE

SECTION: Section 2; Page 28, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 597 words


The following recent theatrical films are now available for home screening.
Excerpts are from reviews by Times critics.

Prizzi's Honor

Starring Jack Nicholson, Kathleen Turner, Robert Loggia, William Hickey and
Anjelica Huston; directed by John Huston, 1985 (R) Vestron Video 130 minutes.
$79.95 Based on Richard Condon's novel about a Mafia hit man who unwittingly
falls in love with a professional killer. Mr. Huston's film ''delivers a kind of
high mood commonly associated with controlled substances . . . [and]
demonstrates the extraordinary, continuing vitality of this amazing film maker,
now 78 years and never better. . . .All the performers are fine, but the four
principals are terrific.'' (Vincent Canby) Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome Starring
Mel Gibson and Tina Turner; directed by George Miller and George Ogilvie, 1985
(PG-13) Warner Home Video 108 minutes. $79.95 George Miller and George Ogilvie's
postapocalyptic film is the third in a series of Mad Max movies. ''The hero
assumes greater and greater mythic dimensions in this third film''; it ''has
showier stunts than its predecessors and a better sense of humor.'' (Janet
Maslin) Mask Starring Cher, Eric Stoltz and Sam Elliott; directed by Peter
Bogdanovich, 1985 (PG-13) MCA 120 minutes. $79.95 A true story about the
relationship between a Los Angeles mother and her teen-age son who is afflicted
with a disfiguring malady. '' 'Mask' is one of those movies that try so hard to
get their supposedly universal message across (don't we all hide behind a mask
of one sort or another?) that they are likely to put your teeth on edge more
often than they bring one little, lonely teardrop to the eye. . . .All the
performances are limited by the material.'' (Canby) Rambo: First Blood Part II
Starring Sylvester Stallone and James Cameron; directed by George P. Cosmatos;
1985 (R) Thorn EMI/HBO Video 93 minutes. $79.95 An action-adventure drama about
the hero's return to Vietnam in search of missing American prisoners of war.
''[The film] does nothing less than rewrite history. . . .[Its] politics are
implausible if not truly bubble-headed, but they are a conveniently topical
frame for the spectacle of Mr. Stallone, bare to the waist and sometimes
further, as he gives his one-man army demonstration.''(Canby) Teen Wolf Starring
Michael J. Fox, James Hampton, Susan Ursitti; directed by Rod Daniel; 1985 (PG)
Paramount Home Video 90 minutes. $79.95 A comedy about a sweet-natured
high-school student who gains small-town celebrity and power when he discovers
that he's a werewolf. ''For a film that is so innocuous, 'Teen Wolf' is
aggressively boring . . . and is overacted by everybody except Mr. Fox, who is
seen to far better advantage in 'Back to the Future.' '' (Canby) St. Elmo's Fire
Starring Emilio Estevez, Rob Lowe, Andrew McCarthy, Ally Sheedy. Judd Nelson;
directed by Joel Schumacher; 1985 (R) RCA/Columbia Pictures Home Video 108
minutes. $79.95 A comedy-drama about a close-knit group of school friends.
''[The film] is most appealing when it simply gives the actors a chance to flirt
with the camera, and with one another. When it attempts to take seriously the
problems of characters who are spoiled, affluent and unbearably smug, it becomes
considerably less attractive.''(Maslin) Video cassettes are generally available
in VHS and Beta. Some titles are also available in the 8-millimeter format and
on LaserVision video disks. Unless otherwise specified, prices cited are the
manufacturer's suggested retail price for a VHS cassette; rental rates vary from
store to store.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN REALITY TAKES TO THE STAGE

BYLINE: By LESLIE BENNETTS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1921 words


If someone had invented the plot, it might seem too incredible: a straight-arrow
city official resigns from his post, then changes his mind and requests his job
back - but the mayor has already decided to appoint someone else. In a rage, the
official - a former policeman and fireman -shoots the mayor and another city
official, a prominent homosexual activist.

There is no question he committed the murders, but when the case comes to trial
the defense claims, among other assertions, that the accused had been binging on
junk food with a high sugar content, which may have precipitated violent
behavior - a theory soon immortalized as ''the Twinkie defense.'' The jury
declines to convict the assassin of first- or second-degree murder, passing only
a verdict of voluntary manslaughter - which carries a maximum penalty of seven
years in jail.

The outraged community riots, with thousands of people storming City Hall and
setting fire to police cars. The murderer is paroled after five years in prison,
but he has polarized the city and left a legacy of bitterness and anger that
will last for years. Long before the wounds fade, the murderer commits suicide
in his garage, running a rubber hose into his car to pipe in carbon monoxide and
create his own personal gas chamber.

As fantastical as it might sound to one unacquainted with recent American
history, Emily Mann didn't have to invent that plot, the story of her new play,
''Execution of Justice.'' All of it actually happened when Dan White, a former
San Francisco City Supervisor, shot Mayor George Moscone and another City
Supervisor, Harvey Milk, in 1978. At the time, Miss Mann, a rising young
director and playwright whose career had primarily focused on regional theater,
paid little attention. Later, however, on a visit to San Francisco to see a
production of one of her plays, Miss Mann was shocked by the lasting damage
caused by the incident, and she began to explore the subject.

The result was a play based on the Dan White case that has already had seven
productions in regional theaters around the country. When a new production opens
here at the Virginia Theater this Thursday, it will mark Miss Mann's Broadway
debut as both playwright and director.

The work is nothing if not ambitious: using a cast of 23 playing a total of 44
different roles, it re-creates not only the murders and the trial but also a
community in turmoil, with a diverse chorus of voices adding their own testimony
to official transcripts and recorded facts. The characters range from a young
mother of three to a black lesbian leader, from psychiatrists and lawyers to
riot police, from Dan White's jailer to Sister Boom Boom, a flamboyant
homosexual in drag as a nun. The production features a large video screen and
music that includes Steve Reich, heavy rock, Gregorian chants and Maria Callas.
The rich variety of that canvas is essential to the work's larger goal, for in
Miss Mann's eyes the Dan White case represents far more than an isolated event.

She began to understand its resonance when she went to San Francisco four years
ago to see a production of her earlier play, ''Still Life,'' at the Eureka
Theater. ''I found such incredible reactions to the White case, and I realized
it was still an open wound,'' she says. ''It surprised me that people who were
not necessarily politically oriented found it so shameful and upsetting. The
city was still reeling, no matter what people's point of view. What surprised me
most was that people who had nothing to do with Harvey Milk, personally or
politically or in terms of their sexual preference, were still walking around
shell-shocked from this sequence of events -the assassinations, the trial, the
verdict. The wounds were really deep, and they hadn't healed. The more I
investigated, the more I realized how important the issues it brought up were -
not just to San Francisco, but to America as a whole.''

When the Eureka Theater commissioned her to write a play on a socially or
politically relevant subject, Miss Mann chose the Dan White saga. For the
33-year-old playwright, the case evoked some of the country's deepest, most
controversial divisions. Mr. White, a law-and-order conservative who supported
the death penalty, originally gained office as a crusader against what he
perceived as the city's growing tolerance for overt homosexuality, crime,
prostitution and other symptoms of moral decay. His victims were on the other
end of the political spectrum: the mayor, George Moscone, was a longtime
liberal, and Harvey Milk - the city's first acknowledged homosexual elected to
office -had been instrumental in passing a homosexual rights ordinance
considered the most stringent in the nation. The murder trial plunged an already
polarized city into turmoil, with law enforcement officials wearing ''Free Dan
White'' T-shirts and establishment heterosexuals joining homosexual activists to
protest the leniency of the verdict.

''What was on trial became Dan White's set of values versus Harvey Milk's and
George Moscone's set of values - the liberal ethic versus the conservative
church, family and bedrock values,'' Miss Mann explains. ''This trial is so
emblematic of the co-opting of the moral center of the country by the right.
Suddenly liberals looked like they lived in a cesspool. The genius of the
defense in this trial was to rob the left of any moral strength and push the
buttons of moral bigotry in the jury. The defense lawyer would talk about Dan
White as being the perfect American male figure we should all aspire to, with
good values - as opposed to the men he killed. The conclusion he built to was
that good people don't kill other people - unless in some way they were morally
repelled, and therefore somehow justified, as if the pressures of immorality and
corruption around him had somehow made a good man crack. The underlying feeling
was that on some level Dan White stood for what was right in America, and the
others symbolized the decay in our society.''

The more she learned about the case, the more appropriate it seemed to Miss Mann
as a subject for theater. ''There was a very strong emotional defense, as
opposed to a prosecution that made a decision that they wanted to get the trial
over quickly and just let the facts speak for themselves,'' she notes. ''The
more I worked on the play, the more I realized that what the defense and the
prosecution were at war about was very complicated, emotionally and
intellectually. You walk in with what looks like two clear cases of first-degree
murder, and by the end of the play you understand why two counts of voluntary
manslaughter came down - and why there was a riot in response to that.

''What we learn in theater is that emotionality is often stronger than
rationality and fact, and here you had a prosecution that stuck to the facts and
a defense that worked on people's sentimentality and unconscious prejudices.
Where the prosecution was tough-minded, the defense was passionate - and passion
won out in the courtroom.''

The consequences were far-reaching. ''What the play has become for me is more
than just an examination of this particular event,'' says Miss Mann. ''It's
become an American tragedy. This event changed the political makeup of San
Francisco, and the number of people who were hurt by it is staggering.''

In the play, these range from friends and lovers of the victims to the district
attorney whose career was ruined by the uproar. Onstage, the story is not so
much re-enacted as told in a kind of oral history pastiche culled from trial
transcripts and other documents, reportage and interviews. The testimony is
rapid-fire, with different voices speaking their sometimes contradictory
versions of the truth in overlapping bursts. Miss Mann says that although a few
of the characters are fictional, they are composites of real people, and she has
limited her material to words actually spoken.

''There's not a line in this that wasn't in some way said to me,'' she says of
the testimony that departs from official documents. ''And all the trial stuff is
transcript - boiled down, of course, distilled, but in keeping with what was
said and meant. I decided to stick with this pure a form because I wanted the
rigor and discipline of keeping to the facts as much as possible.''

Miss Mann was exposed early to a passion for history and current events; the
daughter of a history professor, she grew up in Massachusetts and Chicago and
graduated from Harvard University as an English literature major. She worked for
several years at the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis, where she wrote her first
play, a one-woman show called ''Annulla Allen: The Autobiography of a Survivor''
whose text was drawn entirely from tape recordings of a 76-year-old survivor of
the Holocaust. Although Miss Mann has worked primarily as a director in regional
theaters around the country, her playwriting credits also include ''Still
Life,'' a drama about the effects of the Vietnam War which won her Obie Awards
for playwriting and directing when it was produced here at the American Place
Theater. It too was shaped from tape recordings, made with a Minnesota veteran,
his wife and his girlfriend. Miss Mann currently lives in Rockland County with
her 2-year-old son and her husband, Gerry Bamman, an actor who plays the
prosecutor in ''Execution of Justice.''

Given her own interest in using real events as the basis for theater, Miss Mann
is somewhat disturbed by the tendency of many of her contemporaries to restrict
themselves to a smaller scope, focusing on personal events unconnected to a
social or political context. ''I find it very disappointing that our generation
of theater people are not writing significant plays about our society,'' she
says. ''I feel like I'm trying to write intelligent plays for intelligent
people. We're coming into this theater to look at an event that happened in this
country, and to judge it.''

Her own judgment is reflected in the play's title. ''It means two things:
justice was done, and justice was murdered,'' she observes. ''The law was
carried out, but I don't think justice was done; clearly Dan White didn't think
justice was done either. I think for most people, common sense tells them that
when an elected mayor and city supervisor are killed, execution-style, and the
killer walks out of jail five years later without having gone through any kind
of rehabilitation - he had no therapy, because they said there were no signs of
mental disorder - I think society begins to doubt the system that is doing
this.''

However, the piece has proved controversial in performance. ''The responses from
audiences really go across political lines,'' Miss Mann reports. ''People come
face to face with what their belief system is: what you believe is right and
wrong, what you can excuse and what you can't excuse in people's behavior, what
you think should be done. Usually the audiences go out arguing with each other.
The emotions are surprising.''

Such disputes are exactly what Miss Mann hoped to provoke. ''What I've done is
to let each point of view have a strong and articulate voice,'' she says. ''You
hear from so many sides, from the extreme left to the extreme right, and from so
many levels of society; from people's hearts and minds and prejudices and
convictions. In the end, you may come out with more questions than answers -
which is part of my purpose. I don't think there are easy answers, but I think
the questions have to be raised.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LIBERALS: THEIR OWN WORST ENEMY

BYLINE: By Harry Stein; Harry Stein is the author of ''Ethics (and Other
Liabilities).'' He is working on a book about growing up male in America.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 36, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4359 words


BACK WHEN I WAS A KID, AN ENTER-prising 14-year-old at my summer camp decided to
conduct a poll, bunk by bunk, on the Presidential race then under way. It was a
couple of days after Lyndon B. Johnson had the Democrats assembled in Atlantic
City in 1964 nominate him by acclamation. The result of the poll, something like
124 for L.B.J. and one for Barry Goldwater, stunned more than a few of us; we
couldn't figure out who had voted for Goldwater.

Upon investigation, it turned out to have been a kid who habitually walked
around with a deck of washable playing cards and wore a T-shirt bearing an
illustration of a fiery car wreck. The camp geek. And, it was additionally
ascertained, even his allegiance to the Republican candidate was shaky; it was
based on an obscure family connection to William E. Miller, Goldwater's running
mate, who, years later, would turn up, fittingly, in one of the early
''Do-you-know-me?'' American Express commercials.

I found myself thinking back on that long ago summer - when virtually everyone I
encountered seemed to be politically to the left of center and proud of it - one
recent Sunday after stumbling upon a depressing little something deep in the
morning paper. Headlined ''A Liberal by Any Other Name May Get More Votes,'' it
confirmed with actual data what most people had known before only from being
alive: that this is a godawful time to be a liberal. Indeed, according to The
New York Times/CBS News Poll cited in the article, while the term
''conservative'' elicited a positive reaction among better than two-thirds of
those prepared to venture an opinion, the term ''liberal'' made more than half
say they ''think worse'' of someone to whom it was applied.

How, I wondered over my raisin bran, and not for the first time, had it come to
this? How, so quickly, had we liberals gone from society's good guys, on our way
to imposing our own moral vision upon the future, to something very like
pariahs? How, above all, had it come to pass that right-wing Republicans, of all
people, had ended up with a stranglehold on the very issues - those involving
moral values and ethical responsibility - that had once been virtually conceded
to the left?

A large part of what happened, of course, is altogether obvious: history itself.
Exactly a year before we junior liberals cast our ballots for L.B.J. at summer
camp, many of us had listened, transfixed, as the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King
Jr., in Washington, articulated a common dream; in 1965, Stokely Carmichael,
talking ''black power,'' would expel young whites en masse from the Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, initiating a fundamental change in the
character of the civil-rights movement. In his acceptance speech that summer of
1964, Johnson lingered over the war against poverty; but three weeks before, the
headlines had been about the Tonkin Gulf.

Quite simply, the convulsions of the late 1960's not only turned liberals
against one another, but stripped liberalism itself of the moral certitude that
had made it so potent a force in the first place; and, more than that, the
upheavals allowed liberalism's adversaries to associate it in the public mind
with disorder and chronic naivete, a stigma that has persisted through all the
years since.

And now - need it even be observed? - we're at the nadir. It's not just that our
old adversaries are prospering (the geek in the T-shirt is probably chief
executive officer of some corporation by now), but that we ourselves seem so
woefully out of sync with the prevailing mood. All around us, not just in the
State of the Union address, but on movie screens, in print, in commercials for
automobiles and beer and life insurance, we find an unabashed reverence for
''traditional values.'' Yet, for many liberals, these very words, ringing as
they do with nostalgia for a time when patriotism, order and the primacy of the
nuclear family were unquestioned verities in American life, are suspect,
suggesting provincialism, intolerance and meanness of spirit. Faced with a
President beloved beyond all rational measure, we sometimes actually find
ourselves embarrassed to argue positions that he has managed to characterize as
softheaded or softhearted.

In liberal circles, all of this has, for years now, been cause for bottomless
frustration. We know what the problem is, all right, just as well as we knew it
during the time of Nixon and his silent majority - not simply the guy in the
White House, but the average boob in the streets unable, or unwilling, to see
through him. And what do you do about that?

Blaming the unenlightened electorate is, in its odd way, a comforting notion.
For what we have been far less comfortable acknowledging, what many of us
liberals are loath to deal with even as a theoretical proposition, is: that our
predicament might also be of our own making; that, though in the American
philosopher Morris Raphael Cohen's definition, liberalism involves the
willingness to examine all premises in the light of available evidence, too
often we have been prisoners of a dogma at odds with others' day-to-day
experience; that routinely there is a gulf between our ideals in the abstract
and the specifics of our own lives; that, most directly to the point, our
cynicism about ''traditional values'' appears to reflect the kind of
insensitivity to the human condition that, in other circumstances, we are the
first to deplore.

It is, all in all, not terribly surprising that, as Peter D. Hart, the pollster
for Walter F. Mondale, puts it:

''For the Democrats, the values issues were never a central agenda item. The
perennials tend to be the economy and war and peace.''

Meanwhile, Richard Wirthlin, Hart's Republican counterpart, compiled extensive
research data confirming that, as he puts it: ''In voters' minds, those issues
frequently override all others. We found a real contrast between Ronald Reagan
and the much more loosely defined value structure of Walter Mondale.
Occasionally you heard the Democrats talk about values, they'd use the rubrics,
but the passion wasn't there.'' Wirthlin pauses. ''You can't mouth values.
You've got to feel them.''

Edward J. Rollins, director of the 1984 Republican campaign, sounds very much
the same theme. ''What it comes down to,'' he says flatly, ''is that not too
many liberals are concerned with those matters themselves - and so truly don't
understand how important they are to other people. One of the great mistakes the
liberals keep making is in refusing to recognize that Reagan's appeal isn't
based just on the fact that he's a charming guy. He also deeply feels things
-about right and wrong, about fairness - that an awful lot of other Americans
also feel.''

Taking this in, I feel a powerful impulse to begin climbing the nearest wall.
This, from the camp that gave us James G. Watt to protect the environment and
William Bradford Reynolds to enforce civil rights policy?

''For the right,'' notes Paul Smith, of the Children's Defense Fund, which has
lobbied vigorously against Administration cuts in social spending, ''the family
is some Darwinian creature expected to make its way alone against all predators.
How this can be seen as resurrecting traditional values truly puzzles me.'' But,
then, it is worth noting that Ed Rollins is a one-time Democrat himself; in
fact, at 42, a Roman Catholic, the son of a local labor leader, he is a
veritable prototype of the man that got away. If, in fact, the right has been
staggeringly successful in seizing the terms of the debate -appropriating the
word ''morality'' as code for its own social agenda and managing, for instance,
to identify the American Civil Liberties Union in the public mind as ''the
criminals' lobby'' - it is no less true that we liberals have failed to
empathize with profound popular concerns.

Worries about declining values and standards of behavior have been evident
everywhere, from public opinion surveys on crime to Ann Landers's mail.

Many people feel that, somehow, things in this society have been spiraling out
of control. But we liberals have tended to dismiss those concerns as
illegitimate. Once, within memory, liberalism made emotional sense to most
Americans - it was not only generous in its larger social vision but it seemed
to be responsive, on a gut level, to daily concerns - these days, though, it
sometimes seems to demand that we deny fundamental aspects of ourselves.

I don't mean to belabor the down side. A case can certainly be made that there
is movement among liberals on this score, some of it striking. Mario Cuomo, New
York's Governor, for instance, has identified himself as closely with the broad
concept of family as any national Democrat in memory. On the local level,
liberal politicians -otherwise known, in terminological self-defense, as
''progressives'' - have increasingly been taking the initiative on two of the
issues most chronically ceded to the right, crime and the inadequacies of the
criminal justice system; at long last some of them are making the case that it
is appropriate to empathize above all with the victim. ''For years,'' says Tom
Hayden, a founder of Students for a Democratic Society, now the Democratic
Assemblyman for California's 44th District and certainly among the most
prominent of these politicians, ''in the face of rising crime, liberals acted
like social psychologists. That's just not right. Burglary and rape should
provoke outrage. So should a juvenile justice system that teaches 17-year-olds
that crime does pay.''

The landmark agreement between General Motors and the United Automobile Workers
on the company's projected Saturn plant - a pact mandating both worker
participation in decision making and salaries partially based on performance -
is more than merely a recognition by the bellwether U.A.W. of changed economic
times. In an era in which labor is widely perceived as indifferent to the
general welfare, it is an affirmation by this most liberal of unions of
responsibility to the social whole. ''We've got to break away from the notion,''
as the U.A.W.'s director of public relations, Peter G. Laarman, puts it, ''that
labor is a 'bad actor' in the economy. It must be understood that trade unionism
is fundamentally rooted in community.''

All of this is immensely heartening. Still, more generally, it remains the case
that those liberals who insist on going on about values and personal
responsibility tend to be seen by other liberals as somehow tainted by creeping
Reaganism. Any such preoccupation is alien to liberals' practical political
experience to start with, and it is additionally suspect on the more substantive
ground that it is regarded, somehow, as being bound up with religion.

Which, in its way, suggests just how far gone we are. Certainly, extreme
sensitivity to the church-state question is always in order, and never more so
than during the Reagan years. But what liberals seem to have forgotten, what we
desperately need to relearn, is that, as Bruce Babbitt, the Democratic Governor
of Arizona, puts it, ''there is something called civic morality, a shared body
of values, based on the Judeo-Christian and republican traditions, that is the
underpinning of our society. Too often lately, we've found ourselves drifting
into moral neutrality.''

BILL HONIG HAS DONE MORE THAN just give the matter serious thought; 10 years
ago, while teaching elementary school in a lower-class black neighborhood in San
Francisco, as a means of sorting out his own feelings, he composed a 100-page
paper on the subject: What happened? How was it that we as a society and, most
especially, those of us who had historically prided ourselves on our moral
rigor, seemed to have grown so alarmingly inattentive to the matter of
standards?

What he concluded was that not only had the social upheaval of the 1960's and
early 70's turned numberless liberals into cynics - that was obvious - but that
it had ripped liberalism itself from its intellectual moorings. ''Throughout the
50's,'' he observes, ''the liberal creed was intimately bound up with individual
responsibility - one had an obligation to be a consciously good person. But
suddenly we found ourselves in a climate, with its emphasis on systems, that
belittled moral responsibility. Broad, agreed-upon values were no longer seen as
ennobling - they were restrictive and repressive.''

Today, as California's State Superintendent of Public Instruction, Honig is best
known in the rest of the country - and among liberals tends to be seen as very
nearly heroic - for standing up to textbook publishers who, bowing to
fundamen-talist pressure, had made it a practice to underrepresent evolution in
biology texts. But on his home turf, Honig, who 15 years ago abandoned a
promising career in corporate law to join the teacher corps, is often perceived
as conservative; occasionally he is even seen as an ideologue of the extreme
right. In a recent book, ''Last Chance for Our Children,'' he writes of his
surprise upon learning, after he had spoken before some honor students at the
University of California at Los Angeles, that one of the professors had reacted
by assigning a paper on ''the hazards of the Moral Majority taking over the
schools.''

He laughs about that incident now. ''Isn't that amazing!'' he says. But Honig
continues to be much troubled by the mentality it represents. Quite simply,
since his surprising 1982 election as head of the nation's largest public school
system, following a campaign that stressed back-to-basics, high expectations and
the responsibility of the public schools to communicate ethical standards, he
has found his most intractable critics on the left. He has tangled with
progressives on various aspects of his so-called ''Excellence'' agenda.
Teachers' union leaders initially opposed his proposals to grant merit pay and
to streamline the firing of ''incompetents.'' Hispanic activists are still upset
over his view that bilingual instruction should be a means of integrating
students into the regular curriculum, not an end in itself. But he has most
often been challenged for his unrelenting emphasis on values.

''These people are constantly saying, 'Give me a consistent conceptual value.' I
say, 'honesty,' and immediately they come back with, 'I can think of plenty of
times when you shouldn't be honest.' Well, you know what my answer is to that?
'So what? Mostly, overwhelmingly, it's better to be honest than dishonest.'

''And people have got to know that. People have to feel connected to a shared
moral community. There is a yearning for morality that, I think, is genetic -
and far too many of us in this society have a hole in our souls because, day to
day, it just isn't there.

''Why do you read 'Pride and Prejudice'? Just for character and narrative? No,
because it's a powerful way of saying 'Here's what noble behavior is - look for
the real and watch out for the sham.' '' Honig pauses. ''Look for the real and
watch out for the sham.''

In Honig's view, the stakes can hardly be overestimated. ''America is still an
experiment,'' he says. ''The jury is still out on whether you can take a huge
country, keep it pluralistic, enshrine liberty and individual development and
not have it fly apart. That's always been the tension in this society. Can you
combine individual push with common social purpose?

''Well, that should be our task, to make sure that it does survive - because we
are still a beacon for the rest of the world. I truly believe that we have
something remarkable to say about how you form a society and how you live a
life.''

THIS KIND OF UN-SELF-CONSCIOUS AFFIRMATION of Americanism continues to make most
of us to the left of center more than a little uneasy. Still smarting from our
own Vietnam experience, at once too jaded and too mindful of peer expectation to
embrace so seemingly sectarian an ardor, we have allowed the right free rein to
obliterate the distinction between love of democratic institutions and crude
jingoism - a condition that was hardly addressed, let alone resolved, by the
ritual flag-waving of the 1984 Democratic National Convention in San Francisco.
''People are always telling me,'' says Anthony T. Podesta, president of People
for the American Way, a liberal organization, ''that they don't even bother to
open our direct mail because they assume we're a right-wing group.''

Scott Rains, coordinator of a group called Prolifers for Survival, based in
Chapel Hill, N.C., knows all about such liberal assumptions - and the
inflexibility of the dogma with which they are so bound up. ''All people on the
left have to do is hear our name and they're furious,'' he says. ''Liberals are
not inclined to listen to opposing views on any subject, but an opposing view on
abortion is seen as outright heresy. The most you're allowed to say is that you
have qualms but still support it. Even friends of mine make it very clear that
they regard me as a tool of the right.''

In fact, Rains, like a great many of the group's 2,000 members, is a veteran of
the antiwar movement, and the members of his organization are as involved in
promoting the nuclear freeze and other peace issues as in opposing abortion.

''What we are arguing is moral consistency,'' he says. ''It seems to me that if
you're truly in favor of life - against capital punishment and nuclear war -
then you've also got to start asking yourself some very, very hard questions
about abortion.''

Many of us will, on both philosophical and practical grounds, take serious issue
with such an argument. But that in no way justifies the refusal to acknowledge
the depth of feeling that prompts it, or the impulse, often a reflex, to cast
the author of such a view as an ideological Judas.

There is, to cite a particularly striking recent example of that reflex, the
matter of Tipper Gore, wife of Tennessee's Democratic Senator, Albert Gore Jr.,
and the great rock-lyrics controversy. Mrs. Gore co-founded, along with, among
others, Susan Baker, wife of the Secretary of the Treasury, the Parents Music
Resource Center. The group has campaigned for a labeling system for records
aimed at alerting parents to sexually explicit or violent content. A mother of
four with a background in psychology, Mrs. Gore has become convinced ''that we
as adults are both arrogant and myopic in failing to understand the effects of
mass media on the young. All we're saying is, 'Let's look at what we're doing to
our children; for heaven's sake, let's look at what we're doing to ourselves.'
Is that really so unreasonable?''

''The issue here,'' she says, ''is limits, recognizing that something has gone
terribly wrong in our culture, and trying to address it.'' ''What this is about
is censorship,'' responds Danny Goldberg, president of Gold Mountain Records,
who has led a counterattack on the Parents Music Resource Center. ''Mrs. Gore is
trying to impose her own blacklist. As far as I'm concerned, she's another
McCarthy, an agent of the far right.''

For most of us raised in liberal households, Goldberg's assertion packs no small
wallop. Three buzzwords in as many sentences! And, in fact, it might well be
that Goldberg's absolutist First Amendment stand should prevail on the merits.
Even Mrs. Gore, though generally at pains to characterize the labeling proposal
benignly, as ''consumer information,'' admits to understanding why so many of
her critics might see this particular issue as a constitutional question.

But after hearing out both the principals, one is struck less by the specifics
of the dispute than by its character; above all, by a defense of freedom on
Goldberg's part that seems utterly to preclude a free exchange of ideas. His
adamancy notwithstanding, Tipper Gore is hardly of the right; indeed, in
philosophical terms, she has much in common with Goldberg himself. Nor, as he
asserts, has she undertaken this fight because ''she's married to a Southern
Democrat who thinks it's a cool way to appeal to Southern bigots.''

Indeed, rather than ostracize those who ask the difficult questions - who, in
one way or another, demand that we bring a more rigorous value system to bear on
our view of the social order - liberals ought to recognize them as the resource
they are. Ferment, intellectual as well as ethical, has been too long absent in
our ranks.

If vigorously espousing other such views has been dicey, Glenn C. Loury's
challenge to an even more sacrosanct slice of liberal dogma, that part dealing
with poverty and race, has been utterly foolhardy. Loury is a black professor of
political economy at Harvard and currently a fellow at the Institute for
Advanced Study at Princeton. Lately he has been arguing in print that, while a
profound commitment to social justice on the part of government is essential,
and that while traditional antipoverty programs are often of enormous benefit,
solutions to many of the problems that have come to be seen as intractable
cannot, finally, be imposed from without. ''I'm convinced,'' he explains, ''that
there is a behavioral dimension to the problems of inner-city crime,
unemployment, educational underachievement, teen-age pregnancy and family
instability that absolutely necessitates a discussion of values. The position
that people are inevitably victims and can't be held to standards - that
dysfunctional behavior is basically a civil-rights matter - aside from being
condescending on the face of it, has pushed out the possibility of discourse and
impoverished the poverty debate.''

The reactions to Loury's views have occasionally been encouraging. ''I recently
got a letter,'' he says, ''from a retired black schoolteacher who's worried
about the attitudes of black kids today and the attitude of liberal white
teachers who are unwilling to push them.'' But most of the response from
liberals has been predictable. ''The message,'' he notes dryly, ''is that I'm a
mean-spirited, neo-Darwinian, reactionary, Reaganite tool.''

He recognizes that distortion of his positions by both sides is a virtual
inevitability, and so he has been obliged to come to terms with it. ''The
alternative,'' he says, ''is to be silent about important questions when you
think you have something important to say. The history of the last 20 years
argues that one should take one's risks.''

IT IS NOT NECESSARILY EMPTY OPTIMISM TO suggest that the present state of
affairs among liberals could be readily turned around. By virtually every
measure, conservative philosophy in the social arena remains further out of sync
with popular sentiment than our own. Even Ed Rollins concedes that Ronald Reagan
is the only person with his beliefs who could be elected today. ''If Jack Kemp
said the same things about abortion, I seriously doubt he could get away with
it.'' And fundamentalist influence within the Republican Party is hardly on the
wane.

In fact, by 1988, the Rev. Jerry Falwell and the Liberty Federation, his new
political organization, could well emerge as a major political liability for the
Republicans. ''When it comes right down to it,'' asserts former Representative
John Buchanan, a moderate Alabama Republican who was cut down by the Moral
Majority in 1980: ''We Americans are not a mean-spirited people. Ours is a
tradition of freedom and pluralism and diversity and, given half a chance, we
will reject a doctrine so authoritarian and devoid of compassion.''

But it is not via an ideological version of negative advertising that we can
hope to reclaim the public spirit. It will not be enough merely to point up the
gap between our adversaries' professed piety and their evident impatience with
the niceties of constitutional law. It is not enough even to make the case that,
by rendering the success-at-any-cost ethic so harrowingly respectable, the right
has itself fostered a nationwide epidemic of precisely the sort of amorality it
professes to deplore.

It is, rather, for us liberals to assert, on our own terms, that values do
matter; to embrace collectively the proposition that an unembarrassed sense of
morality is essential both to the formulation of public policy and to the life
of the culture itself.

L IKE MANY OTHERS who have lately grown impatient with what he calls ''the
liberal litmus tests,'' Brooklyn Assemblyman Daniel L. Feldman, co-author of the
recent New York State law mandating that covers of pornographic magazines be
kept under wraps, tends to be outspoken. Last spring, he was among those who
flew to Bitburg, West Germany, to protest the President's visit. But he is also
enormously attentive to nuances. A former aide to Elizabeth Holtzman when she
was a Representative from Brooklyn, the author of a thoughtful volume on
governmental reform and a lawyer with a history of defending civil liberties,
Feldman angered more than a few of his constituents in 1984 by helping to kill
another piece of ''values'' legislation, one intended to keep minors from
browsing through pornographic materials.

''I felt then,'' he tells me, ''and I feel now, that that bill created First
Amendment problems. This one doesn't.''

This one has, however, created other problems for him. ''Even my father doesn't
like the bill. He's 82, and a libertarian, and he has good instincts. We've
never disagreed on any issue before.''

He pauses. ''Believe me, it's hardly my idea of a good time, being perceived as
some sort of right-wing crazy. But I'll tell you, something like this really
drives it home. How in the world did we take up the view that people walking
into a grocery store should have to be assaulted by pornography? The
Constitution doesn't say that.''

Noticing a stack of uncorrected midterms on the desk before him - he also
teaches at a couple of local colleges -he seizes upon an intriguing metaphor:
''Pornography is an elective course. The Constitution protects your right to
take it, but it doesn't require you to take it.

''The problem, really, is that we've been so lazy for so long.'' He pauses,
then, unexpectedly, smiles. ''Who knows, maybe that's the one good thing that
will come of Reagan. Maybe he'll be the one to force us out of our intellectual
stupor.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Eden Ross Lipson

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 290 words


HOME FRONT. By Patti Davis with Maureen Strange Foster. (Crown, $15.95.) Despite
its catalogue of flaws as narrative fiction, this roman a clef by President
Reagan's daughter offers a tiny harvest of redeeming social value. Modestly
veiled as Beth Canfield, the daughter of the Republican Governor of California
in the late 1960's, Miss Davis reveals nothing about her parents. Her father is
genial, distant and dim, and her mother is dainty, distant and determined. Mrs.
Canfield's rules for feminine behavior in courtship include: ''Never order soup
on a first date'' and ''three places a boy may put his hand: in your hand,
around your shoulders, and around your waist.'' In her Brentwood Hills childhood
''the sun always seemed to shine on Sundays,'' but in adolescence Beth is at
boarding school in Arizona with her horse. Her roommate's boyfriend drops out
and joins the Marine Corps. Greg's letters from basic training and Vietnam, and
their subsequent affair, bring the television war into Beth's daily life.
Starting college near Chicago in 1969, Beth quickly learns to ''make skirts out
of bedspreads,'' go to meetings and demonstrations and, while her roommate
sleeps, ''light a kerosene lamp and work on my poems.'' Miss Davis doggedly
links each headline event of the war years to the campus response and the
parallel domestic schisms found then in so many families, but magnified by
public life. With its inclusion of every stereotype from the Governor to wounded
and maimed veterans, including campus activists, this is an earnest and
well-intentioned souvenir from the receding past. Trivial pursuit of these pages
is barely justified by her father's positions then and now, and the familiarity
of the rite of passage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHILDREN'S BOOKS;
Bookshelf

SECTION: Section 7; Page 37, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 224 words


Additional titles of interest:

THE WOMAN IN THE MOON: And Other Tales of Forgotten Heroines. By James Riordan.
Illustrated by Angela Barrett. Dial. $11.95. (Ages 8 and up) A British
folklorist's collection of tales from around the world -from the Plains Indians
of North America to Norway, Vietnam, Japan and Ghana - in which the heroines
''are central characters in their own right.'' The handsome illustrations are in
black and white.

GOLDEN GIRL. By Nancy Tilly. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $11.95. (Ages 12 and up) A
first novel about the tribulations of Penny Askew, a contemporary 13-year-old
girl growing up in the old-fashioned town of Kingsport on the North Carolina
coast.

RAMONA FOREVER. By Beverly Cleary. Yearling/ Dell. Paper, $2.95. (Ages 8 to 12)
Ramona Quimby is now, in her fifth book, in the third grade and there is a lot
going on in her life - her father wants to be a teacher, her mother is going to
have another baby and Aunt Bea is getting married. It's as wonderfully
believable as the other volumes and a fine continuation.

I TOUCH. Written and illustrated by Rachel Isadora. Greenwillow. $11.75. (Ages 9
months to 3 years) An enchantingly pretty toddler considers people and objects
in her life - her bear, cereal, cat and mother. The lollipop is sticky, daddy's
beard scratches - the hot cup remains untouched.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustration from ''The Woman in the Moon''

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SIKH HELD IN GANDHI MURDER PLOT IS TO GO ON TRIAL

BYLINE: By LEONARD BUDER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 750 words


A 35-year-old Sikh, a computer scientist who has lived and worked in the United
States since 1982, is to go on trial today in Federal District Court in Brooklyn
on charges that he plotted to assassinate Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India
when he visited this country last year.

The defendant, Gurpartap Singh Birk, a resident alien who lived in the Park
Slope section Brooklyn when he was arrested last May, is also accused of
conspiring to purchase explosives and weapons as part of a plan to foment
revolution in India, of violating the United States Neutrality Act and of other
offenses.

Two other Sikhs - Lal Singh, whom the authorities identified as a resident of
Queens, and Ammand Singh, for whom the authorities said they had no further
identification at the time of the indictment - were indicted on the same charges
but have eluded arrest.

Mr. Birk, who is now being held at the Metropolitan Correctional Center in
Manhattan, could face life imprisonment if convicted of the most serious
charges, according to an assistant United States Attorney, Charles E. Rose, who
will lead the prosecution.

'A Lot of Angry Talk'

Mr. Birk, who had been working at Automated Tolls Inc., of Mount Vernon, N.Y.,
has denied the charges. He contends that he is being prosecuted as part of an
attempt to stop the Sikh people from creating an independent country in the
Punjab region of India and because the United States is seeking to win favor
with Indian Government.

''He had an enormous rage toward the Indian Government because of what the
government did to the Sikhs,'' one of Mr. Birk's lawyers, William M. Kunstler,
said Friday.

''He may have engaged in a lot of angry talk, but nothing happened,'' Mr.
Kunstler said. ''He did not do anything.''

Mr. Gandhi - the target of the purported assassination plot for which Mr. Birk
and the two others were charged - is the son of Indira Gandhi, who was
assassinated in October 1984, purportedly by two Sikh guards.

Mr. Gandhi succeeded his mother as Prime Minister and his subsequent visit last
June to the United States occurred without incident.

Mr. Birk and four other Sikhs were also charged by the Federal authorities in
Louisiana last May with planning to assassinate Bhajan Lal, Chief Minister of
the Indian state of Haryana, who was then in New Orleans for medical treatment.

But the charges were dismissed by a Federal judge on the grounds that Mr. Lal,
who was not here on official state business, was not an ''internationally
protected person'' under United States law. The Government is appealing the
ruling.

No state charges have been filed in the case.

Case Outlined in Affidavit

The purported plot against to kill Mr. Gandhi and the other acts that will
figure in the trial, which is to start tomorrow, were outlined in an affidavit
filed last May in Federal District Court in Brooklyn by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and the Secret Service.

The affidavit said that an undercover operative met with Mr. Birk and Lal Singh
at the New York Hilton Hotel on Jan. 26, 1985. The undercover operative was
later identified as Thomas R. Norris, an F. B. I. agent and ''an expert in urban
guerrilla warfare.'' In 1976, Mr. Norris, then a Navy lieutenant, was presented
with a Medal of Honor for service in Vietnam by President Gerald R. Ford.

Mr. Norris, who as an undercover agent used the name Tom Nichols, posed as
someone ''with expertise in explosives and weapons'' and was introduced to them
by Joseph F. Camper, who ran a camp for training mercenaries in Alabama that Lal
Singh and other Sikhs, but not Mr. Birk, had attended.

In two subsequent meetings, the affidavit said, Mr. Birk and Lal Singh, told Mr.
Norris that they represented a group whose purpose was to ''cause the
revolutionary overthrow of the present Government of India'' and that they
wanted to smuggle into India enough explosives to blow up a large bridge and a
36-story building.

And on April 27, the documents said, while driving to a New Jersey site that Mr.
Birk and Lal Singh said would be a training site for the group's activities,
they purportedly told Mr. Norris that their group was looking for someone to
assassinate Mr. Gandhi during his trip to the United States.

Mr. Birk, according to material made public by Mr. Kunstler, was born in the
Punjab area, and received his secondary and university education in London.

The material Mr. Kunstler made available said Mr. Birk held a Ph.D. in computer
and medical electronics.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gurpartap Singh Birk (AP)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS DIGEST: MONDAY, MARCH 10, 1986

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 385 words


The Economy The prospect of smaller deficits is changing the debate about future
economic policies. Signs that $200 billion budget deficits are a thing of the
past could reinforce President Reagan's opposition to cuts in spending for
Social Security and the military and stiffen his opposition to a tax increase,
economists note. But some are fearful that the forecasts of smaller deficits
could divert attention from the deficit problem before it is really solved.
[Page A1.] Weak economic statistics may push interest rates lower during the
next few weeks, but the decline is not expected to be as sharp as during the
past month. [D1.] A resurgence in fixed-rate mortgages is raising concern that
savings institutions could be hurt as they were in the 1970's and early 1980's
if interest rates climb again. [D1.] Companies Peoples Jewellers raised its bid
for Zale, the nation's largest jewelry retailer, to $45 a share in cash and
notes, from $40. Zale's board refused last Monday to consider the first bid.
[D1.] Altman's has offered its president's job to a Dallas retailer, Jack
Schultz of Sanger-Harris, industry sources say. [D2.] International Western
Europe's economic prospects are at a 10-year peak, thanks to the sustained drop
in oil prices and the value of the dollar. [D1.] A long-term decline in oil
prices would hamper Mikhail S. Gorbachev's efforts to revitalize the Soviet
economy. [D10.] OPEC oil production will average 800,000 barrels a day less in
the first three months of this year than in the last quarter of 1985, dropping
to 16.8 million, the International Energy Agency reported. [D11.] Saudi Arabia
is set to announce its budget, which is expected to be lower because of the drop
in oil revenues. [D11.] Vietnam is committed to major reforms in its economy.
The change comes after years of hesitancy and disagreement within the Vietnamese
Communist Party. [D10.] Today's Columns The battle over House trade bills may
intensify with the formation of a business lobbying group. Washington Watch.
[D2.] The futures industry is suffering internal strains that political friends
will not be able to help. Futures/Options. [D4.] Volume on the Big Board
typically reaches a peak before stock prices form their top, one analyst says.
Market Place. [D8.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI'S ECONOMIC REVOLUTION

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section D; Page 10, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 951 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


After years of hesitancy and disagreement within the Vietnamese Communist Party,
Hanoi now appears to be committed to major reforms in almost every area of the
nation's economic life.

''We consider this a revolution in our country,'' Hong Ha, the editor of the
People's Daily, the party newspaper, said in a recent interview. In a strongly
worded New Year's Day editorial, the People's Daily cited ''many errors and
shortcomings'' in the country's economic management, and said there were a
''string of burning problems'' that had to be tackled this year.

The task will be a large one. With a per capita income of between $120 and $160,
according to the best international estimates, Vietnam ranks among the world's
poorest nations, falling steadily behind most of its Asian neighbors.

Mr. Ha, a youthful-looking 57-year-old party central committee member who was
wearing a stylish cavalry twill suit, pastel shirt and fashionable woolen tie
when he met reporters in his well-furnished office, said that the increased
production of consumer goods - including textiles, paper and bicycle parts -
would be one of this year's economic priorities.

Peasants Need Materials

''The peasants are also demanding building materials,'' he added.

But more fundamental than what Vietnam hopes to produce, Mr. Ha said, was how
this production would be carried out. He said the country needed new economic
management to monitor cost effectiveness, productivity and quality control.

Woefully inadequate communcation and transportation systems, an absence of
reliable statistics, unworkable and discouraging investment practices and even
the country's tight security net would have to be reassessed, he said.

''We have to be more dynamic,'' he said.

The Communists' Sixth Party Congress, called for the end of this year, will have
to endorse changes, pressed by the country's chief planner, Vo Van Kiet, to make
them official. But already there are sure signs that the measures are being
taken seriously.

Several Western reporters who recently visited Hanoi and toured the countryside
- where some agricultural reforms are already being tested - heard officials and
farmers alike using phrases such as ''cost analysis,'' ''streamlined labor
forces'' and ''consumer demand.'' But with one eye on the party hardliners, they
also talk about ''socialist accounting'' and describe saving money as a
''revolutionary activity.''

The Vietnamese say their models - particularly for incentive systems and
encouraging private initiative -are Moscow, Hungary or East Germany, noting that
many young Vietnamese work, or are educated, in Soviet bloc countries.

Watching Peking

Foreign diplomats here say Hanoi has been watching Peking's progress very
carefully. Just as in China, the Vietnamese say, farmers here are beginning to
improve their lives at a rate unknown to city dwellers. Under a five-year-old
experimental ''contract'' system of farming, production of foodstuffs over an
agreed amount can be disposed of by the individual farmer or his cooperative.

Reporters visiting a cooperative farm in Hai Hung province were told how each
farmer is also entitled to grow crops of his choosing on 5 percent of the land
he works for the cooperative. Produce and meat from private plots is sold at
busy markets in rural towns. In variety and freshness of food, a meal in the
countryside beats anything Hanoi's best hotels can offer.

Vietnam's planners have also been watching the trade patterns of Southeast
Asia's prosperous non-Communist neighbors, as some of these countries -
Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand in particular -find their overseas
markets shrinking in a slower world economy.

Regional Trade

Hanoi - or more often Ho Chi Minh City, the former South Vietnamese capital of
Saigon, which retains some economic independence - has been having some success
at increasing trade with regional countries looking for new markets, despite an
official boycott linked to Vietnam's continued occupation of Cambodia.

Recent figures from the Thai Farmers' Bank, one of Thailand's leading financial
institutions, show that Singapore's business community had almost doubled trade
with Vietnam between 1980 and 1984, from $67 million to $120 million. And an air
cargo service was recently started between the Malaysian capital of Kuala Lumpur
and Ho Chi Minh City.

There is no way to measure the additional income in smuggled goods. Many of the
luxury items that find their way to Hanoi come from Bangkok or Singapore.
Imported beer and whisky found in hotels catering to foreigners frequently bear
the label ''Singapore duty not paid.''

The Japanese, whose Government also professes to follow an official embargo on
aid, recently held a trade fair in Ho Chi Minh City for 18 private companies.
The companies selling what one diplomat here described as exactly the kind of
machinery the Vietnamese need in this stage of development: rice-harvesting
equipment, small hydro units and power generators and other simple, but
critical, technology.

Japanese Seek Longer Stay

Japanese businessmen, who now get three-to-six-month visas from Hanoi, are
hoping to be able to move in permanently next year, a diplomat said.

Vietnam's biggest drawbacks to increased trade, diplomats say, include its lack
of hard-currency reserves to pay for imports or buy needed technology, a poor
transportation system and what one foreign resident of Hanoi decribed as ''no
sense at all of how to make a profit.''

''What Vietnam has not got,'' this European said, ''is a cadre of highly
educated, free-market economists -usually American trained - like those who have
guided development in the rest of Asia.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of food merchants displaying wares at market in village of Di Su
(NYT/Barbara Crossette).

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN SEES A 'MORAL OBLIGATION' BY U.S. TO AID NICARAGUAN REBELS

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 10


President Reagan, conceding that his proposed $100 million aid package for the
Nicaraguan rebels faces an uphill battle in Congress, said today that the United
States had a ''moral obligation'' to provide the assistance.

Mr. Reagan, in a speech here to about 200 conservative supporters, added that he
believed Congressional support of his plan was growing.

''This an uphill battle in which we are engaged, but we are making progress,''
Mr. Reagan said. ''You can sense that the tide is turning in favor of the
democratic resistance,'' referring to the insurgents fighting the Sandinista
Government.

White House officials said privately that the proposal for $70 million in
military assistance and $30 million in so-called humanitarian aid would be
defeated in both houses if votes were taken today. They said Mr. Reagan was
prepared to compromise with Congress, but was rejecting such a suggestion for
now in the hope of getting the strongest aid package possible before the House
votes next week.

The official said White House lobbyists were heartened by the favorable
reception given the measure by several influential House members. He singled out
Representatives Dante B. Fascell and Claude D. Pepper, Democrats of Florida, and
Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin.

At the same time, the officials said they believed Mr. Reagan's selection of
Philip C. Habib as a special envoy to Central America would help convince
Congress that the President favored a negotiated settlement in Nicaragua. Mr.
Habib spent the afternoon on Capitol Hill meeting with several Congressional
leaders.

Democrats critical of the aid package have warned that its approval could mean
that more than $100 million would be available for the contras, as the rebels
are known. They said that was because Mr. Reagan wanted to end Congressional
restrictions on using additional money in covert Central Intelligence Agency and
Pentagon accounts.

In what appeared to be a shift in tactics as the Administration's lobbying
effort entered its second week, Mr. Reagan made no direct attack on his critics
in his speech today.

He also met privately and individually with two Republican Senators, Daniel J.
Evans of Washington and Nancy Landon Kassebaum of Kansas. Last week, in a speech
on the Senate floor, Mrs. Kassebaum rebuked as ''highly offensive'' the
Administration's effort to portray the aid proposal as what she said was a
choice ''between good freedom fighters and evil Marxists.''

Mr. Reagan told the conservative audience today that aiding the rebels was not
''some narrow partisan issue,'' but a ''national security issue of paramount
importance.''

''On this issue, we must act not as Republicans, nor as Democrats, but as
Americans,'' he said. ''At a critical early stage, the United States gave hope
and help to the freedom fighters in Nicaragua. We have a moral obligation now,
after a couple of years' gap, to continue that support.''

Quoting Senator Henry M. Jackson, the Washington Democrat who died in 1983, Mr.
Reagan said, ''In matters of national security, the best politics is no
politics.''

Says Consensus Is Growing

Mr. Reagan said that in the last few years, a ''slow reconstruction'' of the
anti-Communist coalition had emerged on Capitol Hill that reflected a return of
the bipartisan consensus on foreign policy that once existed.

''I don't have to tell any of you about far left ideology and the power that it
once wielded here,'' he said.

''An ideology that automatically identified anyone wearing fatigues, carrying a
rifle and spouting Marxist slogans as a liberator of his nation, an ideology
that permitted many liberals to practice selective indignation, to hold to a
double standard for certain dictators, to judge these dictators, no matter how
repressive or cruel, less harshly because they called themselves Socialists,
Marxists or Communists. But as I say, I think all of this is fading now and
realism is returning.''

Mr. Reagan said the new mood he saw in Congress was reflected by its lifting
last year of crubs on covert assistance to rebels in Angola. The Administration
is considering providing about $10 million to $15 million to Angolan rebels
fighting the Marxist Government there.

''What we're seeing is the end of the post-Vietnam syndrome, the return of
realism about the Communist danger,'' he said. ''And now we're ready for one of
the final acts.''

In response to reporters' questions later, Larry Speakes, the White House
spokesman, said the President's remarks were not an implied criticism of the
Carter Administration, which initially tried to work with the Sandinista
Government after the overthrow of Gen. Anastasio Somosa Debayle in 1979.

Mr. Speakes said Mr. Reagan was referring to ''that group of people who have
historically opposed'' a United States policy of standing up against Communism.

Mr. Reagan equated the situation of the Nicaraguan rebels with that faced by
Hungarian rebels in the 1956 uprising against Soviet domination.

''The tragic plea could not be answered,'' he said. ''That was when the tanks
rolled down the streets, the Soviet tanks, in Hungary and crushed that
revolution.

''Now we have the chance to answer a similar plea.''

Mr. Reagan, who said last week the aid was needed so that American troops would
never be sent to Nicaragua, said today that the contras did not want United
States soldiers to be involved.

Denies Rights Violations

Mr. Reagan also denied that the contras had committed atrocities in Nicaragua.
Several organizations, including Amnesty International and Americas Watch, have
made such assertions.

Mr. Reagan said he had been told that the rebels had refused to destroy a power
plant in Nicaragua, although such a tactic was being used by guerrillas opposed
to the United States-backed Government in El Salvador.

''And those contras, those freedom fighters said no, that they would hurt the
people of Nicaragua, and we don't want to hurt the people, our people, in
Nicaragua,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Patrick Buchanan and President Reagan (NYT/Paul Hosefros)
(page A8)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

108 MORE VIETNAM DEAD TO BE LISTED AT MEMORIAL

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 526 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 10


The names of 108 Americans killed in the Vietnam War will be added next month to
the 58,022 names of the dead and missing already etched into the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial here, leaders of the memorial's search committee said today.

The roster on the glistening black granite monument wall will then total 58,130,
which will probably be the final figure, according to Jan C. Scruggs, the
founder and president of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund.

The 108 were initially omitted because they did not die in the Vietnam combat
zone, but the Defense Department changed its rules to include two new categories
of war casualties: those killed as a result of aircraft accidents while
returning from combat missions over the war zone or on their way there, and
those who died of wounds received in Vietnam.

Today the search committee called on the families and friends of the 108 to come
forward and identify themselves so that as many next of kin as possible could be
formally invited to a rededication of the monument on Memorial Day, May 26. The
privately financed memorial, transferred to the United States Park Service on
Veterans Day 1984, has proved to be a leading Washington tourist attraction,
with nearly four million visitors last year.

Donation of $80,000

John Wheeler P. Wheeler 3d, the memorial fund chairman, said the $80,000 cost of
the belated engraving was being contributed by the Ford Motor Company.

Mr. Scruggs said the names of the 108 Vietnam dead would be read aloud at the
Memorial Day ceremony, by family members, if possible, or by members of their
branch of the armed services.

The Pentagon's re-examination of the circumstances of the 108 service deaths was
begun last year after Leo Broadhead, a retired Air Force colonel from Oklahoma,
visited the memorial and found that the name of his son, 1st Lieut. Larry
Broadhead, was not engraved on the monument wall. Colonel Broadhead's son was
the co-pilot of a B-52 bomber that crashed on takeoff from Guam on its way to a
mission over Vietnam in May 1969, killing all six on board, and Colonel
Broadhead said today he was ''furious'' at the omission of the six names.

After inquiries at the Pentagon by the two Oklahoma Senators, Don Nickles and
David L. Boren, the deaths of Lieutenant Broadhead and 107 others were
reclassified.

Next of kin should write or telephone the Vietnam Veterans Family Search, 2550 M
Street N.W., Washington, D.C. 20037. The telephone number is 202-659-9419.

Names From Tri-State Area

In addition to Lieutenant Broadhead, the names released today included these
from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut:

Connecticut: Joseph Anthony Carinci of Derby, Marine Corps; Allan Lombard
Dunning Jr. of Stonington, Navy.

New Jersey: Ronald W. Ringwall of Millburn, Air Force; Charles Albert Philhower
of Morristown, Navy; Edward Richard Stephan of Mercer, Navy.

New York: Robert H. Aldrich of Port Washington, Navy; Joseph Stephen Henriquez
of Long Island, Navy; Miguel A. Hernandez-Diaz of New York City, Air Force;
Allan S. Major of Maspeth, Air Force; Michael Kelly McGuire of Buffalo, Navy;
Abraham Schwartz of Brooklyn, Air Force.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 12, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Says It Found More U.S. War Dead

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 96 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 11


Vietnam has told United States officials that it has found the remains of 21
Americans and can identify 10 of them by name, a senior Pentagon official said
today.

Richard L. Armitage, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International
Security Affairs, also said Vietnam has agreed to look into three reports that
Americans have been seen alive in Vietnam.

The developments took place at a meeting of technical experts late last month in
Hanoi. The 21 remains have yet to be repatriated, but the families of the 10
identified by the the Vietnamese have been notified.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 12, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Habib: The Man With the Golden Suitcase

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1065 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 11


Virtually every postwar President has found himself calling on special envoys to
handle particularly difficult international assignments. President Truman asked
George C. Marshall to try to resolve the Chinese civil war; President Johnson
used Cyrus R. Vance on missions to Cyprus and South Korea, and President Reagan
has called repeatedly on an apparent favorite, Philip C. Habib.

Not all these special envoys succeed in their tasks. But the publicity
surrounding their mission often buys the President time to deal with political
ramifications at home while the international crisis is afforded expert care.

Mr. Habib has been asked twice in the last month to take on vastly different
problems, first the Philippines and now Central America.

The latest assignment, announced by Mr. Reagan with some fanfare at the White
House last Friday, was for Mr. Habib to find ''a diplomatic solution'' to the
problems of the region.

A Cynical Reaction by Some

Not unexpectedly, since it came just as the White House was building up a
crescendo of pressure on Congress to approve $70 million in military aid for the
Nicaraguan rebels, the naming of Mr. Habib, a man with little Latin American
experience, provoked a cynical reaction among even some of his friends in
Washington. They viewed the move as a political effort by Mr. Reagan to blunt
the charge that he is interested only in a military solution in Nicaragua.

A longtime Habib admirer who is no fan of Mr. Reagan but has himself gone on
many special diplomatic missions said he regretted that Mr. Habib had taken on
such an undefined task. With Mr. Reagan under criticism at home, the former
diplomat said, Mr. Habib will look as if he is just a cover to allow the
President to say he is negotiating.

But others say that even if Mr. Reagan has only the vaguest thoughts of
negotiating a settlement in Nicaragua, he may end up engaged in doing just that
once Mr. Habib gets started.

Mr. Habib, a gregarious diplomat who was forced into early retirement seven
years ago because of a number of near-fatal heart attacks, spent most of his
career in the Far East and the Middle East. But ''retirement'' has seen him
accept numerous special assignments in the Carter and Reagan Administrations.

On his mission to Manila last month, Mr. Habib apparently did little more than
meet a great number of Filipinos and then come home and tell Mr. Reagan that his
friend Ferdinand E. Marcos could not survive as President of the Philippines.

Mr. Reagan had seemed most reluctant to acknowledge that Mr. Marcos was unsuited
to serve after seemingly rigging his own re-election. But after meeting with Mr.
Habib, Mr. Reagan went along with the recommendations of Secretary of State
George P. Shultz that Mr. Marcos be urged to leave the Philippines.

A State Department official said Mr. Habib was selected for the Philippines
assignment on the recommendation of Michael H. Armacost, Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs, who as a former envoy to Manila felt that Mr.
Marcos had to go but knew that Mr. Reagan would be skeptical of such a
suggestion coming just from the State Department.

Mr. Reagan, who admired Mr. Habib's work as a special Middle East envoy in
1981-83, agreed to the assignment because he trusted Mr. Habib's judgment, White
House aides said.

The question that is being asked privately around the State Department is
whether Mr. Habib will come back from Central America with another message that
would otherwise not be acceptable to Mr. Reagan.

The Administration has refused to negotiate directly with the Sandinista
government until it opens negotiations with its own opponents, both those still
in Nicaragua and the rebels known as the contras.

Most other governments in Latin America and many members of Congress say the
Administration has not given diplomacy a genuine chance. Some State Department
officials say it is inevitable that Mr. Habib, after surveying the situation in
Central America, will suggest more emphasis on diplomacy, even if it means
engaging the Nicaraguans.

Mr. Habib, who celebrated his 66th birthday Feb. 25, is due to depart Wednesday
for El Salvador, the first of many countries he will visit in coming weeks. A
White House official said Mr. Habib had permission to travel anywhere he wanted
and to confer with anyone he wanted, with one significant exception: He cannot
go to Nicaragua or talk to Sandinista leaders.

When asked why the President seemed so enamored of Mr. Habib, one State
Department official who was involved in recommending him for the Latin
assignment said, ''It was simpler than you think.''

''Habib emerged from the Philippines as our senior negotiator, our senior
troubleshooter,'' he said. ''And when we decided we needed a senior negotiator
and a senior troubleshooter, he was the obvious choice.''

A White House official asked to list the reasons Mr. Reagan so often entrusted
Mr. Habib with assignments said: ''One, he is a recognized troubleshooter; two,
he has broad and deep experience in crisis diplomacy; three, he is a man's man
type of diplomat, straight talk, no fawning advice; four, he is able to give
independent judgments that override bureaucratic concerns; and five, because of
his reputation, which shows that the President is attaching a great deal of
importance to getting internal negotiations between Nicaragua and the
opposition.''

''And you can't underestimate that the President wanted to go from the 'success'
of the Philippines to a 'success' in Central America,'' he said.

Habib Is Avoiding the Press

As usual, Mr. Habib was avoiding the press as he planned for his next mission.
Throughout his career, in which he first achieved prominence by being one of
those who told President Johnson in 1968 that a military solution was not
feasible in Vietnam, Mr. Habib has specialized in saying as little as possible
to the press. He likes to banter with reporters but rarely has provided a view
on his own thinking.

Last Friday, when Mr. Reagan put him in front of the cameras to name him to the
new post, Mr. Habib said, ''I have no illusions about the complexity of the
issues in Central America and the difficulties in reaching a negotiated
solution.''

''Nevertheless,'' he said, ''I pledge my efforts to work with our democratic
friends and neighbors in the region toward a peaceful and democratic outcome.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Philip Habib (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 12, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: TWO NEW HISTORY SERIES

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 911 words


Having put the final editorial touches on the 20th volume in its ''Vietnam
Experience'' series, the Boston Publishing Company has just about written
''finis'' to a collection that has sold more than five million copies. But the
company, founded in 1978 for the express purpose of publishing the Vietnam
books, is not about to go out of business now that it has exhausted its original
subject.

In fact, it recently joined with Field Publications for two more major series:
''American Wars,'' 15 volumes dealing with each of the nation's armed conflicts,
and ''Empires,'' 14 volumes focusing on the life and times of 28 of history's
great empires and their leaders. The first volume of ''Empires,'' the American
edition of a series originally published by Rizzoli in Italy, will be available
this summer. The first volume of ''American Wars'' will be available early next
year.

Field Publications will invest $4.5 million to finance development of the two
series, most of it for ''American Wars,'' plus another $2.5 million in authors'
royalties. The Middletown, Conn., company publishes the Weekly Reader, a
newspaper for children. It also recently signed a contract with Jim Henson,
creator of the Muppets, to begin a Fraggle Rock book club for children 4 to 8,
and it is testing a Muppet Babies book club for children 3 to 7. Both will be
part of Field's Weekly Reader Book Clubs, said to be the largest children's book
club operation in the world.

''American Wars'' and ''Empires'' will be edited by Robert Manning, editor in
chief of Boston Publishing. The company, founded by Robert George, who was a
Marine Corps pilot in Vietnam, was sold to Time-Life Books in 1982 but
repurchased last year by Mr. George and Mr. Manning. Although both new series
may be available in bookstores, they will be sold primarily through direct mail,
as are the ''Vietnam Experience'' volumes.

At a time when the courts have found that even novelists can commit libel, on
grounds that their depictions of certain reputed fictional characters contained
more fact than fiction, Ben Stein would seem to be venturing into dangerous
territory. Mr. Stein, a prolific novelist and essayist, has just published ''Her
Only Sin'' (St. Martin's Press), a novel about a woman who becomes head of a
major Hollywood studio, and even before publication one of his characterizations
began causing a stir.

''When the book began circulating in galleys,'' Mr. Stein said, ''five different
women studio executives insisted to me they know they are the main character in
thin disguise.'' Two executives at the same studio telephoned to say how angry
they were that Mr. Stein wrote about them without permission; an executive at
another studio warned the author he would pay for mocking her, and yet another
told him his characterization had missed some of her best features.

Since Mr. Stein is the author of ''Dreemz,'' a memoir of Hollywood, it would be
highly unusual if ''Her Only Sin'' were not based to some degree on real people
and real events in the city he knows so well. Moreover, since Mr. Stein is also
a lawyer (as is his wife, Alexandra), he is unlikely to be ignorant of the laws
of libel. In fact, though, he did not have to look very far for a role model.
''To the extent that my main character is based on anyone,'' Mr. Stein said,
''it is based on my wife, a vice president of United Artists, and she has not
complained at all.''

''Margaret Mead and Samoa: The Making and Unmaking of an Anthropological Myth''
by Derek Freeman, which called into question Miss Mead's research and
conclusions, set off perhaps the biggest controversy in the history of
anthropology. Published by Harvard University Press in 1983, the book suddenly
transformed the author, an Australian anthropologist, into something of a
celebrity (Harvard sent him on a two-week publicity tour) as well as an object
of considerable scholarly passion.

Anthropological journals still carry letters about the controversy and the book
continues to generate interest. Pelican recently published a paperback edition
in this country, it has been published in England and there have been
translations into German, Italian and Japanese. To top it off, another
Australian anthropologist is writing a book about the controvery. And as for Mr.
Freeman, he is back in Canberra, where he is a professor emeritus at the
Australian National University, apparently none the worse for wear. ''I have
more than survived the 'fallout,' '' he said recently. ''The whole affair has
been immeasurably invigorating, instructive and salutary.''

The Smithsonian Institution published its first book in 1848, ''The Ancient
Monuments of the Mississippi Valley,'' by George Squier and Edwin Davis. Now it
is about to publish its first novel, ''Barawa and the Ways Birds Fly in the
Sky,'' by Michael Jackson.

This Michael Jackson is one of New Zealand's leading poets, and his novel is
based on oral and written history, legends and the author's anthropological
fieldwork in Africa. ''We're publishing this work because we have a long
tradition of pioneering anthropological research, and this novel offers a new
form of ethnographic inquiry,'' said Gail Grella, the marketing manager of the
Smithsonian Institution Press.

The book came to the press on the recommendation of two Smithsonian
anthropologists who knew of the author. Mr. Jackson has won major New Zealand
and Commonwealth poetry awards, but this is his first novel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 13, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY GROUNDS 2 HELICOPTER FLEETS AFTER MISHAPS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 412 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 12


The Army decided today to temporarily ground its two newest helicopter fleets,
the UH-60 Blackhawk and the AH-64 Apache, because of safety concerns.

It was the second time in less than a year that the fleet of Blackhawks had been
grounded and the second time in a month that the Apache fleet was ordered out of
the air.

The grounding of the Blackhawks was prompted by the crash of one of the
helicopters Tuesday at Fort Rucker, Ala., in a routine training flight. Three
soldiers died in the crash.

The Apaches were grounded because of an incident Tuesday in which a test pilot
had problems controlling the craft in flight. The pilot managed to set it down
without incident, but the Army decided to ground the entire fleet for
inspection.

Maj. Phil Soucy, an Army spokesman at the Pentagon, said the grounding orders
affected 643 Blackhawks and about 60 Apaches.

Both directives are ''temporary, precautionary measures,'' he added.

The spokesman said the Blackhawks would be grounded at least until the Army
determines the likely cause of the Fort Rucker crash, but he declined to predict
how long that would be.

Lieut. Col. David Burpee, another Army spokesman, said the Apache helicopters
would each return to the air after being inspected. He said the problem
experienced by the test pilot appeared to be mechanical.

The grounding of the Blackhawk, the Army's newest troop-carrying helicopter,
follows a similar grounding that lasted two months last spring after two crashes
in which 15 people died.

The Apache, the Army's newest attack helicopter, was grounded this year from
Jan. 30 to Feb. 20 after cracks were discovered in some rotor blades. That order
was lifted after investigators determined the cracks had been caused by an
improperly designed maintenance tool.

The Blackhawk is a twin-engine, single-rotor helicopter that is replacing the
aging UH-1 Huey copters of the Vietnam era as the Army's primary air assault and
air cavalry craft.

The Blackhawk, made by the Sikorsky Aircraft division of the United Technologies
Corporation in Stratford, Conn., costs about $4.9 million each.

The AH-64 Apache is replacing the Cobra helicopter gunship as the Army's primary
attack helicopter. They cost about $11.5 million apiece. Marty Moore, a
spokesman for Sikorsky, said he could not discuss any details of the Blackhawk
crash or the Army's decision to ground the helicopter. He said the company was
participating in the service's investigation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 13, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEWBURGH TRIES TO RECAPTURE ITS PAST GLORY

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1023 words

DATELINE: NEWBURGH, N.Y.


Few people here are optimistic enough to believe that things will ever look as
bright again as in 1952, when Look magazine named Newburgh that year's
''all-American city.''

But the recent announcement that a regional bank was planning to build its
headquarters here has been taken by many as a sign that the city's fortunes,
declining steadily for over two decades, may finally be looking up. With Key
Bank coming in, said the city's mayor, Joan Shapiro, Newburgh is becoming ''a
city to be reckoned with.''

''People had given up on Newburgh,'' Mayor Shapiro said. ''It might sound corny,
but the city was forsaken. It was considered the pits.''

Today, only the outlines remain of the city's former splendor, which dates from
the last century when Newburgh - 60 miles north of Manhattan -was a trading
center for goods passing from eastern Pennsylvania and upstate New York down the
Hudson River to the city.

The wide main street, which dips down to the river, is lined with gabled brick
buildings that long ago fell into disrepair.

The once-bustling waterfront of this city of 24,000 is desolate. Where ferries
used to dock and families strolled on Sunday afternoons, now there is a pile of
old cars discarded in a riverside dump.

Newburgh's decline began as highways replaced the river and the railroad as
preferred shipping routes, and the city's middle-class residents fled to the
newly built suburbs. Urban renewal projects that were never completed added to
the sense of dispair in the city in the 1960's and 70's. Some credit for the
city's rising spirits, community leaders say, belongs to Mayor Shapiro, a
self-professed ''big mouth'' who has criss-crossed the country touting Newburgh
to industry officials. The Mayor points with pride to the dozen or so businesses
that have moved to the city, among them a manufacturer of artificial Christmas
trees and an electric guitar factory.

But according to John D'Ambrosio, executive vice president of the Eastern Orange
County Chamber of Commerce, Newburgh is simply ''at the right place at the right
time,'' again.

With so many companies moving into the suburbs, ''Westchester and Rockland
County have been tapped out,'' he said. Orange County, of which Newburgh is the
largest city, is the next logical place to move to.

George Washington not only slept here, he lived here during the last years of
the Revolutionary War. Thomas Alva Edison came to Newburgh in 1884 to set up the
Montgomery Street Station, one of the world's first electric power generating
stations. Information like this comes in handy if you want to play the Orange
County Game, a local version of Trivial Pursuit. Here's a typical question:

Q: What famous American author was arrested by Newburgh police in the 19th
century? A: Edgar Allen Poe. Last summer, when Michael Krawetz, a graduate of
Newburgh Free Academy, the city's high school, appealed for help to build a
memorial to a classmate killed in Vietnam, he found the city's response
disappointing.

The story of the city's apparent apathy caught the attention of the columnist
Jim Brady, who took Newburgh to task in a syndicated article last fall. Mr.
Brady called the Vietnam soldier, Jack Wolpe, a hero that ''a town forgot.''

Dan Gordon, a television writer, saw Mr. Brady's column, and last month, the
story was the basis of an episode of the NBC series ''Highway to Heaven.''

The episode had a happy ending, and so, it seems, does the real-life tale. The
memorial has been expanded to honor about 1,000 local veterans from World War I
through Vietnam, and volunteers say they have raised almost all the money.

John McCormick, who heads the Preservation Association in Newburgh, remembers a
day, not long ago, when his group was called ''the hysterical society.''

But with Victorian houses in the city that once sold for $10,000 now valued at
more than 10 times that amount, most people have abandoned their sarcasm, Mr.
McCormick said. And a lot of them are kicking themselves about the houses razed.

Recently, the city's historic district was expanded to include more than 2,000
buildings, including hundreds of Victorian town houses and several Greek Revival
structures. The district is now larger than the one in Greenwich Village,
according to Mr. McCormick. ''That's a real feather in our cap,'' he said.

Whatever the prospects for Newburgh's future, currently one out of four
residents live below the poverty line. And with an influx of new residents has
come the fear that escalating rents will force many of the longtime tenants onto
the streets, increasing the city's already sizable homeless population.

''I'm getting scared of the rapid rise in rents,'' said Wilbert Sanchez,
executive director of Fuente, a Hispanic social services organization.
Apartments in Newburgh used to rent for $175 to $275 a month, Mr. Sanchez said,
''but that is totally history. Now they go for $475 or $575.''

He said he saw the number of homeless increasing nearly every day. ''If I had
1,000 apartments, I could fill them today,'' he said.

Mayor Shapiro has said that her administration was committed to solving the
city's housing problems.

''Realistically there has to be and there will be some gentrification,'' she
said. ''But this need not be a dirty word. There has to be a place for
everyone.''

An hour and a half from Manhattan and without a single sushi bar or Benetton
store, Newburgh might appear to have few attractions for yuppies. But the new
residents who are buying up the city's renovated brownstones say that its
spacious houses and magnificent scenery make up for missed pleasures.

Schuyler Bishop, a freelance writer, and his wife moved into a town house here
in November.

His early doubts became particularly acute, he said, when friends from lower
Manhattan brought rememberances of Italian pastries past.

Mr. Bishop's wife, Denise, tried to cheer him up by suggesting that they try
local fare. He found the cannoli equal to the best examples in Little Italy. And
the bill for two cappuccinos and three pastries? A mere $3.50.

''That's when I decided this was a really good place to live,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Newburgh, N.Y. and its Mayor, Joan Shapiro (NYT/Suzanne
DeChillo)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 13, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Books: History Lessons

BYLINE: By Bernard Gwertzman

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 686 words


THINKING IN TIME: The Uses of History for Decision Makers. By Richard E.
Neustadt and Ernest R. May. 329 pages. The Free Press. $19.95. IN explaining the
other day why President Reagan was so insistent on offering Ferdinand E. Marcos
haven in the United States, a State Department official said that Mr. Reagan was
determined that the former Philippine leader not be treated ''as shabbily as the
Shah of Iran.'' The official added, however, that Mr. Marcos was more concerned
that he not end up like the former ruler of South Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Diem, who
was killed during the coup that ousted him in 1963.

And, as the debate continues in Washington on whether to provide $100 million in
aid, including $70 million in military assistance, to the rebels of Nicaragua,
the critics in Congress are warning of ''slipping into another Vietnam.'' The
White House, for its part, is warning that failure to provide the aid will
hasten ''another Cuba'' in the hemisphere.

In short, historical analogy is well and thriving in Washington. Very little, in
fact, seems to happen in the nation's capital without something from the past
being brought to life for the sake of advancing the argument of one side or the
other. It is this phenomenon that has attracted the attention for the past 10
years of two Harvard professors, Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May, who have
jointly taught a course for middle level officials at the John F. Kennedy School
of Government on ''Uses of History.''

They authors say they started their course because they found not only that - as
might be expected - many in Washington were operating without knowing any
history ''and were unaware of suffering any lack,'' but that many
decision-makers ''used history in their decisions, at least for advocacy or for
comfort, whether they knew any or not.'' This book, a distillation of their
course, is meant as a blinking yellow light for those who are in public life,
such as policy makers, staff aides and reporters, so that before they burst
forth with some historical analogy they give some thought to whether it is
accurate, pertinent or apt.

In short, Professor Neustadt, a specialist on Presidential power, and Professor
May, who has written extensively on diplomatic history, are advocating more and
better use of history by those charged with making decisions. It is a rather
chatty book, with the frequent use of case studies to make their points. They
note, for instance, the ''crisis'' of late summer 1979 when the Carter
Administration came to the edge of a confrontation with the Soviet Union over
the ''discovery'' by American intelligence of a Soviet combat brigade in Cuba,
only to find out months later that the United States Government actually knew
about that brigade since 1962, but had collectively forgotten about it.

The case studies include an examination of the the ''Swine Flu'' scare of 1976,
when, because of a concern that the great influenza epidemic of 1918 might be
revisited, millions were spent on a vaccine that was not needed. They also cover
such different themes as the formation of the Social Security system in 1935,
and the analogies used by President Truman in the Korean War and President
Johnson in the Vietnam War. The Carter Administration, perhaps because it was so
recent, is devastated by the authors for numerous cases of mishandling history.
These historical sketches provide lively reading on their own.

But the authors are not trying to entertain as much as to instruct. Tips are
lavishly provided on how decision-makers and their advisers should act in a
crisis. First, they should sort out the facts. This means listing the ''known,''
the ''unclear'' and ''presumed.'' Secondly, the authors say, ''dust away
analogies that may cloud vision.'' Decision-makers or their aides should list
''likenesses'' and ''differences'' of past events with the present. Only then,
the authors say, should policy choices be explored and decisions made. If these
prudent suggestions were followed, officials just might stop making decisions
first and then seeking historical analogies to justify them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard Neustadt; photo of Ernest May (Martha Swope)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 14, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SAID TO WEIGH TRAINING CONTRAS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 857 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 13


Defense Department officials said tonight that President Reagan was prepared to
use military advisers to train rebels fighting the Nicaraguan Government if
Congress approved the $100 million in aid the President has requested for the
insurgents.

It was the first indication that the Administration was ready to give direct
assistance to the forces known as contras that are fighting the leftist
Sandinista Government in Managua.

The officials emphasized, however, that the United States advisers would not be
permitted to enter Nicaragua. They said the advisers would remain at training
bases outside of Nicaragua, meaning Honduras.

The officials also said the United States would be prepared to share
intelligence information with the contras. The official position of the
Administration had been to avoid contact between American officials and the
contras in Honduras and Nicaragua.

'No Specific Plans'

Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman said tonight, ''There are no specific
plans under consideration for any trainers for the contras.'' He said ''any
additional training component would be few in numbers.'' A senior White House
official, elaborating on Mr. Speakes comments, said that though there have never
been any specific plans to use American military personnel to train the contras,
the possibility was not out of the question.

But the official said that such an effort would be done mainly by military
personnel already in Honduras and that ''no more than a handful of additional
advisers would be needed.''

Insurgency and training other soldiers for insurgency is a primary mission of
the Army's Special Forces, popularly known as Green Berets, with headquarters at
Fort Bragg, N.C. The Green Berets trained insurgents and counterinsurgents in
Vietnam.

U.S. Would Consider Request

If the $100 million requested by the President, $30 million of which is for
nonlethal aid, is approved by Congress, the Pentagon officials said, the next
step would be to determine with the contras the weapons, equipment and training
they would need. At that time, they said, a request for help on training would
be considered favorably. The aid request is to be debated in the House on
Wednesday.Representative Michael D. Barnes, Democrat of Maryland and chairman of
the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere Affairs, said
tonight that the Administration's suggestions of using military advisers were
''obviously a major escalation of American involvement in the war.'' Mr. Barnes,
a vocal critic of the Administration's policy in Central America, said use of
advisers would be ''a significant factor that members of Congress will want to
consider.''

He said many members of Congress are concerned that American policy in Nicaragua
''will lead inevitably to the question as to whether or not to commit American
forces and this obviously is a step in that direction.''

Today the White House hastily organized a trip for a bipartisan group of
legislators to fly to El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua. The purpose of the
overnight trip, which starts Friday, White House officials said, was for the
legislators to get ''a first-hand assessment'' of the situation in the region.

In testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee on Wednesday, Gen. John
R. Galvin, the commander of American forces in Central America, called for
''comprehensive United States support'' for the Democratic Resistance Forces
that have bases in Honduras and mount forays across the border into Nicaragua.

Faster Improvement With Aid

Asked to explain ''comprehensive,'' the general said that the contras would
gradually improve themselves without America help and that they would improve
more rapidly with American help, but that ''if military experts were able to
work with them, they would improve faster.''

Pentagon officials said tonight that General Galvin had been looking ahead to
the time when the contras might ask for help.

The Defense Department and Central Intelligence Agency are currently prohibited
from providing intelligence information, military training or lethal equipment
to the contras under terms of a $27 million humanitarian aid package Congress
approved last year. Mr. Reagan has requested $100 million in assistance, without
a prohibition on the use of military advisers.

President Reagan, in an interview with The Baltimore Sun today, said: ''We feel
that if we are going to help them with weapons and arms that we ought to be
freed of those restrictions and allowed to provide this other assistance to
them.''

The President also said he wanted to be able ''to give them military
intelligence and to help with military planning.'' A transcript of the interview
was later issued by the White House.

The senior White House official said Mr. Reagan's interview remarks were
designed mainly to convey the President's desire to exchange intelligence
information with the contras. The official said he had no idea why the President
and other Administration officials had raised such a delicate issue at a
critical time in the Congressional debate over whether to provide the aid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 15, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TEXT OF THE REAGAN MESSAGE TO CONGRESS ON FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 5587 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


Following is the text of President Reagan's message, titled ''Freedom, Regional
Security and Global Peace,'' which was sent to Congress today:

I. America's Stake in Regional Security For more than two generations the United
States has pursued a global foreign policy. Both the causes and consequences of
World War II made clear to all Americans that our participation in world
affairs, for the rest of the century and beyond, would have to go beyond just
the protection of our national territory against direct invasion.

We had learned the painful lessons of the 1930's, that there could be no safety
in isolation from the rest of the world. Our nation has responsibilities and
security interests beyond our borders - in the rest of this hemisphere, in
Europe, in the Pacific, in the Middle East and in other regions - that require
strong, confident and consistent American leadership.

In the past several weeks, we have met these responsibilities - in difficult
circumstances - in Haiti and in the Philippines. We have made important
proposals for peace in Central America and southern Africa.

There and elsewhere, we have acted in the belief that our peaceful and
prosperous future can best be assured in a world in which other peoples too can
determine their own destiny, free of coercion or tyranny from either at home or
abroad.

The prospects for such a future -to which America has contributed in innumerable
ways - seem brighter than they have been in many years. Yet we cannot ignore the
obstacles that stand in its path. We cannot meet our responsibilities and
protect our interests without an active diplomacy backed by American economic
and military power.

We should not expect to solve problems that are insoluble, but we must not be
half-hearted when there is a prospect of success. Wishful thinking and
stop-and-go commitments will not protect America's interests.

Our foreign policy in the postwar era has sought to enhance our nation's
security by pursuit of four fundamental goals:

* We have sought to defend and advance the cause of democracy, freedom, and
human rights throughout the world.

* We have sought to promote prosperity and social progress through a free, open
and expanding market-oriented global economy.

* We have worked diplomatically to help resolve dangerous regional conflicts.

* We have worked to reduce and eventually eliminate the danger of nuclear war.

Sustained by a strong bipartisan consensus, these basic principles have
weathered contentious domestic debates through eight administrations, both
Democratic and Republican. They have survived the great and rapid changes of an
ever-evolving world.

There are good reasons for this continuity. These broad goals are linked
together, and they in turn match both our ideals and our interests. No other
policy could command the broad support of the American people.

A foreign policy that ignored the fate of millions around the world who seek
freedom would be a betrayal of our national heritage. Our own freedom, and that
of our allies, could never be secure in a world where freedom was threatened
everywhere else. Our stake in the global economy gives us a stake in the
well-being of others.

A foreign policy that overlooked the dangers posed by international conflicts,
that did not work to bring them to a peaceful resolution, would be irresponsible
- especially in an age of nuclear weapons. These conflicts, and the tensions
that they generate, are in fact a major spur to the continued buildup of nuclear
arsenals. For this reason, my Administration has made plain that continuing
Soviet adventurism in the developing world is inimical to global security and an
obstacle to fundamental improvement of Soviet-American relations.

Our stake in resolving regional conflicts can be simply stated: Greater freedom
for others means greater peace and security for ourselves. These goals threaten
no one, but none of them can be achieved without a strong, active and engaged
America.

II. Regional Security in the 80's

Our efforts to promote freedom, prosperity, and security must take account of
the diversity of regional conflicts and of the conditions in which they arise.
Most of the world's turbulence has indigenous causes, and not every regional
conflict should be viewed as part of the East-West conflict. And we should be
alert to historic changes in the international environment, for these create
both new problems and new opportunities. Three such realities must define
American policies in the 80's. Soviet Exploitation Of Regional Conflicts The
first involves the nature of the threat we face. The fact is, in the 1970's the
challenge to regional security became - to a greater degree than before - the
challenge of Soviet expansionism. Around the world we saw a new thrust by our
adversaries to spread Communist dictatorships and to put our own security (and
that of friends and allies) at risk.

The Soviet Union - and clients like Cuba, Vietnam and Libya - supplied enormous
quantities of money, arms and training in efforts to destabilize and overthrow
vulnerable governments on nearly every continent.

By the 1970's the long-proclaimed Soviet doctrine of ''wars of national
liberation'' was for the first time backed by a global capability to project
military power. The Soviets appeared to conclude that the global ''correlation
of forces'' was shifting inexorably in their favor.

The world now knows the results, above all the staggering human toll. Murderous
policies in Vietnam and Cambodia produced victims on a scale unknown since the
genocides of Hitler and Stalin. In Afghanistan, the Soviet invasion led to the
terrified flight of millions from their homes. In Ethiopia, we have witnessed
death by famine and more recently by forced resettlement, and in South Yemen
this year, factional killing that consumed thousands of lives in a span of a few
days.

These have been only the most horrifying consequences. Other outgrowths of
Soviet policies have been the colonial presence of tens of thousands of Cuban
troops in Africa; the activities of terrorists trained in facilities in the
Soviet bloc; and the effort to use Communist Nicaragua as a base from which to
extinguish democracy in El Salvador and beyond.

These are not isolated events. They make up the disturbing pattern of Soviet
conduct in the past 15 years. The problems it creates are no less acute because
the Soviet Union has had its share of disagreements with some of its clients, or
because many of these involvements have proved very costly.

That the Soviet leadership persists in such policies despite the growing burden
they impose only testifies to the strength of Soviet commitment. Unless we build
barriers to Soviet ambitions, and create incentives for Soviet restraint, Soviet
policies will remain a source of danger - and the most important obstacle to the
future spread of freedom.

In my meeting and other communications with Soviet General Secretary Gorbachev,
and in my address before the U.N. General Assembly last October, I have made
clear the importance the United States attaches to the resolution of regional
conflicts that threaten world peace and the yearning of millions for freedom and
independence - whether in Afghanistan or in southern Africa.

For the United States, these conflicts cannot be regarded as peripheral to other
issues on the global agenda. They raise fundamental issues and are a fundamental
part of the overall U.S.-Soviet relationship. Their resolution would represent a
crucial step toward the kind of world that all Americans seek and have been
seeking for over 40 years. Joining Others'

Strength to Ours

The second reality that shapes America's approach to regional security is the
need to join our own strength to the efforts of others in working toward our
common goals.

Throughout the postwar period, our country has played an enormous role in
helping other nations, in many parts of the world, to protect their freedom.

Through NATO we committed ourselves to the defense of Europe against Soviet
attack. Through the Marshall Plan we helped Western Europe to rebuild its
economy and strengthen democratic institutions. We sent American troops to Korea
to repel a Communist invasion.

America was an ardent champion of decolonization. We provided security
assistance to help friends and allies around the world defend themselves. We
extended our hand to those governments that sought to free themselves from
dependence on the Soviet Union; success in such efforts - whether by Yugoslavia,
Egypt, China or others - has contributed significantly to international
security.

Despite our economic and military strength and our leading political role, the
pursuit of American goals has always required cooperation with like-minded
partners. The problems we face today, however, make cooperation with others even
more important.

This is in part a result of the limits on our own resources, of the steady
growth in the power of our adversaries, and of the American people's
understandable reluctance to shoulder alone burdens that are properly shared
with others. But most important, we want to cooperate with others because of the
nature of our goals. Stable regional solutions depend over the long term on what
those most directly affected can contribute. If interference by outsiders can be
ended, regional security is best protected by the free and independent countries
of each region. The Democratic Revolution If American policy can succeed only in
cooperation with others, then the third critical development of the past decade
offers special hope: It is the democratic revolution, a trend that has
significantly increased the ranks of those around the world who share America's
commitment to national independence and popular rule.

The democracies that survived or emerged from the ruins of the Second World War
- Western Europe, Japan and a handful of others - have now been joined by many
others across the globe. Here in the Western Hemisphere, the 1980's have been a
decade of transition to democracy. Today, over 90 percent of the population of
Latin America and the Caribbean live under governments that are democratic - in
contrast to only one-third a decade ago. In less than six years, popularly
elected democrats have replaced dictators in Argentina, Bolivia, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Peru, Brazil, Uruguay and Grenada.

In other parts of the world, we see friends and allies moving in the same
direction. Earlier in this decade, the people of Turkey fought back a violent
assault on democracy from both left and right.

Similarly, since the fall of Vietnam, the non-Communist nations of Southeast
Asia have rallied together; with prosperous economies, and effective
increasingly democratic national governments, they play an increasingly
important role on the world stage.

These trends are far from accidental. Ours is a time of enormous social and
technological change everywhere, and one country after another is discovering
that only free peoples can make the most of this change. Countries that want
progress without pluralism, without freedom, are finding that it cannot be done.

In this global revolution, there can be no doubt where America stands. The
American people believe in human rights and oppose tyranny in whatever form,
whether of the left or the right. We use our influence to encourage democratic
change, in careful ways that respect other countries' traditions and political
realities as well as the security threats that many of them face from external
or internal forces of totalitarianism.

The people of the Philippines are now revitalizing their democratic traditions.
The people of Haiti have their first chance in three decades to direct their own
affairs. Advocates of peaceful political change in South Africa are seeking an
alternative to violence as well as to apartheid. All these efforts evoke the
deepest American sympathy. American support will be ready, in these countries
and elsewhere, to help democracy succeed.

But the democratic resolution does not stop here. There is another, new
phenomenon as well. In recent years, Soviet ambitions in the developing world
have run head-on into a new form of resistance. Peoples on every continent are
insisting on their right to national independence and their right to choose
their government free of coercion.

The Soviets overreached in the 1970's, at a time when America weakened itself by
its internal divisions. In the 1980's the Soviets and their clients are finding
it difficult to consolidate these gains - in part becuase of the revival of
American and Western self-confidence, but mainly because of the courageous
forces of indigenous resistance.

Growing resistance movements now challenge Communist regimes installed or
maintained by the military power of the Soviet Union and its colonial agents -
in Afghanistan, Angola, Cambodia, Ethiopia and Nicaragua.

We did not create this historical phenomenon, but we must not fail to respond to
it.

In Afghanistan, Moscow's invasion to preserve the puppet government it installed
has met stiff and growing resistance by Afghans who are fighting and dying for
their country's independence. Democratic forces in Cambodia, once all but
annihilated by the Khmer Rouge, are now waging a similar battle against
occupation and a puppet regime imposed by Communist Vietnam.

In Angola, Jonas Savimbi and his Unita forces have waged an armed struggle
against the Soviet- and Cuban-backed Marxist regime, and in recent years Unita
has steadily expanded the territory under its control.

In Nicaragua, the democratic resistance forces fighting against another Soviet-
and Cuban-backed regime have been holding their own -despite their lack of
significant outside help, and despite the massive influx of the most
sophisticated Soviet weaponry and thousands of Soviet, Cuban and Soviet-bloc
advisers.

The failure of these Soviet client regimes to consolidate themselves only
confirms the moral and political bankruptcy of the Leninist model. No one can be
surprised by this. But it also reflects the dangerous and destabilizing
international impact that even unpopular Leninist regimes can have.

None of these struggles is a purely internal one. As I told the United Nations
General Assembly last year, the assault of such regimes on their own people
inevitably becomes a menace to their neighbors. Hence the threats to Pakistan
and Thailand by the powerful occupying armies in Afghanistan and Cambodia. Hence
the insecurity of El Salvador, Costa Rica and Honduras in the face of the
Nicaraguan military buildup.

Soviet-style dictatorships, in short, are an almost unique threat to peace, both
before and after they consolidate their rule. Before, because the war they wage
against their own people does not always stay within their own borders. And
after, because the elimination of opposition at home frees their hand for
subversion abroad. Cuba's foreign adventures of the past decade are a warning to
the neighbors of Communist regimes everywhere.

The drive for national freedom and popular rule takes different forms in
different countries, for each nation is the authentic product of a unique
history and culture.

In one case, a people's resistance may spring from deep religious belief; in
another, from the bonds of ethnic or tribal solidarity; in yet another, from the
grievances of colonial rule, or from the failure of an alien ideology to
contribute to national progress.

Our traditions and the traditions of those whom we help can hardly be identical.
And their programs will not always match our own experience and preferences.
This is to be expected. The real question is: Can our policy - of active
American support - increase the likelihood of democratic outcomes? I believe it
can.

III. The Tools of American Policy

These three realities of the 80's -the new thrust of Soviet interventionism, the
need for free nations to join together, the democratic revolution - are
inseparable.

Soviet power and policy cannot be checked without the active commitment of the
United States. And we cannot achieve lasting results without giving support to -
and receiving support from - those whose goals coincide with ours.

These realities call for new ways of thinking about how to cope with the
challenge of Soviet power. Since Harry Truman's day, through administrations of
both parties, American policy toward the Soviet Union has consistently set
itself the goal of containing Soviet expansionism. Today that goal is more
relevant and more important than ever. But how do we achieve it in today's new
conditions?

First of all, we must face up to the arrogant Soviet pretension known as the
Brezhnev Doctrine: the claim that Soviet gains are irreversible; that once a
Soviet client begins to oppress its people and threaten its neighbors it must be
allowed to oppress and threaten them forever. This claim has no moral or
political validity whatsoever. Regimes that cannot live in peace with either
their own people or their neighbors forfeit their legitimacy in world affairs.

Second, we must take full account of the striking trend that I have mentioned:
the growing ranks of those who share our interests and values.

In 1945 so much of the burden of defending freedom rested on our shoulders
alone. In the 1970's some Americans were pessimistic about whether our values of
democracy and freedom were relevant to the new developing nations.

Now we know the answer. The growing appeal of democracy, the desire of all
nations for true independence, are the hopeful basis for a new world of peace
and security into the next century. A world of diversity, a world in which other
nations choose their own course freely, is fully consistent with our values -
because we know free peoples never choose tyranny.

Our involvement should always be prudent and realistic, but we should remember
that our tools work best when joined together in a coherent strategy
consistently applied. Diplomacy unsupported by power is mere talk. Power that is
not guided by our political purposes can create nothing of permanent value.

The two tools of U.S. policy without which few American interests will be secure
are our own military strength and the vitality of our economy.

The defense forces of the United States are crucial to maintaining the stable
environment in which diplomacy can be effective, in which our friends and allies
can be confident of our protection, and in which our adversaries can be
deterred. And our economic dynamism not only provides the resources essential to
sustain our policies, but conveys a deeper message that is being better
understood all the time, even by our adversaries: Free, pluralist societies
work.

The failure to maintain our military capabilities and our economic strength in
the 1970's was as important as any other single factor in encouraging Soviet
expansionism. By reviving both of them in the 1980's we deny our adversaries
opportunities and deter aggression. We make it easier for other countries to
launch sustained economic growth, to build popular institutions, and to
contribute on their own to the cause of peace. Security Assistance And Arms
Transfers When Soviet policy succeeds in establishing a regional foothold
-whether through invasion as in Afghanistan or Cambodia, or sponsorship of local
Leninists as in Nicaragua - our first priority must be to bolster the security
of friends most directly threatened.

This has been the reason for increasing our security assistance for Pakistan,
Thailand and the friendly democratic states of Central America. U.S. aid to
Pakistan has been indispensable in demonstrating that we will not permit the
Soviet Union to gain hegemony over all within reach of its growing power. By
raising and sustaining aid to El Salvador after the Communist guerrillas' failed
''final offensive'' of 1981, we showed that controversy here at home could not
stop us from backing a friendly and democratic government under threat.

Similarly, by providing needed equipment to friends in the Middle East - whether
to democratic Israel, or to longstanding friends in the Arab world who face
clear and present radical threats - we contribute to stability and peace in a
vital region of the world.

By supporting the efforts of others to strengthen their own defense, we
frequently do as much for our own security as through our own defense budget.

Security assistance to others is a security bargain for us. We must, however,
remember that states hostile to us seek the same sort of bargains at our
expense. For this reason, we must be sure that the resources we commit are
adequate to the job.

In the first half of this decade, Libyan and Iranian aid to Communist Nicaragua,
for example, totaled more than three times as much as U.S. aid to the democratic
opposition. Soviet assistance to Vietnam, at nearly $2 billion annually, far
outstrips U.S. support for any country save those that signed the Camp David
peace accords. Soviet support for Cuba is larger still.

Economic Assistance

In speaking of Central America in 1982, I said that ''economic disaster [had]
provided a fresh opening to the enemies of freedom, national independence, and
peaceful development.''

We cannot indulge the hope that economic responses alone are enough to prevent
this political exploitation, but an effective American policy must address both
the short-term and long-term dimensions of economic distress. In the short term
our goal is stabilization; in the long term, sustained growth and progress by
encouraging market-oriented reform.

In Central America, for example, the dollar value of our economic aid has
consistently been three, four, or five times as much as our security assistance.
In 1985 the former totaled $975 million, the latter, only $227 million.

Over the long term, America's most effective contribution to self-sustaining
growth is not through direct aid but through helping these economies to earn
their own way. The vigorous expansion of our own economy has already spurred
growth throughout the Western Hemisphere, as well as elsewhere.

But this healthy expansion of the global economy - which benefits us as well as
others - depends crucially on maintaining a fair and open trading system.
Protectionism is both dangerous and expensive. Its costs include not only the
waste of resources and higher prices in our own economy, but also the blow to
poorer nations around the world that are struggling for democracy but vulnerable
to antidemocratic subversion.

Diplomatic Initiatives

Some have argued that the regional wars in which the Soviet Union is embroiled
provide an opportunity to ''bleed'' the Soviets. This is not our policy. We
consider these wars dangerous to U.S.-Soviet relations and tragic for the
suffering peoples directly involved.

For those reasons, military solutions are not the goal of American policy.
International peace and security require both sides in these struggles to be
prepared to lay down their arms and negotiate political solutions.

The forms of such negotiations may vary, but in all of these conflicts political
efforts (and the improvement of internal political conditions) are essential to
ending the violence, promoting freedom and national self-determination, and
bringing real hope for regional security.

With these goals in mind, in my address to the U.N. General Assembly last fall,
I put forward a plan for beginning to resolve a series of regional conflicts in
which Leninist regimes have made war against their own peoples.

My initiative was meant to complement diplomatic efforts already under way. To
all of these efforts the United States has given the strongest possible support.
We have done so despite the fact that the Soviet Union and its clients have
usually resisted negotiations, or have approached the table primarily for
tactical purposes. We intend, in fact, to redouble our effort through a series
of bilateral discussions with the Soviets.

In Afghanistan, we strongly support the diplomatic efforts conducted under U.N.
auspices. We see no clear sign that the Soviet Union has faced up to the
necessity of withdrawing its troops, which remains the central issue of the
negotiations. But we will persist.

In southern Africa, the recent announcement by the South African Government of a
date for the creation of an independent Namibia provides a new test of its own
and of the Angolan regime's interest in a settlement that truly begins to reduce
the threats to security in this region.

In Central America, President Duarte of El Salvador has offered a bold
initiative that would produce three sets of simultaneous peace talks - his own
with Salvador's Communist guerrillas; U.S.-Nicaragua bilateral discussions, and
an internal dialogue between the Communist regime in Nicaragua and the
democratic opposition - if the Sandinistas will agree to the latter. My new
envoy for Central America, Ambassador Philip Habib, will pursue the Duarte
initiative as his first responsibility.

In Cambodia, we support A.S.E.A.N. - the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
- in its intensive diplomatic efforts to promote Cambodian self-determination
and an end to Vietnam's brutal occupation. Support for Freedom Fighters In all
these regions, the Soviet Union and its clients would of course prefer victory
to compromise. That is why in Afghanistan, in Southeast Asia, in southern
Africa, and in Central America, diplomatic hopes depend on whether the Soviets
see that victory is excluded. In each case, resistance forces fighting against
Communist tyranny deserve our support.

The form and extent of support we provide must be carefully weighed in each
case. Because a popularly supported insurgency enjoys some natural military
advantages, our help need not always be massive to make a difference. But it
must be more than simply symbolic: Our help should give freedom fighters the
chance to rally the people to their side. As John Kennedy observed of another
nation striving to protect its freedom, it is ultimately their struggle; winning
inevitably depends more on them than on any outsiders. America cannot fight
everyone's battle for freedom. But we must not deny others the chance to fight
their battle themselves.

In some instances, American interests will be served best if we can keep the
details of our help - in particular, how it is provided - out of view. The
Soviets will bring enormous pressure to bear to stop outside help to resistance
forces; while we can well withstand the pressure, small friends and allies may
be much more vulnerable.

That is why publicity for such details sometimes only exposes those whom we are
trying to help, or those who are helping us, to greater danger. When this is the
case, a President must be able to work with the Congress to extend needed
support without publicity.

Those who make it hard to extend support in this way when necessary are taking
from our hands an important tool to protect American interests. Other
governments that find they cannot work with us on a confidential basis will
often be forced not to work with us at all.

To hobble ourselves in this way makes it harder to shape events while problems
are still manageable. It means we are certain to face starker choices down the
road.

Nowhere is this clearer than in Central America. The Nicaraguan Communists have
actively sought to subvert their neighbors since the very moment they took
power. There can be no regional peace in Central America - or wherever Soviet
client regimes have taken power - so long as such aggressive policies face no
resistance. Support for resistance forces shows those who threaten the peace
that they have no military option, and that negotiations represent the only
realistic course.

Communist rulers do not voluntarily or in a single step relinquish control and
open their nations to popular rule. But there is no historical basis for
thinking that Leninist regimes are the only ones that can indefinitely ignore
armed insurgencies and the disintegration of their own political base.

The conditions that a growing insurgency can create - high military desertion
rates, general strikes, economic shortages, infrastructural breakdowns, to name
just a few -can in turn create policy fissures even within a leadership that has
had no change of heart.

This is the opportunity that the freedom fighters of the 80's hope to seize, but
it will not exist forever, either in Central America or elsewhere. When the
mechanisms of repression are fully in place and consolidated, the task of
countering such a regime's policies - both internal and external - becomes
incomparably harder.

That is why the Nicaraguan regime is so bent on extinguishing the vestiges of
pluralism in Nicaraguan society. It is why our own decisions can no longer be
deferred.

IV. Regional Security and U.S.-Soviet Relations

My Administration has insisted that the issue of regional security must have a
prominent place on the agenda of U.S.-Soviet relations.

We have heard it said, however, that while talking about these issues is a good
idea, the United States should not be involved in other ways. Some people see
risks of confrontation with the Soviet Union; others, no chance that the Soviets
would ever reduce their commitment to their clients. I challenge both of these
views. A policy whose only goal was to pour fuel on existing fires would
obviously be irresponsible, but America's approach is completely different.

Our policy is designed to keep regional conflicts from spreading, and thereby to
reduce the risk of superpower confrontations. Our aim is not to increase the
dangers to which regional states friendly to us are exposed, but to reduce them.

We do so by making clear to the Soviet Union and its clients that we will stand
behind our friends. Talk alone will not accomplish this. That is why our
security assistance package for Pakistan - and for Thailand and Zaire - is so
important, and why we have increased our help to democratic states of Central
America. We have made clear that there would be no gain from widening these
conflicts. We have done so without embroiling American forces in struggles that
others are ready to fight on their own.

Our goal, in short - indeed our necessity - is to convince the Soviet Union that
the policies on which it embarked in the 70's cannot work. We cannot be
completely sure how the Soviet leadership calculates the benefits of
relationships with clients. No one should underestimate the tenacity of such a
powerful and resilient opponent.

Yet there are reasons to think that the present time is especially propitious
for raising doubts on the Soviet side about the wisdom of its client ties.

The same facts about the democratic revolution that we can see are visible in
Moscow. The harmful impact that Moscow's conduct in the developing world had on
Western readings of its intentions in the last decade is also well known.

There is no time in which Soviet policy reviews and reassessments are more
likely than in a succession period, especially when many problems have been
accumulating for some time. General Secretary Gorbachev himself made this point
last year when he asked American interviewers whether it wasn't clear that the
Soviet Union required international calm to deal with its internal problems.

Our answer to this question can be very simple. We desire calm too, and - even
more to the point - so do the nations now embroiled in conflict with regimes
enjoying massive Soviet support. Let the Soviet Union begin to contribute to the
peaceful resolution of these conflicts.

V. Conclusion

I have often said that the tide of the future is a freedom tide. If so, it is
also a peace tide, for the surest guarantee we have of peace is national freedom
and democratic government.

In the long struggle to reach these goals, we are at a crossroads. A great deal
hangs on America's staying power and steadfast commitment.

If America stays committed, we are more likely to have diplomatic solutions than
military ones.

If America stays committed, we are more likely to have democratic outcomes than
totalitarian ones.

If America stays committed, we will find that those who share our goals can do
their part, and ease burdens that we might otherwise bear alone.

If America stays committed, we can solve problems while they are still
manageable and avoid harder choices later.

And if American stays committed, we are more likely to convince the Soviet Union
that its competition with us must be peaceful.

The American people remain committed to a world of peace and freedom. They want
an effective foreign policy, which shapes events in accordance with our ideals
and does not just react, passively and timidly, to the actions of others.
Backing away from this challenge will not bring peace. It will only mean that
others who are hostile to everything we believe in will have a freer hand to
work their will in the world.

Important choices now rest with the Congress: whether to undercut the President
at a moment when regional negotiations are under way and U.S.-Soviet diplomacy
is entering a new phase; to betray those struggling against tyranny in different
regions of the world, including our own neighborhood; or to join in a bipartisan
national endeavor to strengthen both freedom and peace.

I have no doubt which course the American people want.

RONALD REAGAN

The White House, March 14, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 15, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS ASSAIL REAGAN CREDIBILITY ON MILITARY

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 744 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, March 14


Contending that the Reagan Administration is losing its credibility on national
security and military policy, two leading Congressional Democrats predicted
today that their party was poised to regain the political advantage on this key
issue.

''We are going to wrap the 'window of vulnerability' around their necks in
'88,'' said one, Representative Les Aspin of Wisconsin, chairman of the House
Armed Services Committee, alluding to a phrase Mr. Reagan used in his 1980
campaign to assail President Carter's military program.

Mr. Aspin and Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia led a panel discussion on military
policy before an audience of Texas Democrats, many of whom are partial to the
giant military contractors in this area. The forum was sponsored by the
Democratic Leadership Council, an independent group of elected officials who are
trying to give a more centrist cast to their party's image and policies.

Council officials billed today's event as the beginning of its campaign to
re-establish Democratic credibility on this troublesome issue by focusing on
what they consider to be their most credible spokesmen on national security and
military questions.

'Star Wars' Plan Assailed

Mr. Nunn, the Senate's most influential voice on military matters, asserted that
President Reagan was ''in a dream world'' in trying to sell his project to
protect against nuclear missile attack and lead to disarmament, a program Mr.
Reagan calls his Strategic Defense Initiative.

''S.D.I. has been defined in such grandiose terms that it is misleading and
possibly could get us into a trap in the arms control arena,'' said Mr. Nunn.
''When you describe the purpose of that program, first of all to implicitly
protect our population, and second, to get rid of all the nuclear weapons in the
world, that position is totally out of sync with reality.''

Mr. Nunn said that even if the system could stop 95 percent of incoming enemy
missiles, ''which I don't believe,'' it would not prevent the Soviet Union from
using bombers and other means, including ''suitcases,'' to deliver nuclear
devices.

Having said that, Mr. Nunn joined Mr. Aspin in supporting continued research for
the project, which they said could be used as leverage in arms control
bargaining.

Mr. Nunn charged that the Administration had not developed ''a coherent military
strategy related to the resources available'' and that this had resulted in a
serious erosion of the ''public consensus on defense'' that ''was so painfully
rebuilt'' after the Vietnam War.

''People don't perceive that their tax dollars have been well spent,'' said Mr.
Nunn, adding that the issue was not the amount the Administration is spending on
the military but the way it is being spent.

Issue of Military Spending

The Administration's ''strategic posture is in total chaos,'' said Mr. Aspin.
''I don't think they are that serious about defending this country,'' he added.
''They throw money at it and that's about it.''

Mr. Aspin said the White House has been either ''indifferent or hostile'' to
efforts to make fundamental changes in the military establishment, including the
need to overhaul the Pentagon's procurement process and the need to bring about
a ''unified military force.''

With the chief executives of two major military contractors sitting next to them
on the panel, the lawmakers treaded lightly on the subject of overcharges and
violations of procurement laws by contractors.

Mr. Nunn said the ''horror stories'' about exorbitant prices charged for toilet
seats and coffee pots were only the ''tip'' of the problem. ''As bad as those
things are,'' he said, ''the big waste is not that'' but an ''inefficient and
ineffective'' procurement system.

That assessment was shared by the two military contractors on the panel, Robert
Kirk, president of the LTV Aerospace and Defense Corporation, and Stan Pace, who
recently became chairman of General Dynamics, both major employers in the area.

Mr. Kirk said that military contractors had been so concerned about their
technical performance that they had neglected ''the administrative side'' of
their business. ''We have to deal with these administrative problems to restore
taxpayer confidence'' in military spending, he said.

General Dynamics was twice suspended from bidding on Government contracts last
year by the Pentagon. Four of its former and current executives were indicted
last December on charges of defrauding the Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

38 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS CITED

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 48, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 481 words


The New York City Department of Health last week released a list of 38 food
establishments cited for violating the health code.

In addition, it listed nine restaurants that were allowed to reopen after
correcting earlier violations and five that were closed for having failed to do
so. The establishments are these: Violations MANHATTAN A. T. & T Cafeteria,
Service Systems Company, 811 10th Ave. (54th St.). Blueprint 100, 100 Park Ave.
(40th St.). Burger King, 613 8th Ave. (39th St.). Carolei Pizza, 1422 St.
Nicholas Ave. (181st St.). CBS Cafeteria, Lackmann Management Manhattan Inc., 51
W. 52d St. Cuchifritos, 68 2d Ave. (4th St.). Harlequin, 569 Hudson St. (11th
St.). The Himalaya Restaurant, 615 1/2 Hudson St. (12th St.). Indus Restaurant,
411 Park Ave. S. (28th St.).

Israeli Discount Bank Cafeteria, THF Eastern

Food Service Inc., 511 5th Ave. (42d St.). Jarabacoa Restaurant, 380 Audubon
Ave. (184th St.).

The Original Famous Ray's Pizza, 77 Lexington

Ave. (26th St.).

Paris Croissant, 1161 Ave. of the Americas (45th

St.). Le Saigon Pavilion, 140 W. 4th St. Sushi Typhoon, 120 1st Ave. (7th St.).

Talcott Factors Cafeteria, Lessing Inc., 1633

Broadway (50th St.). Victor's Cafe, 240 Columbus Ave. (71st St.). BRONX Joel's
Restaurant, 522 E. 180th St. BROOKLYN Chez Denise, 3603 Church Ave. (Brooklyn
Ave.).

El Segundo Castillo de Jagua, 768 Nostrand

Ave. (Sterling Pl.).

Medgar Evers College Cafeteria, Unsurpassed

Inc., 1150 Carroll St. (Rogers Ave.). Glatt Kosher Gourmet Deli, 502 Ave. M.
Monique's Affair, 5505 Church Ave. Pepper & Salt, 900 Utica Ave. (Church Ave.).
QUEENS Chicken House, 80-45 Kew Gardens Rd. Durow's, 81-01 Myrtle Ave. Elegant
Chinese Kitchen, 212-06 Hillside Ave. Elmhurst Bar, 87-06 Queens Blvd. Jack &
Ernie's Bar, 153-10 Hillside Ave. Jerry's Full Stop Pizza, 228-11 Merick Blvd.
K. J. Donovan, 79-14 164th St. Kosher Kettle, 81-70 Lefferts Blvd.

New China Restaurant of Jamaica, 92-24 Guy

Brewer Blvd. Rosa Pizzeria, 114-19 Merrick Blvd. Royal Cafe, 77-02 101st Ave.
Wood Crest Cafe, 87-01 Atlantic Ave. STATEN ISLAND Chicken Holiday, 4569 Amboy
Rd. (Bamberger La.).

Villa Capri Pizzeria, 306 New Dorp La. (Edison

St.).

Reopened MANHATTAN Foo Ho Restaurant, 104 Mott St. (Canal St.) La Groceria, 333
Ave. of the Americas (3d St.). BROOKLYN Bojangle's, 427 Fulton St. (Pearl St.).
Donut Shoppe, 1503 Ave. U. Galaxia, 1319 Broadway (Grove St.). Johnny's
Pizzeria, 1794 Utica Ave. (Ave. I). Mary's Fried Chicken, 56 4th Ave. (Dean
St.). Popeye's, 848 Utica Ave. (Linden Blvd.). QUEENS Kneer's Catering, 32-08
Broadway.

Closed BROOKLYN Le Banquet Restaurant, 3405 Church Ave.

Fox Cocktail Lounge, 344 Livingston St. (Nevins

St.).

Zum Zum, Kings Pl. Shopping Mall (Flatbush

Ave. and Ave. U). QUEENS Flushing Snack World, 135-11 Roosevelt Ave. Gonzalez
Restaurant, 34-06 36th Ave.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ANOTHER CAUSE, ANOTHER CONCERT FOR PETER, PAUL AND MARY

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1119 words


There are framed gold and platinum albums on the wall of Mary Travers's midtown
office, reminders of the million-selling hits she sang as a member of Peter,
Paul and Mary in the 1960's. Hanging next to them, however, are other kinds of
citations - including, for instance, one from the Korean Institute for Human
Rights. Twenty-five years after Miss Travers first sang with Peter Yarrow and
Paul Stookey, the trio has been marking its anniversary with concerts for causes
- standard operating procedure for the pop-folk singers who have played more
than 300 benefits for causes and candidates in the past three years alone.

In the wake of such socially conscious rock events as Live Aid for famine
relief, Farm Aid to publicize the farm problem and the all-star anti-apartheid
single ''Sun City,'' Peter, Paul and Mary might well feel like elder siblings.

The group's recent 25th anniversary show at Washington's Kennedy Center was a
benefit for the Free South Africa movement, which is working to end apartheid. A
photograph in the program showed the singers, alongside Mr. Yarrow's daughter
and Miss Travers's mother, getting arrested on the steps of the South African
embassy - ''my first time with plastic handcuffs,'' Miss Travers said. This
Tuesday, the trio will open ''From Bleecker to Broadway'' - a six-day,
eight-show engagement at the Minskoff Theater, and Peter, Paul and Mary's first
Broadway shows ever - with a sold-out benefit for the New York City Coalition
for the Homeless that will raise approximately $40,000.

Another cause, another concert. In the 1960's, Peter, Paul and Mary brought folk
songs, children's songs and brand-new protest songs - ''All My Trials,'' ''Puff,
the Magic Dragon,'' ''If I Had a Hammer,'' ''Blowing in the Wind'' - to a
gigantic pop listenership; along with concert tours, they sang at civil-rights
marches, anti-Vietnam rallies and political benefits. In the 1980's, while
folk-style music has virtually disappeared from the pop charts, Peter, Paul and
Mary's worldwide audience still turns out to see a group whose agenda continues
to mix social activism with three-part vocal harmony. They say they are in the
tradition of ''Seeger's Raiders'' - paying tribute to the folk singer, who has
been an activist musician since the 1940's.

The trio is no longer indivisible. Peter, Paul and Mary split up in 1970, two
years after Mr. Stookey converted to Christianity and adopted Noel as his first
name. ''I had a family,'' he said, ''and unless I stopped touring and attended
to them I wasn't going to have them much longer.'' Peter, Paul and Mary remained
on good terms, and reunited occasionally for benefit concerts. In 1978, they
began working together more steadily. Meanwhile, Miss Travers and Mr. Yarrow
have mixed political organizing and solo performing careers; Mr. Stookey sings
Christian music with a group called Bodywork.

''To a large extent now,'' Mr. Stookey said, ''we walk our own roads and we
bring to the group what we find arresting - an arrangement, or new lyrics, or
changing lyrics. Inevitably there's a discussion. Right now, we're debating the
issue of abortion, because the Christian and the political perspectives are
somewhat different.''

''This is a relationship, with all three of us, that has gone through terrible
fights and wonderful making up,'' Mr. Yarrow said. ''These days, Noel and I
write the songs, and Mary writes the poetry and the speeches.''

''Twenty-five years ago,'' Miss Travers said, ''I used to get onstage and not
open my mouth and not want to open my mouth to talk. The other night, at a
meeting, my job was to present an organized piece of material and to lay out a
course of action, and I was very organized and did it. Peter looked at me and
shook his head, and he said, 'To think we thought you were dumb.' ''

Mr. Stookey has lived in Maine since the mid-1970's; Mr. Yarrow and Miss Travers
both have homes in Connecticut, and Miss Travers also maintains an apartment and
office in Manhattan. ''I write songs while driving down the highway from
Connecticut,'' Mr. Yarrow says. ''I pick up the pencil and write without looking
at it; later, I see if I can make it out.''

Peter, Paul and Mary say they are heartened by the increasing social activism of
rock. ''Even though Live Aid and Farm Aid were very comfortable and accessible
gestures,'' Mr. Yarrow said, ''which did not involve alienating a group that
would object to one's involvement, they were important steps for pop music.
There's something happening in the world, and with the technology that could
unite us. It's moving again, and it's a great joy that we can participate. And
we have something to share now that we didn't have then - we're experienced.''

''Singing 'Blowing in the Wind' all the places we've been,'' Miss Travers said,
''it takes on a different meaning everywhere. When you sing the line, 'How many
years can a people exist before they're allowed to be free?' in a prison yard
for political prisoners in El Salvador, if you have sung it to a group of union
organizers - who have all been in jail - in South Korea, if you've sung that
song to Soviet Jews who have been refused exit visas, if you've sung it with
Bishop Tutu, the song breathes, lives, it has a currency.''

''If we were wearing spangled tights and singing 'Fly Me to the Moon' or hits of
the 50's,'' Mr. Stookey said, ''I don't think we'd still be so involved with
what we're doing.''

Peter, Paul and Mary are no longer under contract to a major record label;
''we're waiting for someone to find us, I guess,'' Mr. Stookey said. ''We have a
record's worth of new material to perform, and at most concerts a third to a
half of the material we do is brand new, created within the last year and a
half.'' (At current concerts, the group offers for sale a single written by Mr.
Stookey - ''El Salvador.'') Trio members have gone on fact-finding missions to
Central America, the Soviet Union and elsewhere; over the past week, they have
accompanied politicians on visits to shelters for the homeless in New York City
to draw attention to the problem. ''What can Peter, Paul and Mary do in the
context of homelessness?'' Mr. Yarrow said. ''Well, we have a platform now. It's
been 25 years, and we've been made responsible, in a way, by our research and
our serious commitment.

''I think folk music is terrific,'' he concluded. ''I think classical music is
terrific, too; I played the violin when I was a kid. But when I saw that music
can activate energies and articulate thoughts and be a vehicle for people to
move forward - when I saw it as a unifying force, I said, 'That's for me - I
want to do that.' And that's why I'm still doing it, 25 years later.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Peter Paul and Mary (Joan Marcus)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

On the Slippery Slope To Another Vietnam

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 189 words


To the Editor:

Even if the alarm bells have been muted so far, the news coming out of
Washington should set them ringing loud and clear for all of us.

Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger is quoted (news article, March 6) as
telling the House Armed Services Committee that a failure to grant the aid to
Nicaragua requested by the Administration could eventually lead to the
introduction of United States troops in Central America: ''I think it is
absolutely inevitable, and I know what the additional cost, not only in dollars
but in human lives - this time American lives - would be.''

He was replying to a suggestion by one of the members of Congress that if
Congress did not grant the aid requested and the contras collapsed, the only
alternative might be for us to intervene ourselves.

If it is ''inevitable'' that we send U.S. troops into Nicaragua if the contras
collapse, we are already on the slippery slope toward another Vietnam.HENRY R.
LABOUISSE New York, March 6, 1986 The writer was United States Ambassador to
Greece from 1962 to 1965 and executive director of the United Nations Children's
Fund in 1965.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICA'S FUTURE IN SPACE AFTER THE CHALLENGER

BYLINE: By John Noble Wilford; John Noble Wilford reports on science and space
for The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 38, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4640 words


THE WARMING WINDS OF MARCH SWEEP THE EMPTY LAUNCHING PADS AT Cape Canaveral. It
is a forlorn scene, like a seaside resort in the off-season, unsure that its
season will return anytime soon. What is left of the space shuttle Challenger,
which exploded after liftoff on Jan. 28, lies submerged offshore and in twisted
fragments on the floor of a huge hangar at Florida's Kennedy Space Center. The
remaining shuttles - Columbia, Discovery and Atlantis - sit in their hangars
with nowhere to go. No shuttles, not much of anything, will be taking off for
months, perhaps not for a year or two.

More than the Challenger exploded in the blue sky over the Atlantic Ocean. The
space shuttle was the most visible symbol of American leadership in space
technology. Its successes seemed to affirm our faith in the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration to transport us safely and efficiently to a new
frontier of human aspirations. Now, suddenly, after an investment of $30 billion
and 14 years, in the reverberating shock of failure, we are left full of doubts
not only about the shuttles and NASA's fabled competence, but about the very
fundamentals of our national space policy.

As long as the launching pads bustled to the tempo of countdowns and shuttles
regularly took off - 24 missions had been flown since 1981 - it was easy to set
aside the doubts. If the technology had its flaws, it certainly seemed to work
well enough. If the space shuttles' much-advertised potential for hauling
cargoes at reduced costs had yet to be realized, just wait until they were
flying 20 or 30 times a year. If shuttle costs and delays were paralyzing other
space endeavors, enabling foreign competitors to steal a march on us, this was
unavoidable and only temporary. There were risks to space flight, of course, but
the shuttles were making it routine enough to send a Senator, a Congressman and
a schoolteacher to float weightless above the earth.

Now, however, for all its strengths, there is no denying the weaknesses of both
the shuttles and the policy that relied almost totally on a single launching
system. In these bleak, uncertain times for the American space program, the
current inactivity at Canaveral becomes all the more painful, even a little
embarrassing, in the light of recent developments in the Soviet Union, Western
Europe and Japan. Any assessment of the magnitude of the shuttle disaster must
take into account the following: The world's scientists gather this month not in
Pasadena or Houston, but in Moscow and Darmstadt, West Germany, to receive the
first closeup images of Halley's comet. Two Soviet spacecraft, Vega 1 and Vega
2, make the first encounters with the comet, followed by the European Space
Agency's Giotto craft and two smaller Japanese probes. American scientists have
instruments aboard the Soviet craft, and American antennae are helping to track
the robot travelers, but this is hardly the leading role that has come to be
expected of American science in the realm of interplanetary exploration. Money
for an ambitious American Halley's mission was diverted to meet shuttle
development costs. On Feb. 20, the Soviet Union took another big step in its
drive to establish a permanent human presence in space. A new-generation space
station, named Mir, for ''peace,'' was launched into orbit to serve as the core
facility in a proposed complex containing living quarters and a variety of
research, manufacturing and observation stations. By contrast, the United States
is just starting its own space station project, scheduled to be deployed in the
mid-1990's.

On Feb. 21, the European Space Agency launched another of its Ariane rockets,
sending two satellites into orbit without a hitch. Compared to the re-usable
shuttles, the Ariane represents old-fashioned technology. It is an expendable
launch vehicle (E.L.V.), a rocket built to be used only once to boost a payload
into orbit; the shuttles, according to their most optimistic proponents, were
supposed to consign E.L.V.'s to the ash heap of technology. Although three of
the 16 Arianes launched since 1979 have failed after takeoff, failures of
unmanned rockets are less catastrophic and disruptive to scheduled operations
than the Challenger explosion is sure to be. Meanwhile, enterprising European
space officials have made it known they are ready and very willing to do
business with shuttle customers left bereft by NASA's mishap.

Whatever the outcome of the Challenger investigation, it is certain that the
shuttles will fly again. But the short-term outlook for the nation's space
enterprise is not good, and the long-term prospects are unclear. The shuttle
tragedy has underscored what many in the aerospace community have known for
several years: The United States is involved in a new space race. But unlike the
contest with the Soviet Union to land men on the moon two decades ago, this new
race has more than two participants and more than one goal. And there is no
clear winner in sight.

With the shuttles out of service, foreign and domestic communications satellite
operators will likely turn to Europe's Ariane, which already has gained nearly
half of a business in which NASA used to boast a monopoly. It may take years to
re-establish confidence in the shuttles, time enough perhaps for the Japanese,
Russians, even the Chinese to gain additional advantages in the world's
commercial launch market.

Important missions to study the Sun and Jupiter, and to orbit a telescope that
can peer toward the edge of the universe, will be deferred, additional blows to
scientists who believe they have suffered unduly at the hands of those who
diverted funds and public attention to develop shuttles. The expense of
restoring shuttle operations may well stall the nascent space-station program.
The only station for years to come will be Russian.

Of greatest concern will be the effect of the shuttles' grounding on the
nation's military space program. Although it has a few conventional rockets
available, the Pentagon has designed most of its advanced communications and
reconnaissance satellites for shuttle deployment. Serious problems could arise,
military leaders warn, if the shuttles are not flying again in a year.

In the long run, though, the disaster could lead to a clearer definition of
American space policy, and none too soon. The Reagan Administration's ambition
to put the shuttle on a commercial footing will be reassessed; NASA will no
doubt be restructured; and the Pentagon will probably emerge with even more
influence in matters of space. Production of conventional rockets will be
accelerated, and new E.L.V.'s will probably be developed, freeing the shuttles
from the excessive burden of trying to be all things to all users.

In the end, the nation has an opportunity to develop a comprehensive space
policy based not on proving the efficacy of existing shuttle technology, but on
using the best possible technologies to achieve well-defined goals. IN HIS 1985
BOOK ''THE Heavens and the Earth,'' a critically acclaimed political history of
the space age, Walter A. McDougall, a history professor at the University of
California at Berkeley, wrote: ''Apollo was a matter of going to the moon and
building whatever technology could get us there; the space shuttle was a matter
of building a technology and going wherever it could take us.''

It was this thinking - as close as the United States came to a national space
policy in the early 1970's -that led to an almost exclusive dependence on the
space shuttle as the national launching system. Coming off the successful Apollo
moon landings, NASA officials had sought a mandate to deploy a manned orbiting
space station, to build a fleet of re-usable shuttles to ferry to and from the
station, perhaps to fly men to Mars in the 1980's. But the public and the
Administration of Richard M. Nixon, beset by the war in Vietnam, urban decay and
economic concerns, were in no mood for a new space extravaganza. The best NASA
could get was approval, in 1972, to build a fleet of four shuttles, a
revolutionary transportation system in search of a well-defined mission.

NASA extracted a promise from the White House that all conventional rockets
would be phased out eventually in favor of the shuttles. The entire space
community - including the Defense Department, scientists, the communications
industry and foreign customers - was given little choice but to trust its future
launch plans to America's shuttles.

But to assure backing for the shuttle, NASA was forced to strike some
uncomfortable bargains. To meet the demands of Administration budget experts,
the vehicles had to be developed at half the originally estimated cost, or
approximately $5.6 billion (in 1972 dollars) over 10 years. To get Air Force
sup-port, the vehicles had to be larger than otherwise necessary, to carry
military hardware. To satisfy Congress, the system had to pay for itself, which
meant that NASA, chartered as a research and development agency, was put in the
unaccustomed position of hustling business and running an orbital freight
operation. The conflicting goals and pressures, as well as the complexity of the
machines themselves, virtually assured that America's Space Transportation
System - as the shuttle is officially known - would not operate with the
efficiency its original designers had planned. As Dr. Alex Roland, a historian
of technology at Duke University, has written: ''Instead of a horse, NASA got a
camel - better than no transportation at all and indeed well-suited for certain
jobs, but hardly the steed it would have chosen.''

Even before the Challenger accident, reality had caught up with the initial
assessments of the shuttle's economic viability. NASA had managed to launch only
nine missions in 1985, and was pressing hard to meet a schedule of 14 launches
this year, far fewer than the 30 or 60 missions a year originally envisioned.
The shuttles required much longer preflight processing than had been
anticipated, driving up costs to as much as six times the early predictions,
according to a study by the Congressional Budget Office.

''The shuttle was an economic bust before the accident,'' says Dr. Roland.
''It's just crazy to think, as some people in NASA do, that we can return to
business as usual.''

A EROSPACE EXPERTS EX-pect the modifications of the shuttle that are sure to
result from the Challenger investigation to raise mission costs even higher. As
a consequence, NASA's shuttle managers will be in more of a bind than ever. The
commercial rate for hiring the full shuttle cargo bay is now $71 million, and
will go up to $74 million in 1988, at least $50 million less than the true
mission cost. But if NASA raises its shuttle fees, it could price itself out of
competition with the European Ariane.

The shadow of Ariane has loomed over the shuttle ever since these expendable
rockets were introduced. Developed by the multinational European Space Agency,
with France taking the lead, the three-stage rocket has been upgraded
continuously to carry larger payloads, usually two satellites at a time. At
first, Ariane's customers were all Europeans, companies and countries wanting to
launch communications and weather satellites. But in 1984, a private company,
Arianespace, took over operations and mounted an aggressive marketing campaign,
winning business worldwide, including that of several American communications
companies. Ariane's costs are approximately $10,000 per cargo pound less than
the shuttle's, and the company has shown a flexibility in pricing and financing
that NASA, by law, is unable to match.

Ariane's prospects are looking bright; after the Challenger accident,
Arianespace's Washington office reported receiving many inquiries from companies
that customarily have done business with NASA. The company has responded by
stating that it is prepared to add four more Ariane missions, capable of
carrying eight satellites, in 1987 and 1988, to serve customers who might be
stranded by the shuttle problems.

The relative success of Ariane, and the failure of the shuttle to dominate the
commercial launch field, has encouraged others to think of seizing a share of
the business. The Communists are interested in a piece of this capitalist
action. China has announced it will discuss offering the services of its Long
March rockets to interested customers. And the Soviet Union has quoted a
launching price of about $24 million (less than either Ariane or the shuttle)
for the use of its Proton rockets.

Several American aerospace companies are also scouting the launch market. The
General Dynamics Corporation has sought customers for the Atlas-Centaur, and a
new company, Transpace Carriers Inc., is trying to sign up users for the Delta;
both are expendable rockets being phased out by NASA as part of its
shuttle-centered policy.

But the Reagan Administration's contradictory policy on space commercialization
is hindering their efforts. Although the Administration endorses free-market
competition in space, the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, in a
report issued last year, maintained that government subsidization of the shuttle
discourages competition. This policy has similarly dampened the prospects of new
companies like Space Services Inc. of Houston, which is developing a rocket for
delivering small payloads to low-Earth orbit.

F ACED WITH THE shuttle's problems and the new competition from abroad, one
immediate outcome of the handwringing over the Challenger will surely be a
greater reliance by the United States on unmanned conventional rockets. Indeed,
support for a ''mixed launching capability'' was gathering before the accident.

In an editorial in the February issue of Aerospace America, a publication of the
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, which went to press before
the disaster, Kelly H. Burke, a retired Air Force lieutenant general and now an
aerospace consultant in Washington, expressed the prevalent thinking in both
military and civilian space circles when he urged the Defense Department and
NASA to agree on a ''comprehensive space launch plan.'' He recommended a policy
that includes the shuttle, existing expendable launchers such as the Atlas,
Delta and Titan rockets, and a new generation of expendable rockets based on
1980's technology. These vehicles are most urgently needed, General Burke
pointed out in a prescient phrase, ''because potential shuttle outages could
make it impossible to meet imperative defense needs.''

Although the shuttle had flown only two solely military missions prior to the
Challenger accident, one-third of the future flights were to be military. In
most cases, these flights were to deliver navigation, communications and
surveillance satellites into orbit; but the armed forces planned to use the
shuttle increasingly to test technology related to President Reagan's Strategic
Defense Initiative. At a recent Congressional hearing, Air Force Under Secretary
Edward C. Aldridge Jr. testified that the loss of the Challenger was tantamount
to a ''national emergency,'' and recommended the manufacture of a new line of
E.L.V.'s.

New expendables have many supporters. Dr. Hans Mark, a former NASA deputy
administrator and now chancellor of the University of Texas, proposes adapting
the shuttle's main engines and solid-rocket boosters to create E.L.V.'s that
will be more powerful and efficient than the old Titans. And, in its report to
be released next month, the President's National Space Commission, headed by
former NASA administrator Dr. Thomas O. Paine and charged with developing a
comprehensive national space policy, is expected to recommend developing a
heavy-lift expendable rocket to carry into orbit large satellites and the
components for vehicles and bases too heavy to be launched in toto from Earth.
The Soviet Union is believed to be working on a similar rocket.

Until the new E.L.V.' s are available, the Air Force is counting on approval to
produce 10 more of its large Titan 34D rockets, which carry satellites into
geosynchronous orbit, to supplement the 10 ordered last year when military
leaders grew alarmed over the frequent postponements and cancellations of
shuttle flights.

E VEN IF IT IS DE-cided to strip the shuttle of some of its satellite-launching
duties, there will be many missions requiring its large cargo bay, its
round-trip capability and the presence of astronauts. Only the shuttle, for
example, can carry the Hubble Space Telescope, a 94-inch reflector that will
give astronomers an unprecedented ability to obtain visual images of the
universe's far edges, which had been scheduled for deployment this fall.

Shuttle crews have also demonstrated that they can repair, refuel and retrieve
satellites, and conduct a wide range of experiments, including tests of
zero-gravity processing, that some believe could lead to a new industry;
weightless manufacturing makes possible the mixing and separation of compounds
not easily worked with on earth, and allows for almost total purity in the
manufacturing process.

But even before the destruction of the Challenger, the future of space
manufacturing was uncertain. Despite numerous experiments in producing drugs,
growing semiconductor crystals and creating metallic alloys, no American
companies have moved beyond exploratory manufacturing operations in space. The
Europeans and Japanese, however, are beginning to experiment with innovative
government-industry combinations for exploiting the zero-gravity environment in
such areas as electronics and pharmaceuticals.

The shuttle is also an indispensable part of all the plans for an American space
station, which is seen by NASA as the ''next logical step'' in space. Approved
by President Reagan in 1984, the station would be a cluster of residential
modules, docking ports for shuttles, and manned and unmanned research and
manufacturing facilities.

But thus far, NASA has had trouble generating enthusiasm for the space station
among scientists or in the Pentagon; both believe that unmanned satellites can
perform many of the functions a manned station could, at less cost and with
equal or better efficiency. Their indifference, and the need to put more money
into restoring shuttle operations, could postpone the space station's
development. ''The station will probably prove its worth if you get it up
there,'' says Dr. Robert C. Seamans Jr., a former NASA deputy administrator who
is now a senior lecturer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. ''But
nobody has ever been able to make a hard case for its worth. It has to be done
as a matter of faith.''

Despite the reservations about space manufacturing and the space station,
several influential Congressmen favor giving NASA money to begin building a
replacement for the Challenger, which would cost approximately $2 billion and
take two to three years. Representative Edward P. Boland, a Massachusetts
Democrat who heads the House subcommittee that oversees space appropriations,
says, ''I don't think NASA can meet its requirements for space flight without
it.'' Nevertheless, additions to NASA' s budget could run into the brick wall of
the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Deficit Reduction Act, although some observers believe
the Air Force - which has an interest in maintaining shuttle operations -could
take up some of the budgetary slack.

Still, the accident is not likely to diminish the appeal in the United States of
re-usable manned space vehicles. Nor will it cause other nations to scuttle
their plans to build similar spacecraft. The Soviet Union has conducted several
tests of a small spaceplane that would take off atop a large rocket and then
return to Earth. There are also reports of Soviet work on a larger vehicle
designed more along the lines of the American shuttle. France is designing a
manned craft called Hermes, a re-usable vehicle that will be boosted into orbit
by an advanced Ariane 5 rocket; it is scheduled for launching in the mid-1990's.
And Britain announced recently that the Challenger disaster had not altered its
plans to develop a spaceplane called Hotol, a single-stage vehicle that would
take off from and land on conventional airport runways.

A week after the Challenger accident, President Reagan announced that he wanted
the United States to proceed with the development of a Hotol-like
transatmospheric vehicle, or aerospaceplane. Mr. Reagan called it the ''new
Orient Express,'' after its predicted ability to fly from New York to Tokyo in
two hours. This piloted, airplanelike vehicle could be ready in 15 years, and
appeals to military leaders, according to General Burke, because it would
operate at a fraction of the shuttle's costs, could take off for low-Earth orbit
from almost anywhere, and require a minimum of preflight preparation, while
still delivering payloads to orbit.

A LTHOUGH THE shuttle is assured a place in future American space policy, the
postaccident reassessment of that policy could help to resolve the longstanding
conflict between proponents of manned and unmanned space flight. Many prominent
scientists oppose the nation's emphasis on manned flight and share the view of
Dr. James A. Van Allen, the University of Iowa physicist, who noted in the
January issue of Scientific American that ''the overwhelming majority of
scientific and utilitarian achievements in space have come from unmanned,
automated and commandable spacecraft.''

Theirs has generally been a losing fight, given the momentum generated in the
early days of manned flight and the bias within NASA toward the more challenging
and extensive manned missions.

Besides, on a more fundamental level, if it is human to explore, it is natural
that humans will want to be out in space exploring, along with their robots.
Some of the bolder scenarios advanced by the National Space Commission take
cognizance of our innate curiosity, and should inspire fresh debate over new
goals for the American space program. According to some experts, in the next 20
to 50 years, given an increase in spending and a clear commitment, it should be
possible to move step-by-step toward the ''settlement'' of the inner solar
system. People could be living and mining on the moon. Space stations in various
orbits around the Earth could serve as research laboratories and ports of call
on the way to Mars - a mission we could begin to plan now, according to the
commission and scientists inside and out of NASA. It is an undertaking that just
might bring together many nations, the Soviet Union included, in a united and
unifying adventure.

But in the future, NASA will have to take a more cautious approach, most
observers agree. The agency will use the shuttle for what it can do best -
carrying huge payloads, servicing satellites and conducting human-tended
experiments - and rely more on expendable rockets for launching most satellites,
and on unmanned craft for other operations, such as planetary probes and many
scientific observations.

For NASA, this will require a basic change in thinking, and change - an
organizational shake-up, or ''cleansing,'' as one observer calls it - will be
high on the agency's and the Administration's agendas in coming months. NASA's
top management is already being replaced, and middle management may be next. The
reorganization will likely gain steam under new NASA administrator Dr. James C.
Fletcher, who was recently appointed by President Reagan, and who previously ran
NASA from 1971 to 1977. On one level, this housecleaning will serve to restore
the public's and the politicians' confidence in the agency; but the more
practical, operational result, one hopes, will be the improvement of
communications within the shuttle program, to assure that decision makers know
the real state of their technology and the flight readiness of their vehicles.

If this process brings some new blood to the agency, it could serve as a
much-needed tonic for NASA; the agency's friends and critics alike note that it
had shown signs of becoming a ''senile'' bureaucracy. Nearly all of its managers
and top engineers came to the agency when it was young and heading for the moon,
but they have grown old and set in their ways. Many of the most talented and
aggressive people left for high-paying industry jobs and could not be replaced
with younger people because of budget restrictions during the last decade.

Despite the personnel changes, the status quo will prevail at NASA, for the time
being at least. The Air Force will likely gain more influence over shuttle
operations, although it will be prevented by NASA's friends in Congress from
officially taking over the shuttle program. Inasmuch as the military's dominance
over the space program helped to draw NASA further from its original orientation
toward basic research and development, an increase in that dominance could
exacerbate the tensions that have torn at the space agency for much of the last
decade.

It is also unclear whether there will be any immediate changes in the policy
that forced NASA to attempt to turn a profit on the shuttle's commercial
operations. Some aerospace experts, such as the former deputy administrator Hans
Mark, favor removing this responsibility from NASA and creating a new agency to
handle the marketing of the shuttle. But this will only occur after the
vehicle's safety and commercial viability are fully assured. It may well be that
only public and political pressure can return to NASA its old mandate to explore
the unknown, free from conflicting urges. IN THE FIRST DAYS after the Challenger
accident, before the public reaction crystallized, Dr. Walter McDougall of
Berkeley cautioned against responding to the disaster by turning against
technology, its costs, and its dangers; but he further warned against the
tendency to ''bluff ahead with brave words about human life being the inevitable
price paid for technological progress.''

''A better response,'' wrote Dr. McDougall, ''would be to liberate the space
program, and technology in general, from the mystique that we have placed on it.
. . . Our technology is imperfect because we are imperfect, so either worshiping
or despising our technological age is just a neat shifting of blame.''

There is every indication that the American people are responding as Dr.
McDougall hopes, and will be willing to support a space program with a bold and
expansive vision. Public-opinion polls conducted after the Challenger explosion
showed that most Americans favor continuing shuttle flights, after necessary
modifications to the vehicles, and support pushing ahead with a strong space
program. There has been no Luddite reaction against modern technology, a fear
that used to haunt the administrators of the space program.

If we and our leaders follow Dr. McDougall's advice and ''liberate'' ourselves
from the aura technology possesses, then we can indeed seize this moment of
tragedy to rethink the purposes of going into space and the best means of doing
it.

Someday the digital clocks at Cape Canaveral will again count down the minutes
and seconds to the launch of a space shuttle. No one will be taking anything for
granted, though. We will look across the lagoon and sandy flats to the launching
pad with hope and apprehension. With the loss of the Challenger and its crew of
seven, we learned, to our surprise, how much these adventures into space, into
the future, mean to us as a people. Now, when the shuttles lift off from their
pads, we will study as never before the trajectory of those awesome rockets for
reassurance that a new, vibrant season has returned to Cape Canaveral. And with
it will come the renewal of a space program tempered by tragedy but emboldened
by a national resolve to push forward into this frontier of human endeavor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing of Giotto; Photo of shuttle Discovery in assembly plant (David
Burnett/Contact); Photo of Soviet space station Mir at Baikonur space center (A
Pushkaryov/TASS); Photo of Ariane rocket at French Guinana launch center
(Jean-Jacques Bernier/Gamma-Liaison)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN POLICY WITHOUT TEARS

BYLINE: By James Chace; James Chace is an editor of The Book Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1645 words


THINKING IN TIME The Uses of History for Decision-Makers. By Richard E. Neustadt
and Ernest R. May. 329 pp. New York: The Free Press. $19.95.

IN 1948 George C. Marshall, then President

Truman's Secretary of State, was concerned that the Communists seemed to be
winning the civil war in China. He therefore asked Gen. Albert Wedemeyer, who
had been the American commander in China at the end of World War II, to go to
the Far East and see what, if anything, could be done. Upon his return,
Wedemeyer recommended that Washington dispatch a few thousand military advisers.
Attached to Chinese Nationalist forces, those advisers might well halt the
Communist advances and perhaps even allow the Nationalists to win.

General Marshall rejected the advice, concluding that the United States should
not go beyond giving the Nationalists money and supplies. He later explained
this decision to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee: ''It would be
impossible to estimate the final costs. . . . It certainly would be a continuing
operation for a long time to come. It would involve this Government in a
continuing commitment from which it would practically be impossible to
withdraw.''

Marshall's judgment is cited by the authors of ''Thinking in Time'' as a
stunning example of how a statesman can - and should - look at ''an issue in the
present with a sense both of past and of future.'' Marshall's first assignment
as a young soldier had been in the Philippines after the Spanish-American War,
when American public opinion turned against imperialism and in favor of the
Filipinos who were resisting occupation. He had witnessed the public's
disenchantment over American involvement in World War I, its dislike even for
small military actions that lasted too long, such as sending the Marines into
Nicaragua in the 1920's. He had even served in China before World War II. But it
was not his firsthand experience in the Far East that made him reject sending
military advisers to China - General Wedemeyer had served there too but came to
the opposite conclusion. It was Marshall's habit of thinking in ''streams of
time'' - identifying what is worth preserving from the past to carry into the
future.

Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May, distinguished professors, respectively,
of public administration and history at Harvard University, believe that readers
of this book can learn how to use history in the manner of a Marshall. They
suggest a methodology that may or may not produce wise statesmen, but will at
least provide the means to avoid the usual pitfall of American decision makers -
excessive reliance on solving the problem at hand as quickly as possible, with
little regard for the history that led up to it or the future consequences of
actions taken. Students too often believe that international relations can best
be understood by constructing abstract models of behavior, or relying on
historical analogies that fail to question ''some presumption the
decision-makers cherish.'' In their formative years they would do far better to
read history and literature - how the Athenians' preparations for their
ill-fated Sicilian expedition in the fifth century B.C. so weakened them that
they ultimately lost their freedom, or Stendhal's antiheroic description of the
battle of Waterloo.

Before making a final decision on events of grave consequence, the authors urge
the following as standard practice: list the key elements of the immediate
situation, namely, those Known, Unclear and Presumed. That simple procedure,
they point out, ''puts attention on the situation itself instead of on the
question 'what to do?' (which thus is kept at bay a little while).'' Then
identify any past situations that appear analogous -and quickly note the
Likenesses, as well as the Differences that can block use of potentially
misleading analogies. Before defining the desired objective, examine the history
of the issue. First, ask: what's the story? And note any significant changes in
the story so far. Next, ask what the authors call ''the journalists' questions''
- where, who, how and why? Finally, place the organizations and the people
concerned with the situation at hand - what are their histories?

We are treated to cases of how the method was employed successfully (for
example, the Cuban missile crisis, when President Kennedy and his executive
committee used analogies sparingly and subjected them to careful scrutiny) and
unsuccessfully (for example, President Johnson's Vietnam policy in 1965, when he
''relied on the supposition that [the North Vietnamese Government] would respond
to pain as a person might''). The Carter Administration, not surprisingly, was
apt to ignore history. (The President himself, an engineer by training, cared
little for history; his instinct was to get things fixed and move on to the next
problem.) A signal instance the authors provide of how things went wrong when
they need not have was the ''discovery'' in 1979 of the Soviet brigade in Cuba.

The story of the Soviet brigade begins in late July, when the Democratic Senator
Richard Stone of Florida wrote the President of rumors that the Russians had
combat troops in Cuba. If true, the Senator said, Moscow was violating
agreements with Washington made after the 1962 missile crisis. Mr. Carter's
national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, asked for more data, and sure
enough, there the troops were. With the second strategic arms limitation treaty
with the Russians just signed but not ratified, the last thing Mr. Carter wanted
was evidence that the Russians did not keep their word. Nonetheless, calm
prevailed until Senator Frank Church, the chairman of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, learned of the brigade from Secretary of State Cyrus Vance.
Church was up for re-election in 1980 and was under fire for having supported
the arms control treaty and for having gone to Cuba to meet Fidel Castro. He
reacted to news of the Soviet brigade by saying the treaty should be scrapped
and the brigade removed.

Secretary Vance then declared, ''I will not be satisfied with the status quo.''
Mr. Brzezinski, in turn, saw the brigade as further evidence of Soviet
adventurism all over the world. As the mini-crisis continued through the fall,
the President and his aides finally learned more about the history of the
brigade. In fact, the brigade had been there since 1962, and did not violate
past agreements made by Kennedy. Although Kennedy had asked the Russians to
remove the troops, they had not promised to do so, and finally he dropped the
subject. Because the Carter aides failed to discover the true history of the
Soviet brigade soon enough, however, valuable time was wasted that should have
been spent getting the arms treaty ratified, and when the Russians invaded
Afghanistan in December any chances of ratification disappeared forever. ''C
OULD this farce have been avoided?'' the authors ask. Mr. Carter's staff say the
intelligence agencies should have dug deeper earlier. But no one seems to have
asked what motive the Russians could have possibly had to test Mr. Carter,
particularly with an arms control agreement pending. Mr. Neustadt and Mr. May
believe this episode ''underscores the uses of an issue's history and the
consequences of habitually slighting it.'' They add: ''The brigade became an
issue only because Carter and his aides did not know the brigade had been there
all along, hence supposed it indicative of some new move by the Russians, hence
reacted with their own form of the sovereign's complaint, He can't do that to
me.''

Nor did the intelligence agencies have the historical data at hand, the authors
tell us, ''because they were not accustomed to answering historical questions.
Carter did not ask them. So his aides did not ask them either. Nor were they
accustomed to pursuing them with persons out of government, but formerly with
it, who might have known the answers, as some surely did.'' Indeed, Dean Rusk,
who was Secretary of State in 1962 when the Soviet brigade was first discovered
there, tells us he could have ''straightened them out . . . in five minutes -
but no one called.''

There are other rich illustrations scattered throughout ''Thinking in Time,''
and they are fascinating (though the style often lapses into dreadful jargon
-''credentialed,'' ''sophisticating'' - and so, along with history, I would
recommend English composition). As for reading the great historians of the past
- from Thucydides to Henry Adams - we should not look to analogies as a guide to
present problems, a generally dangerous habit. Rather, the authors suggest, we
should understand ''Thucydides' proposition that human nature remains constant -
or better, perhaps, that dilemmas of human governance remain so.'' CHARMING
JIMMY CARTER ''Someone from another country ordinarily has little American
history in his head. . . . [The West German Chancellor Helmut] Schmidt seems to
have taken no notice of events and details offering him possibly useful
inferences about Carter. . . . With a little simple question-asking, Schmidt
might have seen Carter's details against the special events of Southern, even
Georgian, history. . . . Schmidt might then have assumed that he would be
greeted with a sermon and that a great deal of courteous ritual would have to
precede any getting down to business. One veteran of the Carter Administration,
also long acquainted with Schmidt, feels sure in retrospect that, with only a
little imaginative effort, Schmidt could have made Carter a dogged friend and
ally. We are inclined to agree. With a good deal less brainpower than Schmidt
but, partly for that reason, more experience in the exercise of personal charm,
British Prime Minister James Callaghan managed to use Carter occasionally as the
equivalent of an extra Labour Party whip.- From ''Thinking in Time.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Soviet technicians and military men disembarking at Havana in
1962 (AP)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LINGUISTIC WHIZ-BANGS

BYLINE: By Amy Hempel; Amy Hempel's collection of stories, ''Reasons to Live,''
is to be issued in paperback this spring.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 840 words


LOVE IS THE CROOKED THING By Lee K. Abbott. 182 pp. North Carolina: Algonquin
Books of Chapel Hill. $13.95. THE implicit code behind Lee K. Abbott's fiction
seems to be: if you haven't gone too far, you haven't gone far enough. Or as a
California comic put it back in the 1970's, ''There is a light within you - burn
it out!''

Not that the lights in the lives of these 11 stories burn so brightly to begin
with. Living in the author's native Southwest - a landscape of dry arroyos, of
''trees and buttes and colors from Mister Disney'' - Mr. Abbott's characters
include a local rocker known as Dr. Filth, a coked-out college professor, a
''sissy'' outlaw, and assorted ''dipsticks'' and would-be smoothies.

These are people who ''live apart from grace''; that is how Mr. Abbott put it in
his earlier collection, ''The Heart Never Fits Its Wanting.'' The first book
showed the author to be something of a linguistic hellion in the manner of such
hard-barked wordslingers as Barry Hannah and Thomas McGuane. Published in 1980,
the collection won the St. Lawrence Award for Fiction the following year.

Here, as before, Mr. Abbott's stylized hyperbolic prose and loopy humor steal
the show. The ''bifurcated and multifarious'' lectures of the college professor
who falls in love with cocaine in ''The Eldest of Things'' give way to his
classroom declaration that ''he had vaulted across the decades, from gamete to
scholar, without benefit of the swerve and downwardness of adolescence.'' He
looks forward to turning on one of his female students with what his drug dealer
has promised will be ''a mixture likened to the tears of a lost people.''

In ''The Unfinished Business of Childhood,'' Bobby Stoops, a k a Dr. Filth,
formerly of the bands Wet Places at Noon and Men Without Rhyme, chills out in
his hometown after an actionable excess on stage. Feeling better, he dresses to
achieve a ''mytholyrical ef-fect'' and confides to a band member: ''I am risen.
Verily.'' ''We are all risen in this venue,'' the musician replies.

''The Purpose of This Creature Man'' gives us the patchy career of a group of
1940's Oklahoma outlaws headed up by a desperado chiropractor named - what else?
- Doc. (Reference is made to Doc's autobiography, ''Hands Up!'') ''I want the
massive, love-loose and wicked,'' Doc says, interviewing prospective no-accounts
for a new gang. Accepted are the narrator, a poet who is in it for ''seasoning''
and the Verdigris Kid, who calls out to his gang as a robbery is foiled,
''Darlings, we have company.'' The gang does time and then regroups. The poet,
now minus one ear, says, ''I have fled poetry and its pansy ways. I am now an
essayist. Let's ride.'' And they do, with admirable self-parody, into the final
chapter of Doc's autobiography.

If that last quote sounds more than a little like Barry Hannah, there are plenty
of other noises of that kind throughout this collection. And a Vietnam story,
''We Get Smashed and Our Endings Are Swift,'' is terri-tory covered better 11
years ago in Mr. Hannah's story ''Midnight and I'm Not Famous Yet.''

Mr. Abbott's enthusiastic wordplay is a great deal of fun, as in the following
alliterative riff when a soldier puts the war behind him and says goodbye to
''that sound the muscles make in the more hormonal moments of menace.'' But
there are times when his craving for the new earns him only obfuscation, times
when speech proceeds on the broken leg of non sequitur.

When Mr. Abbott stows the be-bop speed rap for a little peace and quiet, he
writes quietly powerful stories like ''Having the Human Thing of Joy'' and ''The
Final Proof of Fate and Circumstance.'' In the former, a man's discovery of his
wife's affair makes him think of something he found years before, going through
his mother's effects after her death. He recalls the trunk filled with
photographs: ''Then I came to the one you know I'm here to tell about,'' he says
- a picture of his mother as a young woman, naked. ''If it's a ride we're on . .
. ,'' he says, ''I want to be blind. I want my train ride to be long and flat. I
don't want to see what's rising behind me.''

''The Final Proof of Fate and Circumstance'' is a father-son love story having
to do with getting to ''that place, made habitable by age and self-absorption
and fatigue, that says much about those heretofore pantywaist emotions like pity
and fear.'' The father tells his son an old and terrible story (about an
accident in which he killed a man) as a prelude to a new and terrible tale, one
whose moral, the son later tells his wife, is ''Everything is fragile.'' This
reduction is and is not the whole story, but this story closes the book in a
moving way.

It's a fact that Mr. Abbott's characters mostly sound alike - an outlaw in the
'40s and a judge in the '80s, American women and Vietcong all use the same wiggy
argot. But it's language coded for laughs, done up with tremendous energy. Mr.
Abbott is right when he says, through his outlaw Doc, ''Words redeem and give
the heart something to beat for.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEEBIEJEEBIEVILLE EXPRESS

BYLINE: By Jean Strouse; Jean Strouse is the author of ''Alice James: A
Biography'' and is working on a life of J. Pierpont Morgan.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2840 words


CHILDREN OF LIGHT By Robert Stone. 258 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $17.95.
ROBERT STONE is the apostle of strung out. People in his novels have reached the
end of the tether: alone, desperate, scared, doing a lot of hard liquor and
drugs, they hit the road. And as they go they keep listening in the dark,
against all odds, for something that might be a moral channel marker, or love,
or God, or just a way to get through the night.

Critics have compared Mr. Stone to Conrad, Faulkner, Hemingway, Graham Greene,
Malcolm Lowry, Nathanael West; all apt enough, but there's a James T. Farrell,
Raymond Chandler, Dashiell Hammett strain as well - a hard-edged, lonely
intelligence that sets bright promise off against stark failure and deals its
mordant hand lightly. In ''A Flag for Sunrise'' (1981), an anthropologist
observes: ''There's always a place for God. . . . There is some question as to
whether He's in it.'' And near the end of ''Children of Light,'' a writer tells
his lover: '' 'I would die for you.' . . . It was true, he thought, but not
really helpful.''

Like his characters, Mr. Stone doesn't stay in one place for long: he has
ventured to try something new with each book. ''A Hall of Mirrors'' (1967) leads
a trio of wasted 1960's weirdos into a nest of right-wing fanatics in New
Orleans, where America's racial and political conflicts rage to an apocalyptic
blood bath. ''Dog Soldiers''(1974), spare and cinematic, starts out in Vietnam
with an American journalist smuggling three kilos of heroin to the United
States, and ends up literally bringing the war home to a bizarre shoot-out in
the Sierras. In ''A Flag for Sunrise,'' his most prodigal, densely textured,
and, I think, brilliant book, Mr. Stone turns to American intervention in
Central America, tracing the paths of some latter-day pilgrims through
Catholicism, alcoholism, liberalism and Gnosticism toward the revolution in tiny
Tecan (more or less Nicaragua). (There's a great deal more to say about these
books, and I'll come back to them later.) Now, with ''Children of Light,'' Mr.
Stone shifts his focus from the war-torn third world to sunny California, from
soldiers of fortune to dissolute writers, from gunrunning and the demiurge to
movie making and schizophrenia. The result is a fine, complex, often funny tale,
full of lights and shadows, with great dialogue and a sharp sense of character
and place. It has some problems - I'll come to these later as well - but they
measure the daring of trying something new, and the risk proves well worth
taking. BOTH ''A Hall of Mirrors'' and ''Dog Soldiers'' were made into
disappointing films, and some of Mr. Stone's best scenes here take steady aim at
''the industry.'' The novel starts in Hollywood, where a burnt-out screenwriter
named Gordon Walker is just waking up, still half-drunk, to the reproach of a
dazzling California day. In short order Walker throws up, tries not to look in
the mirror, contemplates without affection the naked girl from whose bed he's
just climbed, helps himself to her Valium and vodka, does a line of cocaine and
tries not to think about his kids or recently failed marriage. Instead of
writing, Walker has been acting in a Seattle production of ''King Lear.'' Lines
from the play keep coming to mind. Catching his mirrored reflection by mistake,
Walker looks, he decides, ''like a man in his forties who drank'' - and then
hears from Lear: '' 'He hath ever but slenderly known himself.' For the first
time in his articulate, thoroughly examined life, Walker wondered if that might
not be true of him. Not possible, he decided. He knew himself well enough. It
was the rest of things that gave him trouble.''

Wrong. Walker keeps blindly trying to figure himself out - and at the same time
to obliterate the past -in a fog of drink and coke and quotes. Needing a dream,
''a little something to get by on,'' he takes off for Baja where a former lover,
Lu Anne Bourgeois, his ''dark angel'' - Louisianan, Catholic, schizophrenic - is
on location playing the lead in a film he wrote 10 years ago based on Kate
Chopin's 1899 novel, ''The Awakening.''

On the way, Walker encounters a cast of cameos who deserve a review of their
own. He spends a night at a seedy beach hotel called San Epifanio (all
double-entendres intended) with another former lover, Shelley -''a clamorous
presence, never at rest. Even quiet, her reverie cast a shadow and her silences
had three kinds of irony. She was a workout.'' Looking for something to ease him
off drinking and coke, Walker next stops to see Sam Quinn, a former stunt man
with too much belly and a gold death's-head in one of his front teeth. Quinn
hasn't got any downers - he's just buried an old pal, welded into an oil drum,
who OD'd on nitrous oxide -but as he and Walker talk about old times, they spot
two hang gliders high over a nearby ridge. ''Think that isn't kicks, man?'' asks
Quinn. ''That's the way to do your life, Gordo. Look the gray rat in the eye.''
Quinn sends Walker on to Dr. Er Siriwai, formerly the film colony's favorite
drug source, now the proprietor of a laetrile clinic ''a few hours south of the
border.'' Siriwai dispenses Quaaludes, quotes (''Lear,'' of course, and W. C.
Fields, who called death ''the Man in the Bright Nightgown'') and caution:
''You're going to see that schizophrenic poppet, eh? That little southern
creature with the booby eyes? . . . Don't give her cocaine, Gordon. . . . You
want to see fair Heebiejeebieville, my lad, give one of them cocaine.''

Ten years ago, Lu Anne gave Walker ''The Awakening,'' and he wrote her into the
part of Edna Pontellier, a young Louisianan who finds she can't fully give
herself to her children and stifling marriage; Edna tries painting, takes a
lover and finally walks into the sea. Ten years ago, nobody wanted the
screenplay, but now, after the book has been ''discovered'' by academics and
feminists, Hollywood has taken it up: ''It was all perceived as prestigious,
timely and cheap. There was a real possibility that the interests involved might
find themselves in control of a well-made picture that would generate good
reviews, awards and, with the right handling, a favorable profit line. A
vestigial social impulse was being discharged. Somewhere, deep within the
Funhouse, they had opted for a calculated risk.''

Walker arrives to find Grand Isle, La., reconstructed on a Mexican beach - live
oaks trucked in from Northern California, dripping with Spanish moss, a field of
flowering anthemis vines, a tiny, antique trolley set on a narrow-gauge track
across the sand. He also finds Walter Drogue Jr., the picture's director, who
''thinks most people are wienies,'' wants to grab Walker's writing credit and
tells Lu Anne, about to do one of Edna's last scenes: ''Take care of it for me,
kid. . . . The old nothingness-and-grief routine.'' Along for the ride is
Drogue's father, ''one of the industry's living Buddhas. A director himself for
almost fifty years, Drogue senior had been publicly caned, fired upon by sexual
rivals, blacklisted, subpoenaed and biographied in French.'' Mostly, Drogue Sr.
is interested now in sex, but once in a while he talks about the old days,
before sound - at which point his daughter-in-law squeals, ''I love it . . .
when they say 'before sound.' ''

And Walker eventually finds Lu Anne, giving a brilliant performance as Edna, off
her antipsychotic medication (''I'm finding the drug very hard to work behind. .
. . I can't use my eyes''), beginning to drink and hallucinate. Her psychiatrist
husband and children have just left the set - and probably her life. Soon she
ends up with Walker in bed, then in his coke stash. Siriwai was right: fair
Heebiejeebieville doesn't do it justice.

There aren't any good guys in Robert Stone country, but there are people who
fight the good fight - unholy innocents who do, as Quinn put it, ''look the gray
rat in the eye'' - and Lu Anne belongs among them. In ''Dog Soldiers,'' Ray
Hicks, a former Marine who reads Nietzsche and agrees to carry heroin to the
United States as a favor to a friend, gets intercepted by a group of lethal,
crooked narcs; he runs for a while, then settles in to battle with a kind of
samurai grace. In ''A Flag for Sunrise,'' an American nun called Sister Justin
(Martyr) loses her faith and her virginity, joins the local revolutionaries,
gets captured and hideously tortured by a lieutenant in the Guardia Nacional and
manages to take him out spiritually as she dies. Also in ''Sunrise,'' Pablo
Tabor, a homicidal Coast Guard deserter constantly high on Benzedrine has, in
his dark questions and grim determination to survive, a negative force that
highlights the corruptions and betrayals of liberal imperialism.

In ''Children of Light,'' Mr. Stone sets the fight on less exotic ground, among
writers and actors and failures of love. Here, art plays tricks with life and
Hollywood plays tricks with art; children go wrong; madness and genius walk
their fine lines. In order to act, Lu Anne (whose stage name is Lee Verger)
stops taking her pills even though without them she hallucinates ''Long
Friends'' - ghosts with baby faces, French voices, delicate wings - and worse:
the hanged Christ in the local Baja church turns into a cat, charred black,
''its fur turned to ash, its face burned away to show the grinning fanged
teeth.'' Lu Anne, the Drogues agree, is a hallucinee in the ranks of ''Dickens .
. . Joan Miro . . . Wagner . . . Mahler. Max Reinhardt'': she mines her own pain
for her work, at great cost. Riding the trolley by the sea as Edna, she thinks
of her childhood fear, her failure as a mother, her endless despair and
insatiable appetite for ''life more abundant'' - and weeps. Watching this
footage, Drogue Jr. says, ''Man, . . . that's what I call inhabited space.'' His
father asks, '' 'Why did you have her cry?' '' 'Hell, she was crying. Why not?'
. . .

'' 'What do you mean?' old Drogue demanded. 'It's her cracking up.'

'' 'For Christ's sake, Dad, don't you think I know that? It'll play just fine.'
. . .

'' 'She has a way of being crazy,' old Drogue said, 'that photographs pretty
well.' ''

Lu Anne flips quickly from grief to antic mania. She can match Walker quote for
quote, but where his main text is ''Lear,'' hers cover an extravagant range from
''As You Like It'' (''I . . . can strike you lame with reasons and be mad
without any'') and ''Antony and Cleopatra'' to Emily Dickinson, Kate Chopin,
Kipling, Dickens and Scripture. But literature, like religion and love, can't
save her. (It's to her Walker says, ''I would die for you'' - true but not
really helpful.) She's out there by herself, staring down the gray rat, and she
makes her own apocalypse. On the top of a mountain, in a wildly sad and clever
scene complete with storm, stigmata, Shakespeare, biblical cantation and
Gadarene swine, she goes for holiness in a pigsty. MR. STONE has a genius for
the undercut: he provides no safe places or easy comforts -no clear moral
sanctions or oversimplifications. Like Lu Anne (and most of his main
characters), he was raised Catholic, and like her he cannot find redemption in
the traditions behind ritual and allusion. When Shelley delivers a kind of
epilogue with a quote from ''As You Like It'' - ''Men have died from time to
time and worms have eaten them, but not for love'' - somebody else at the table
says, ''Great line.'' And in the mountaintop melodrama, Walker tries to talk Lu
Anne back from the edge of death by promising baptism, renewal, rebirth - but
she's thrown away his cocaine. ''Takes the edge off baptism, renewal and
rebirth, doesn't it?'' she asks. ''When you're out of coke?''

Mr. Stone won't let his narrative rest on Walker's bitterness, and doesn't
idealize Lu Anne's pain (his own mother was schizophrenic). The question of
motivation here, however, is tricky. In the earlier books, whatever has people
so strung out is implicit - the war in Vietnam, racial hatred, United States
incursions in Central America would be quite sufficient, at one level, but
there's also a lapsed-Catholic ear tuned to the cosmic menace. In an exquisite
passage of ''A Flag for Sunrise,'' a skin diver down too far suddenly sees a
shudder pass through showers of blue-gray fish, ''as if the ocean itself had
begun to tremble.'' Then, ''turning full circle, he saw the same shudder pass
over all the living things around him - a terror had struck the sea, an
invisible shadow, a silence within a silence.'' That's perfect: no shark
appears, no leviathan - just raw terror.

In ''Children of Light,'' motivations have moved into the narrative. Walker
flails around wondering why he does things -and comes up with answers that don't
make any difference. That benighted quest is just right in Walker, but Mr.
Stone's picture of what makes Lu Anne tick doesn't quite work. It's fine as
metaphysics: just before her husband leaves, she tells him that her illness
''doesn't have a moral . . . Not of the kind you're comfortable with.''
''Evil,'' he agrees, ''is not the sort of term I'm comfortable with.'' But the
parallel with ''The Awakening'' seems heavy-handed, as does Lu Anne's search for
her ''real'' self in mirrors, in Edna, in Shakespeare's Rosalind. Mr. Stone
describes key scenes from her childhood, as if to suggest the origins of her
madness, but they feel contrived, called upon to explain too much: her schizy
sense of unreality comes through much better in action than in explication. And
though what bothers her and Walker most is the damage they've done to their
children, this sorrow is somehow abstract, offstage, not really part of the
experience in the book. All along Mr. Stone has been updating the 19th-century
novel of ideas, and he's more skillful at mythic, apocalyptic narrative than at
psychological realism. The extraordinary precision and suggestive force of his
writing work best when he gives direct fictional life to his larger ideas and
questions, when the story itself carries the weight of its own meaning.

The title, ''Children of Light,'' comes from I Thessalonians: ''Ye are all the
children of the light, and the children of the day: we are not of the night, nor
of darkness. Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch and be
sober.'' There are, in fine Robert Stone tradition, seven kinds of irony to this
silent invocation of those who stay awake and sober, armed with faith, love and
the hope of salvation. One night in Baja, Lu Anne and Walker attend a
terrifically awful dinner party where everybody gets drunk and mean. A Mexican
painter named Maldonado comes upon Walker snorting cocaine in the john and
announces that coke, among his friends, is ''frowned on as bourgeois. As
gringo.'' Nonetheless, he helps himself, and Walker observes: ''A case could
certainly be made . . . that it's bad for the Indians. In terms of
exploitation.''

''Maldonado waved the argument away. 'It's neither good nor bad for the Indians.
It makes no difference for them. It's ourselves and our societies that we're
destroying.' '' SMILING THROUGH THE APOCALYPSE ''The book's grimness is part of
what I believe about how life is,'' Robert Stone said in a cheerful voice about
his novel ''Children of Light.'' ''It's very difficult to be even basically
decent; it is much easier for people to betray themselves than we think it is.''

It is hard to believe during a telephone conversation with Mr. Stone that he is
the author of four bleak novels that examine the awfulness of drug addiction,
alcoholism, schizophrenia and other illnesses. He was in Adelaide, Australia,
for an arts festival, after which he was off to similar festivities in
Wellington, New Zealand. And he was apparently undaunted by a nasty gash on his
shin that he got when he ran into some stag coral while snorkeling off Perth. He
enjoys snorkeling, and a diving incident forms a key allegory in his novel ''A
Flag for Sunrise.''

Mr. Stone, whose books are rich with literary allusions and careful detail about
exotic locales, is an autodidact and a perceptive traveler. He dropped out of
St. Ann's High School in Manhattan, but has been reading and traveling ever
since, it seems.

And Mr. Stone knows about the drug-induced and schizophrenic hallucinations that
permeate ''Children of Light.'' His mother was a schizophrenic and, he said,
''When you're a small child, you put this sort of thing out of your mind.'' To a
degree, he added, '' 'Children of Light' is cathartic.'' Furthermore: ''I come
out of the generation of drugs when we were all experimenting with LSD - a bunch
of artists experimenting. Drugs marked my generation very strongly. But I lost a
number of friends, by which I mean they are dead.'' Does he take drugs now? ''I
don't use illegal drugs,'' he said. ''I am a social drinker, and even that I
regard as a waste of my creative energy. I write good prose. I wouldn't be able
to do that if I were dependent on drugs and alcohol, which I use progressively
less and which I anticipate using not at all.''- Barth Healey

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Robert Stone (NYT/Susan Fergusson)

TYPE: ReviewREVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND OPINION;
LIFE-AND-DEATH QUESTIONS THAT HAVE NO ANSWERS

BYLINE: By ANGELA AMATO; Angela Amato lives in Smithtown.

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 22, Column 4; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 766 words


RECENTLY, I have been particularly burdened by the responsibility of parenthood
in today's complex world. Lately, it seems to my children that I frequently have
no answers -not that I ever pretended to have all the answers.

But naturally they wanted to believe that I could take care of all their
problems and protect them from all harm. So, too, they wanted to believe that I
am in perfect control of my life and that I am never afraid.

Unfortunately, they have observed my fear and sadness recently and they have
witnessed these emotions in other adults and their sense of security has been
shattered. For the first time they feel vulnerable to events beyond their
parents' control - beyond anyone's control.

I thought I had become desensitized to shock. My generation had coped with the
assassinations of John and Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. The Vietnam
massacre of our youth entered our homes in a personal way. By the time we
approached our 40's, we had personally been exposed to death, illness and
divorce. A feeling of acceptance and complacency began to settle over us. We had
experienced terrible public and private disasters, and yet we had survived and
coped. Our spirit had not been broken. We had discovered reservoirs of strength
in ourselves.

Through osmosis, our children sensed our strength. We hoped the wisdom we had
gained would be automatically absorbed by them - our parents' generation
probably hoped for the same miracle - but it was not to be. In our childrens'
short lifetimes they have become keenly aware of violence in the world.

An attempt has been made on the life of the Pope and on the life of our
President. A threatening nuclear accident occurred at Three Mile Island. Last
year, the famine in Ethiopia became a great worldwide concern - the children
participated in fund raising and Live Aid. The severe earthquake in Mexico
aroused compassion, and the children eagerly participated in collecting food,
clothing and toys. But still, in our youngsters' minds, these areas remained
worlds away.

Last fall, Hurricane Gloria struck. Long Island bore its share of the storm, and
our children witnessed firsthand this natural disaster - fatal accidents, power
failures and damaged homes and cars. Their protective shell had been cracked.

Just when things were getting back to normal, the metropolitan area was suddenly
shaken by a mild earthquake. How could this happen in New York? Conflicting
reports of the Shoreham nuclear reactor's safety are broadcast daily, causing
more doubt and concern. Our sense of safety was again tested.

Violence occurred again with the hijacking of the cruise ship Achille Lauro and
the murder of an innocent American tourist by terrorists. The holiday season
brought more European terrorist attacks and the cold-blooded murder of more
innocent tourists. Now we as Americans are warned by the President that travel
abroad may be unsafe.

In school, these current events are studied and discussed. Students are told
that school trips are canceled. At home, the discussions continue. ''Why do
these things have to happen?'' I am asked. I, who used to have some answers,
must reply, ''I don't know - nobody does.''

I sense their disappointment and frustration with my response, with their
teachers' responses, with the clergy's response.

Shock again forced its way into our daily lives with the tragic explosion of the
shuttle Challenger. As children watched this event ''live'' on television, they
were totally bewildered. ''Why?'' and ''How?'' they asked again. ''Nobody knows
for sure,'' they are again told. We do the best we can by comforting each other
and letting the tears flow. How we ached for the families of the astronauts.

We have all settled back now to our regular activities; children appear to have
coped and accepted this latest tragedy. But can a child's loss of trust in the
world around him ever be restored? There is nothing we can do to prepare or
insulate them against these sudden and repeated events. But, perhaps, we can
help strengthen them as individuals by reinforcing the power of hope and courage
in the human spirit.

We can communicate and share our fears so as not to allow them to dominate our
lives. We must not let fear paralyze us and keep us from following our dreams.
Take every moment we can to share joy and laughter.

No, we can't give our children guarantees - they have learned that now. But we
can replace fear with hope, sorrow with courage and determination - noble
qualities in the human spirit. If, as parents, we accomplish this, then we have
succeeded.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodian Rebels Offer A Plan for Peace

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 136 words

DATELINE: PEKING, March 17


A Cambodian rebel coalition issued a peace plan today calling for a partnership
with the Hanoi-backed Cambodian Government and the gradual withdrawal of
Vietnamese troops under a United Nations-supervised cease-fire.

Diplomats said the proposal marked the first time Prince Norodom Sihanouk and
his two coalition partners had formally offered to form a government with the
Vietnamese-installed Government of Heng Samrin.

The plan was released at the end of a meeting in Peking attended by Prince
Sihanouk, the coalition president, and his two partners, Son Sann and Khieu
Samphan.

The plan included a call for negotiations with Vietnam and possibly other
countries on the withdrawal of some 160,000 Vietnamese troops from Cambodia.
Vietnamese Embassy officials in Peking said they had not seen the document.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Working Profile: Senator Jim Sasser;
Evolution of a Stand: Memphis, Marines, Managua

BYLINE: By, Special to the New York TimesBy STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 17


When Senator Jim Sasser of Tennessee was selected to deliver the Democratic
response to President Reagan's speech on Nicaragua Sunday night, even some of
his own colleagues were surprised. In nine years in the Senate, Mr. Sasser has
seldom played a major role on foreign policy issues or appeared on the
television talk shows.

But Mr. Sasser's emergence on the Nicaragua issue signifies a developing
consensus in Democratic ranks and a new willingness to compromise with the
Administration, which wants $100 million to aid the rebels fighting the
Nicaraguan regime.

Instead of selecting a strident critic of the Administration to speak for the
Democrats, party leaders picked a moderate Southerner who has ties to all wings
of the party, a behind-the-scenes operator with good political instincts who has
prospered in a conservative state, and therefore a man trusted to guide the
Democrats through a tough issue that bristles with political thorns.

Almost daily for the last week, Mr. Sasser met privately with a select group of
Senate Democrats, listening to their views, gauging the political climate and
trying to develop an alternative to the President's plan.

Their working document is a proposal advanced by Mr. Sasser that would allocate
the $100 million requested by the Administration but put it in escrow for six
months while the Administration tries to negotiate a peaceful settlement with
the Sandinistas who rule Nicaragua. If Congress determined at the end of that
period that the Sandinistas were not negotiating in good faith, the money would
be released to the rebels.

'A Genuine Compromise'

Mr. Sasser, a lawyer, acknowledges that his proposal gets criticism from both
those members of Congress who want to send the money right away and those who
want to cut the rebels off completely. But his skill is finding what he calls
the ''mainstream'' of party sentiment, and after dozens of conversations he says
he is convinced that a ''substantial core'' of Congress ''wants this type of
moderate response.''

''They see it as a way to really put the Sandinistas to the test,'' Mr. Sasser
said today, ''as a way of really exhausting the possibility of negotiations in
the region. What I'm proposing is a genuine compromise.''

Mr. Sasser's own evolution to his middleground position mirrors the change in
Congress on the Nicaragua issue over the last few years. In 1983 Congress barred
all aid to the rebels, known as contras, and the Tennessee Democrat voted for
the ban.

A year later, the Senator made his first mark on the issue when he used his
position as ranking Democrat on the Appropriations subcommittee that reviews
military construction projects to inspect American installations in Honduras.
Unlike many politicians, Mr. Sasser tends to listen more than he talks, and he
came away convinced that the Defense Department was illegally siphoning off
funds to pay for air strips and other fortifications that Congress would never
approve directly.

The whole situation in Central America reminded Mr. Sasser, who served six years
in the Marine Corps reserve, of how the United States got drawn into Vietnam. At
49 years of age, he belongs to the generation that fought in Southeast Asia and
now has draft-age children of its own.

The scars from that war still cloud his view of Nicaragua, and in his speech
Sunday night he spoke feelingly of his fears: ''As the father of a 17-year-old
son, I say, Mr. President, let's not rush blindly into that quagmire. We've done
that before.''

But like many members of Congress, Mr. Sasser has grown increasingly
uncomfortable with the Sandinistas and their leader, Daniel Ortega Saavedra. His
memory of Vietnam has been balanced against the memory of another American
foreign policy disaster.

''You see Ortega on television, with his green uniform and red collar tabs, and
it reminds you of what happened 25 years ago in Cuba,'' the Senator said. ''You
can see this weighing on many of my colleagues here.' '

Mr. Sasser, a native of Memphis, won his Senate seat in 1976 by upsetting the
incumbent, Bill Brock, who is now Secretary of Labor; he survived a re-election
campaign in 1982 when he was a leading target of the Republican right wing. As
these elections demonstrated, he has well-tuned political antennae. And recently
they have picked up the vibrations many of his fellow Democrats were sensing,
that a politician who appeared to support the Sandinistas could be courting
political trouble.

This concern was particularly acute in Southern states like Tennessee, where the
anti-Communist tradition is strong and voters worry that growing Sandinista
influence in Central America could send a wave of political refugees northward.

''We didn't want to be viewed as giving aid and comfort to that government,'' he
said.

So last month Mr. Sasser decided to do some more listening, and he made a
three-day swing through four countries in Latin America. His aim, he said, was
to hear from leaders in the region directly, without their comments being
''filtered through the State Department or anyone else.''

He came back convinced, he said, that these leaders wanted the United States to
''keep the pressure on the Sandinistas'' to negotiate more seriously. So he
forged his compromise proposal and set about trying to sell it to his colleagues
and to the American public.

As Congress prepares to vote on the President's aid request in the days ahead,
Mr. Sasser's political instincts will face their strongest test yet. But he has
not been wrong very often. Just ask the Secretary of Labor, the former Senator
from Tennessee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sen. Jim Sasser (UPI)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: ONE-ACT PLAYS ABOUT VIETNAM

BYLINE: By D. J. R. BRUCKNER

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 898 words


THE common theme of three one-acters by Stephen Metcalfe at the Vineyard Theater
is the suffering of families that lost sons in the Vietnam War. But it is the
comedy in each that makes the hurt poignant, and Mr. Metcalfe explores some
aspects of the war at home that were mostly neglected in angrier Vietnam plays
of the 70's.

In the first, ''Sorrows and Sons,'' Edwin, a banker and Yale alumnus, visits his
son Bucky on Parents' Day in 1974 at a small college in Pennsylvania. The often
comic conversation eventually reveals the father's consternation that Bucky
could not make it into Yale and his hopeless sense of loss at the death of
Bucky's older brother in Vietnam. They are interrupted by Burt, a breezy car
salesman who is the father of Bucky's roommate. He takes Bucky's side in the
boy's confrontation with Edwin. The verbal duel between the men exposes how deep
Edwin's pain at the loss of one son is and how unjust he has been to the other,
but it also lays open Burt's disappointment with and occasional dislike of his
own son.

As Bucky studies in ''Spittin' Image,'' the second play, his dormitory room is
invaded by Megs, a strung-out truckdriver. In Vietnam, Bucky's brother, Bobby,
had been killed when he tried to rescue Megs in a firefight and Megs's visit to
Bucky is a nightmare for both of them. His wild stories about adventures on the
road and his richly metaphorical accounts of the depravity of almost everyone
eventually turn into a confession of his inability to escape terrifying memories
and the fearful hallucinations that lurk on the periphery of his vision
alongside the highways he travels.

''Pilgrims,'' the third play, takes us into a coffee shop where high school
seniors gather in 1970. The son of its owner, Dee, has gone to Vietnam as a
Marine and there is a little shrine to him in the diner, a photograph and a
flag. The young people who come into Dee's place - Toole, the madcap class
president; Roy, the handsomest boy in school; Marcia, the sexually wise vamp,
and Jilly, the shy girl who is a part-time waitress in the shop -let Dee into
the secrets of their confused emotions and tease him about his patriotism. And
his pleasure in them is infectious, especially when he is acting as a
matchmaker. Only at the end do we discover that he has been hiding a painful
secret about his son.

Mr. Metcalfe is not always his own master. Some of his gags would work better in
a television sitcom than in the depths he is trying to search in these plays.
And in ''Pilgrims'' his inability to reject funny but distracting incidents at
times turns him aside from pursuing the powerful emotional lines of his plot.
But on the whole these little plays are deeply moving; the laughter and sorrow
in each of them come together naturally as our understanding of the fragile
characters grows. They are compact, complex and intelligent, and they convey a
vision of life that is humane and compassionate.

John Hallow as Edwin and Richard Thomsen as Burt in ''Sorrows and Sons'' turn
their characters into men whose knowledge has been imposed on them with such
force that they seem almost heroic to have survived only half shattered. Dann
Florek as Megs in ''Spittin' Image'' makes the vision of vitality eaten away by
loneliness and terror so vivid he is almost physically painful to watch. Steven
Flynn, who plays Bucky in both pieces, has a problem. To bring out the unfolding
suffering of his character he needs more presence, and more variety of speech
than he has yet; and, to be fair, he would need in crucial places stronger lines
than the playwright has given him. We may feel sorry for him but never feel we
understand him.

Eddie Jones puts a bit too much of Carroll O'Connor's Archie Bunker into Dee at
the beginning of ''Pilgrims,'' but in its final moments his agony and his
willingness to be comforted by a little girl are very convincing. Playing a
teen-ager is a hard assignment for anyone and two of the four here do not
succeed. Grant Shaud does, as the loony class president, but Terri Hawkes makes
Marcia's aggressive sexuality believable but not her vulnerability, and Robert
Tyler as Roy simply does not look 18 - it is not his face and figure that
destroy the illusion, but his movement and speech.

Elizabeth Berridge as the shy Jilly is wonderful. Her surprising confidence in
her own emotions when she becomes attracted to Roy is exactly right; we can see
her growing up. And at the climax of the play, when she is reciting a
Shakespeare speech for Dee and hesitates, looking at his son's picture, we
believe she fears to say the next line because it predicts death - until she
turns and lets Dee know that she has intuited his devastating secret. It is a
fine moment for her, and for us. War Pains Three one-act plays by Stephen
Metcalfe; directed by Peter Frisch; set design by James Wolk; lighting design by
Richard Moore; costume design by Jeffrey Ullman; production stage manager,
Richard Costabile. Presented by the Vineyard Theater, Douglas Aibel, artistic
director; Barbara Zinn Krieger, executive director; Gary P. Steuer, managing
director. At the Vineyard Theater, 309 East 26th Street. SORROWS AND SONS
BuckySteven Flynn EdwinJohn Hallow BurtRichard Thomsen and SPITTIN' IMAGE
BuckyMr. Flynn MegsDann Florek and PILGRIMS DeeEddie Jones JillyElizabeth
Berridge RoyRobert Tyler TooleGrant Shaud MarciaTerri Hawkes

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 19, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN REPORTED TO LACK 10 VOTES ON AID TO REBELS

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 992 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 18


Congressional leaders of both parties agreed today that President Reagan must
persuade at least 10 more House members to vote for his $100 million aid package
for the Nicaraguan rebels or face defeat.

Mr. Reagan, meanwhile, continued to lobby legislators for the aid, one of the
major foreign policy initiatives of his Presidency. The House is scheduled to
vote on the measure Thursday.

Vote counters on Capitol Hill say the President has apparently won over a
handful of wavering legislators in recent days. Supporters of Mr. Reagan contend
that, given the political leverage of the White House, he is within reach of the
votes he needs.

Speech Wins Few Over

But Republican and Democratic leaders agree that his nationally televised speech
Sunday night, in which he appealed to members of the public to contact their
representatives, failed to generate a surge of public sentiment in favor of his
aid proposal.

The offices of most members of Congress reported that calls ran significantly
against the President.

''The Great Communicator didn't reach the American people,'' said Representative
Jim Cooper, Democrat of Tennessee, who reported that 60 percent of his callers
opposed helping the rebels. ''I wouldn't fault his communication skills, I would
fault the product he was selling.''

Bigger Worries Are Noted

Representative Robert H. Michel, the Republican leader, expressed disappointment
that the calls were running about even in his Illinois district.

''People just don't get cranked up about this,'' said Mr. Michel, who supports
the President. ''In my district they're worried about jobs and losing their
farms. That's the problem out there in the country.''

Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. said of the President, ''We have him by 10 or 12
votes.'' And Thomas S. Foley of Washington, the majority whip, said, ''It's
going to be a fairly close vote, but we're going to win.''

Trent Lott of Mississippi, the minority whip, agreed that ''there hasn't been a
mass movement'' toward the President's position and that ''the balance still
hangs with 10 people.'' But he added that the President could still squeak
through if he ''follows through'' on his television speech with personal
lobbying.

Reagan Meets Lawmakers

The President held several meetings at the White House with wavering lawmakers
and reports circulated on Capitol Hill that the Administration was offering to
look favorably on pet projects in exchange for votes on the aid issue.

''There is trading going on,'' said Representative David E. Bonior, Democrat of
Michigan, but he declined to provide specific examples.

Publicly, the Administration has insisted that it will consider no compromise on
its request of $70 million in military aid and $30 million for such nonmilitary
purposes as food and medicine. But lawmakers in both parties reported that White
House aides were quietly asking for recommendations that Mr. Reagan could
include in a letter to Congress just before the vote.

Presumably the letter would include some sort of a promise by the President to
pursue negotiations with the Nicaraguan Government. The widespread belief that
Mr. Reagan has not seriously sought a negotiated settlement is the single
biggest argument against his aid request, lawmakers agree.

Representative John R. McKernan Jr. of Maine, one of a small group of undecided
Republicans, said that if such a letter was ''strict enough'' and could not be
''twisted'' by the White House, it might win the President a few extra votes.

Many 'Feel Betrayed'

But Representative Bonior said many lawmakers ''feel betrayed'' by the President
because he wrote a letter last year promising negotiations but did not follow
through.

''I frankly don't think a letter will make any difference,'' said Mr. Bonior,
one of the chief Democratic strategists on the issue.

Another bipartisan group of swing legislators described to White House aides
today an alternative proposal that they intend to bring forward should the
President's request lose on Thursday.

Representative Rod Chandler, a Washington Republican who helped draft the plan,
said the $70 million in military aid would be suspended for 90 days while
attempts to negotiate with the Managua Government went forward. The $30 million
in humanitarian aid would be allotted immediately.

In addition, a five-member bipartisan commission would be formed to monitor the
negotiations and report back to Congress. If at the end of the 90-day period the
President certified that the Sandinistas were not negotiating seriously, the
military aid would be released. But Congress would have the right to approve a
bill blocking the aid within 15 days.

Some Want a Compromise

Some form of compromise solution appeals to moderates in both parties. ''Many of
us don't view the Speaker, or the President, as having a policy in Central
America,'' Mr. McKernan said. ''One wants all military aid, the other wants
none. We feel we have to bring them together. We need a carrot and a stick.''

Even supporters of the President have been surprised that his speech on Sunday
did not generate more support for his proposal. But foreign policy issues seldom
make a major impact on Capitol Hill and Representative Michel said of Nicaragua:
''Most people don't know where it is.''

Speaker O'Neill said many voters ''just don't think we've gone the route of
diplomacy'' and fear deeper American military involvement in the region.

''The shadows of Vietnam haven't left us,'' Mr. O'Neill said.

Some lawmkers assert that when Mr. Reagan and his advisers accused opponents of
supporting Communists they polarized the issue and alienated some potential
allies.

''If they want to play that game I'll vote no,'' said Representative W. G.
Hefner, a North Carolina Democrat who supported the Administration's aid request
last year. ''After they get through name-calling and get some rational thinking
I'll be happy to consider it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 19, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BRAZIL SURPRISED TO BE ON REAGAN'S LIST

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 581 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, March 18


For the second time in three weeks, Brazil has expressed surprise and puzzlement
at being included by the Reagan Administration among countries in the Western
Hemisphere potentially threatened by Nicaragua.

On Monday evening, the Foreign Ministry formally asked the United States Embassy
in Brasilia to clarify a statement by President Reagan on Sunday night that
''radicals'' from Brazil were among foreigners receiving military training in
Nicaragua.

Earlier this month, Brazil also asked for an explanation as to why a map
displayed by Secretary of State George P. Shultz in Congressional testimony on
Feb. 27 showed Brazil colored red and identified as a target of what American
officials said was Nicaraguan subversion.

In a reply delivered last week, the Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs, Elliot Abrams, said that ''there was no intent to
misconstrue events in Brazil'' and that ''we are aware that there is no
guerrilla movement in Brazil.''

Brazil's Place on the Map

In his address Sunday, Mr. Reagan pointed to a map showing most of Latin
America, including Brazil, colored red and said radicals from those countries
had received ''support in the form of military training, safe haven,
communications, false documents, safe transit and sometimes weapons'' from
Nicaragua.

Brazilian officials, who had reportedly considered the matter closed by Mr.
Abrams's earlier letter, said that President Reagan's statement has caused
''irritation'' and that that they had ''no knowledge'' of any Brazilian
nationals being trained in Nicaragua.

Brazil is actively supporting the efforts of the four Contadora nations to
promote peace in Central America, but has maintained a low diplomatic profile in
the conflict between the United States and Nicaragua, receiving delegations from
both Governments but avoiding taking sides.

Meanwhile, the Brazilian police announced the arrest of 8 Americans and 10
Argentines aboard an oceangoing tug that was found to be carrying about six tons
of weapons. The tug, the Panamanian-registered Nobistor, anchored outside Rio de
Janeiro over the weekend, reportedly after suffering mechanical problems.

A police spokesman said the eight Americans described themselves as ''Vietnam
veterans and mercenaries'' who were protecting two containers full of machine
guns, rifles, ammunition, inflatable boats and uniforms and first-aid equipment
acquired in Argentina. The spokesman said the group reported it was taking the
weapons from Argentina to Ghana.

'Ordinary Consular Matter'

United States officials said that they had seen no evidence to suggest the
weapons were destined for Central America and that, for the moment, they were
treating the case ''as an ordinary consular matter.''

One well-placed Brazilian official said that ''the weapons were apparently
destined for some subversive movement in Ghana, but the operation went wrong.''

In an unrelated development, the Governor of the northeastern state of Maranhao,
Luis Rocha, told reporters today that pro-Sandinista buttons and sophisticated
weapons had been found among peasants involved in a land dispute in his state
last August.

He said local peasants had reported that the buttons and weapons had been
provided by priests who had arrived there from Nicaragua, although he offered no
concrete evidence to support his statement. A senior official in Brasilia said
that ''the highest levels of government'' had never before heard this
accusation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 20, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Condemns Plan By Cambodian Rebels

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 140 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 19


Vietnam today condemned a peace proposal from a rebel coalition fighting
Hanoi-backed forces in Cambodia as ''unjust'' and ''hostile,'' but stopped short
of rejecting it.

The official Hanoi radio said the eight-point plan announced Monday in Peking
''contains a lot of unjust demands and reflects the hostility of China in the
face of the constant growth of the People's Republic of Vietnam.''

The report said China had invited three Cambodian rebel leaders, Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, former Prime Minister Son Sann and the Khmer Rouge leader Khieu
Samphan, to Peking and ''helped them rig up'' the proposal.

The proposal calls for a phased withdrawal of Vietnamese troops in Cambodia,
formation of a four-party coalition government including the pro-Vietnamese
party of President Heng Samrin, and United Nations-supervised elections.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 20, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
The Nation at 120: A Diverse Gathering

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 235 words


Radicals in cowboy boots, refugees from Morningside Heights in the 50's, overage
hippies with granny glasses, pin-striped young executives and even youths in
punk hairdos and wearing earrings shared popcorn and beer and opinions Tuesday
night in the atmosphere of a 70's political convention.

About 3,450 people crowded into the Seventh Regiment Armory, at Park Avenue and
66th Street, to celebrate the 120th anniversary of The Nation.

Guests ranged from Alger Hiss to the teen-age daughters of Arthur L. Carter, the
chief financial backer of the weekly. The other two partners are Hamilton Fish
3d, publisher, and Victor S. Navasky, editor. All beamed during the evening,
which stretched until midnight.

Studs Terkel, the Pulitzer Prize-winning author who was master of ceremonies,
recalled, not so fondly, old causes. Joan Baez sang songs.

''I started reading The Nation as a sophomore in high school,'' said George
McGovern, former Democratic Senator of South Dakota and Presidential candidate,
who pays for his subscription, like everyone else. ''I even voted for one of its
editors, Henry Wallace.''

The key speaker was the Rev. Jesse Jackson, another former Presidential
candidate.

''No to the contras!'' he cried in a reference to United States-backed rebels
fighting the Nicaraguan Government. A mighty roar went up, an echo of anti-
Vietnam War rallies. Then as now, The Nation was opposed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 20, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Congress;
Words, Words and More Words on Nicaragua

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 19


All over Capitol Hill, telephones were ringing with calls from constituents.

Philip C. Habib, President Reagan's special diplomatic envoy, was lobbying in
the corridors, trying to capture a few swing votes.

And on the floor of the House, there was impassioned debate, as is usual when
the House takes up a momentous issue, in this case one that Mr. Reagan has
described as a historic test of his Presidency.

The issue is the Reagan proposal to provide $100 million worth of aid to the
rebels in Nicaragua. Today was the first day of debate; on Thursday comes the
vote.

Representative Bill McCollum, a Florida Republican, warned his colleagues that a
vote against the aid package was ''a vote for Communism in Central America.''

Opponents argued that a vote against the aid package was not a vote for Daniel
Ortega Saavedra, the President of Nicaragua, or for other Sandinista leaders.

A Hawk Will Vote Against

Representative Tim Valentine, a conservative North Carolina Democrat, describes
himself as ''a genuine certified 100 percent hawk'' who supported the American
invasion of Grenada in 1983 and knows full well that the airwaves in his
district now bristle with radio commercials urging him to support the aid plan.

But Mr. Valentine plans to vote against the President's request.

''It would just be pumping money down a sinkhole,'' he said in an interview. ''I
try to find ways to support my President. But I don't like giving away money to
a bunch of illiterate farmers and cutthroats in Nicaragua when we can't find
money to pay for rural electrification or to help the struggling textile
industry in the United States.''

Representative Henry J. Hyde, Republican of Illinois, is a proponent of the aid
package. He expressed strong irritation with colleagues who criticized the
anti-Communist rebels.

''Our friends on the left have never met an anti-Communist they liked,'' he
said, turning to the Democrats. ''As the refugees stream north, history is going
to assign you folks the role of pallbearers at the funeral of freedom in Central
America.''

For all the passion spent in today's oratory, Mr. Hyde said, ''I don't expect
this debate to change a single vote.''

Because the House has often voted on various proposals to provide or to restrict
aid to the rebels, perhaps 375 of the 435 members have firmly established
positions on the issue.

The stakes in the vote to be taken Thursday were described in ever starker terms
as the debate wore on, terms that eventually spanned not just borders but entire
oceans.

In a letter to their colleagues, a group of seven conservative Republican House
members, among them Jack F. Kemp of upstate New York, Newt Gingrich of Georgia,
Vin Weber of Minnesota and Trent Lott of Mississippi, the minority whip, said
that just as a Cuban armored regiment fought against Israel on the Syrian front
in the 1973 Yom Kippur War, so ''Nicaraguans will soon be helping their brothers
in arms in Libya and Iran to achieve their stated goal of defeating Israel.''

For this reason, they warned, the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua poses a
potential threat not just to the United States but also to Israel. The presence
of a Cuban armored regiment in Syria has not been generally noted in accounts of
the 1973 war, but David G. Shedd, press secretary to Mr. Gingrich, said the
information had been confirmed by intelligence officials in the Administration.

Then there were more down-to-earth, simpler approaches to the issue.

Representative Stewart B. McKinney, a Connecticut Republican, said that he
opposed aid to the rebels, but that his wife, Lucie, was telling him, ''You
better vote with the President or you will be in terrible trouble.''

''She is a liberated woman,'' Mr. McKinney said. ''She's got her own opinion on
everything.'' On this issue, he said, she is hearing from friends in Westport,
Fairfield and Stamford, Conn., who rarely offer political advice but feel
strongly that the United States should assist the rebels, known as the contras.

''This is a very gutty, emotional issue,'' Mr. McKinney concluded.

As for Mr. Habib, the Presidential envoy, his pitch on Capitol Hill was said to
have been that leaders of countries near Nicaragua had told him privately on his
recent visit to the region that they supported Mr. Reagan's effort to put
pressure on the Sandinista regime but could not openly declare their support.

How many votes that swung was anyody's guess. But as Representative Ed Zschau, a
California Republican, saw things, Mr. Habib had been an effective advocate for
the President's position.

Adding to the political passion in the debate today was the knowledge that the
issue of aid to the contras might figure prominently in many Congressional
elections this fall.

The National Conservative Political Action Committee is planning ''independent
expenditure campaigns'' to publicize the voting records of 33 members who have
opposed aid to the rebels.

The 33 include Representative Jim Leach of Iowa, a leading Republican critic of
the President's policy in Nicaragua.

''Nicpac announced a massive fund-raising drive and has targeted me,'' Mr. Leach
said. ''It's a bit coercive, but my district is more concerned about problems in
the central part of North America than in the central part of Latin America.''

Remembering Vietnam

Like the Congressional election, analogies to Vietnam also pervaded the debate
on Nicaragua. Representative Bob Dornan, a California Republican, saw economic
decay in both Managua and Hanoi. Nicaragua, like Vietnam, keeps thousands of
political prisoners, he said.

But the Speaker of the House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Democrat of Massachusetts,
saw another analogy.

''I voted for the Gulf of Tonkin resolution,'' he said, referring to the 1964
measure that opened the way to increased American military involvement in
Vietnam. ''In my view, I did the wrong thing. Tomorrow we face another Tonkin
Gulf vote. I can see us getting into a war down there in Nicaragua.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Tim Valentine; photo of Henry Hyde; photo of Stewart McKinney

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 20, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: JOHN GUARE'S 'HOUSE OF BLUE LEAVES'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1303 words


RETURNING to ''The House of Blue Leaves'' 15 years after its Off Broadway
premiere, one expects to find a musty, archetypal artifact of late 1960's black
comedy. Set in Sunnyside, Queens, on that 1965 day when Pope Paul VI visited New
York, John Guare's early, breakthrough play features mockingly observed nuns, a
lethal (but farcical) political bombing, a G.I. earmarked for Vietnam and, as a
protagonist, a zoo keeper who dreams in vain of making it big in Hollywood as a
songwriter. As if that weren't enough countercultural loopiness, the zoo keeper,
Artie Shaughnessy, has a wife named Bananas who really is bananas. In the
period's R. D. Laing-Ken Kesey tradition, Bananas, a schizophrenic destined for
a cuckoo's nest (the house of Mr. Guare's title), is the sanest character in the
work.

Yet a funny thing has happened to ''Blue Leaves'' in the loving revival,
flawlessly directed by Jerry Zaks, that's been mounted at the Newhouse Theater
by Lincoln Center's fledgling theater company. The play no longer seems all that
funny, and it's none the worse for the shift in tone. While some of Mr. Guare's
jokes are indeed dated remnants of the 60's, his characters and themes have
gained the weight and gravity so lacking in his more pretentious recent plays.
Time hasn't healed the wounds described in ''Blue Leaves'' - it's deepened them.
One still leaves the theater howling at Mr. Guare's vision of losers at sea in a
materialistic culture, but the howls are less of laughter than of pain.

Much of that pain derives from an extraordinary performance by Swoosie Kurtz, as
Bananas. If Mr. Guare's zaniness is muted here, so is this actress's
characteristically daffy comic assault. All but unrecognizable, Miss Kurtz wears
a ragged, misbuttoned cardigan over a faded nightgown; her hair is a dark,
silver-tinged mop, framing a pallid face with bulging, swimming eyes. Making her
first entrance in silence, she stands in the gloomy fringes of her threadbare
cage of a living room, watching her husband, Artie (John Mahoney), and his
mistress, a platinum-haired downstairs neighbor named Bunny (Stockard Channing),
plot their elopement to California. Powerless to do anything to halt the plan -
which will place her in the loony bin - the spectral Miss Kurtz exits as quietly
as she entered, a catatonic ghost. And without a single line, she casts the
entire play in tragic shadows.

''Blue Leaves'' can accommodate that darkness. Mr. Guare has found the terror as
well as the absurdity in working-class Queens nobodies who aspire to be
somebodies; at its best, his play often seems like ''The Day of the Locust'' as
rewritten by Tennessee Williams. Certainly Miss Kurtz seems as lost as Blanche
DuBois in her climactic Act I speech, in which Bananas madly recalls having been
at 42d Street and Broadway, ''the crossroads of the world,'' on a day when
Jacqueline Kennedy, Cardinal Spellman, Bob Hope and President Johnson were all
at that intersection hailing cabs. Bananas explains that she gave the
celebrities a lift - only to discover later that night that the disastrous
results were recounted as comic anecdotes on the Johnny Carson show. Recalling
her humiliation before 30 million television viewers, Bananas wonders why stars
can't ''love'' fans like herself. As crushingly delivered by Miss Kurtz, the
monologue is not just a surreal shaggy joke: Bananas' pathological relationship
to glamorous American myths becomes grotesquely symbolic of a national
psychosis.

This isn't to say there is no humor left in ''Blue Leaves.'' When those wayward
nuns appear in Act II, they fly like bats into the iron window bars of the
Shaughnessy living room. We meet a deaf Hollywood starlet, deliciously acted by
Julie Hagerty, whose hilarious confusions include what must be the single
funniest gag ever sparked by the word ''Unitarian.'' There are also Artie's many
failed Tin Pan Alley songs - would-be Hoagy Carmichael ditties with titles like
''Where Is the Devil in Evelyn?'' Mr. Mahoney delivers them raspily at a piano
with the not-quite-slick show-biz moves of every benighted fool who ever
regarded Ted Mack's amateur hour as the pinnacle of artistic aspiration.

What makes these comic twists closer in spirit to Nathanael West than the 1960's
is Mr. Guare's refusal to condescend. The playwright sees his characters
sympathetically, as helpless victims of a society in which movie stars and the
Pope are indistinguishable media gods, in which television is a shrine, in which
assassins are glorified in headlines. In such an icon-ridden landscape, the best
hope is the pathetic one stated by the brash Bunny: ''When famous people go to
sleep at night,'' she wistfully posits, ''it's us they dream of.''

Bunny also claims, apropos of the Pope's visit, that ''there's miracles in the
air.'' But the miracles she and the others long for are either spiritually
bankrupt or unobtainable. Mr. Guare's Sunnyside denizens believe that a
neighborhood boy turned filmland big shot (Christopher Walken) will bring them
instant fame and fortune; they even believe that the Pope, by addressing the
United Nations, can end the war in Vietnam. Such starry-eyed fantasies do little
but drive everyone bananas. The blue spotlight of stardom craved by the
songwriting Artie may be as much of a nuthouse as the blue-leaf-shaded asylum
where he would dispose of his wife. When the Shaughnessys' son (Ben Stiller)
auditions for the role of Huckleberry Finn in a Hollywood movie, his various
stunts (all learned from the Ed Sullivan show) are pointedly mistaken for the
behavior of a ''mental defective.''

Mr. Zaks's direction always illuminates that frontier where Mr. Guare's
absurdism blazes into nightmare. The care extends to the production design: Ann
Roth's tacky 60's costumes are at once satirical and sadly shabby, while Tony
Walton's set (apocalyptically lighted by Paul Gallo) is a Stuart Davis-like
collage in which the Shaughnessys' vulgar domestic squalor is hemmed in by the
urbanscape's oppressive brand-name signs. With the exception of Mr. Walken's
cliched cameo appearance, the acting is of high quality throughout. Mr. Mahoney,
last seen as the mysterious mobster in ''Orphans,'' and Miss Channing are
exceptionally impressive as they find decency and humor in the often clownish
and cruel Artie and Bunny.

Still, it's Miss Kurtz whom audiences will be talking about for the rest of the
season, and then some. By evening's end, Bananas has actually become one of her
husband's animals. Bananas likes animals, she has explained, because they're not
famous and because they represent to her the buried feelings that her
fit-regulating pills usually restrain. Miss Kurtz's metamorphosis brings the
theater to a shocked hush. Her slender hands become paws dancing in the air, her
voice trails off into a maimed puppy's whimper. As Bananas nuzzles helplessly
against her husband, Mr. Guare's inspired image of the all-American loser
acquires a metaphorical force as timeless as West's locusts. Where once there
was a woman with stars in her eyes, we see a battered mutt, the forgotten
underdog that the bright lights of our national fairy tales always pass by.
Bananas at the Zoo THE HOUSE OF BLUE LEAVES, by John Guare; directed by Jerry
Zaks; sets by Tony Walton; costumes by Ann Roth; lighting by Paul Gallo; sound
by Aural Fixation; hair by J. Roy Helland; production manager, Jeff Hamlin.
Presented by Lincoln Center Theater, Gregory Mosher, director. At the Mitzi E.
Newhouse, Lincoln Center. Artie ShaughnessyJohn Mahoney Ronnie ShaughnessyBen
Stiller Bunny FlingusStockard Channing Bananas ShaughnessySwoosie Kurtz Corrinna
StrollerJulie Hagerty Head NunPatricia Falkenhain Second NunJane Cecil Little
NunAnn Talman M.P.Ian Blackman The White ManPeter J. Downing Billy
EinhornChristopher Walken

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Swoosie Kurtz and John Mahoney (Brigitte Lacombe)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN DEFEATED IN HOUSE ON AIDING NICARAGUA REBELS;
PRESIDENT TURNS TO THE SENATE IN FIGHT FOR BILL

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1624 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 20


White House officials said today that, with the House rejection of President
Reagan's $100 million aid package for the Nicaraguan rebels, they were placing
their hopes on the Senate.

At the same time, they conceded that some serious tactical mistakes had been
made in the battle in the House.

Meanwhile, some House Democrats said they had been able to defeat Mr. Reagan's
aid proposal because the President had failed to articulate his policy clearly
or show a firm enough commitment to seeking a diplomatic settlement.

Resentment of Tactics

In addition, they said, the tactics of some Administration officials who had
questioned the loyalty and patriotism of Mr. Reagan's opponents backfired,
generating resentment and hardening opposition to the aid package.

Mr. Reagan, in a statement designed to project the Administration as looking
ahead immediately after the House vote, vowed to continue efforts to obtain the
money. The President said the Administration would now shift its efforts to the
Senate, where an intense selling campaign is to begin Friday.

'The Forces of Freedom'

''Those Democrats and Republicans who stood with the forces of freedom have
their nation's profound gratitude, and the President's,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''But
they have more. They have the President's solemn determination to come back
again and again until this battle is won; until freedom is given the chance that
it deserves in Nicaragua.

''Tomorrow we will begin to press in the Senate, and then back again in the
House, for the real and effective assistance for Nicaragua's freedom fighters,
which was denied them today, and which those brave men and women deserve.''

Mr. Reagan termed the House defeat a ''dark day for freedom.''

''This vote must be reversed,'' he said. ''The Soviet Union cannot be permitted
to enjoy the luxury of knowing that once captured, a country will be relegated
forever to the Communist camp. We declare our unwavering support for freedom and
for peace-loving peoples struggling to overcome Communist tyranny.''

Several senior White House aides, gauging what had gone wrong in the House
battle, said strategists had made a tactical error by shifting gears in recent
days with expressions of a possible compromise.

In particular, they said it was a mistake for Mr. Reagan to agree publicly
Wednesday to a compromise that would have allowed some of the $70 million in
military aid to be suspended for 90 days, while attempts were made to get
negotiations with Managua started.

'A Fundamental Error'

''It was a fundamental error,'' a White House official said. ''Our original
strategy was to get a clear definition of the issue and to then have a vote and
not to get things all muddled up.''

The official said White House aides had chosen the compromise when it became
clear that despite two weeks of intense lobbying by Mr. Reagan, including a
nationally broadcast speech Sunday, they were still at least 10 votes short of
House passage. In the final tally today, the 10-vote gap remained.

One senior aide said he believed in retrospect that some House members saw the
compromise as a ruse in that it would have required Congress to provide the full
$100 million - $25 million immediately and the remaining $75 million in 90 days
if negotiations proved unsuccessful. Some Administration officials have admitted
privately that the full amount could not have been spent immediately even
without the agreement, so such a spending delay would have been inevitable.

But in endorsing that approach, the senior aide said, the White House lost the
force of the main argument about how critical the funds were for the insurgents
- a theme the President has cited repeatedly in public statements and in
meetings with more than 34 senators and 60 representatives.

'The Right Side'

''A lot of members were 'rightsiders,' meaning that they had become convinced
that we were on the right side of the issue,'' the aide said. ''The compromise
made it unclear exactly what the right side was.''

But another key White House strategist, who asserted that the compromise had not
been a factor, traced the defeat to the fact that the Speaker of the House,
Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Democrat of Massachusetts, had promised a second vote on
the aid question in April. That maneuver, he said, meant that some legislators
could vote against it now but support it later.

In fact, a senior White House aide asserted that by offering the compromise the
President had picked up enough votes to win, but that he had then lost some when
Mr. O'Neill agreed to another vote on April 15. This resulted in four defections
among members committed to Mr. Reagan, and the White House also released two
other representatives from pledges to support the President. Had that not been
done, Mr. Reagan could have won, the official said.

House members provided a wide range of factors behind the defeat, including the
argument that Mr. Reagan had failed in his primary objective of elevating public
support for the assistance to the point where a majority of Congress had to
support it.

''Not enough of us are sure we know what the goal of the Administration is in
its policy toward Nicaragua,'' said Representative Richard A. Gephardt, Democrat
of Missouri and chairman of the Democratic Caucus. ''There is not a clearly
perceptible goal. The goals have not been clearly articulated, so there is no
consensus, no cohesion in the Congress or the country.''

Expunging Communist Influence

Other Democrats said that they, like Mr. Reagan, wanted to expunge Communist
influence from the Western Hemisphere, but doubted this could be accomplished by
the Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras.

Mr. Reagan had described today's vote as a historic test of his Presidency. Only
by providing aid to the rebels, he said, could the United States ''deny the
Soviet Union a beachhead in North America.'' The House rejected his request by a
vote of 222 to 210.

Earlier today Speaker O'Neill estimated that 10 Republicans would vote against
the President's request. In fact, there were 16 such Republicans.

Representative Larry J. Hopkins, Republican of Kentucky, said he had voted
against the President's request because he became convinced that the
Administration's ''current policy is not working, is in fact counterproductive,
and has no realistic chance to achieve our goal of reversing the Soviet tide in
Nicaragua.'' Mr. Hopkins said his vote was ''a plea for a more effective
policy.''

Mr. Hopkins's statement paralleled the comments of Representative Lee H.
Hamilton, Democrat of Indiana, chairman of the Select Committee on Intelligence,
who said: ''This contra war has isolated the United States, not Nicaragua. This
proposal will lead us to further escalation, to more bloodshed and to stalemate.
There are better alternatives than an expanded war.''

Factors Cited by Democrats

Democrats said their victory had also been due, in part, to these factors:

* Speaker O'Neill, approaching the end of a 34-year career in Congress, feels
strongly about Nicaragua and engaged in extensive personal lobbying.

* Democrats effectively invoked analogies to Vietnam. They said they were
troubled by the lack of a coherent policy because it reminded them of the
confusion that led the nation into the Vietnam War in the 1960's. Representative
Jim Slattery, Democrat of Kansas, said he felt about Nicaragua as his father had
felt about Vietnam: ''This war just doesn't make sense.''

* The Democrats repeatedly asserted that United States allies in Latin America
opposed Mr. Reagan's request for military aid to the rebels in Nicaragua.
Republicans rebutted such arguments, but they were handicapped because they had
only private expressions of support from Latin America.

* Liberal Democrats frequently asked how Mr. Reagan could find $100 million for
Nicaragua at a time when he was trying to cut the budget for many domestic
programs, such as job training and various forms of Federal assistance to
farmers.

Statement by Buchanan

Both White House officials and Democrats in Congress also agreed that the
Administration's campaign suffered from the assertion that the vote represented
a choice between support for the President or support for the Sandinistas, which
was first raised by Patrick J. Buchanan, the White House communications
director.

While Mr. Buchanan's combative plea for the aid reflected Mr. Reagan's strong
position, the White House lost several days of building its case amid a public
controversy caused by the statement, some White House officials have
acknowledged.

On Capitol Hill, Representative Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn, said
the Administration might have won 15 more Democratic votes if it had been ''more
subtle'' in its appeals. ''Pat Buchanan is to blame,'' he said.

White House officials said they believed that despite the setback, they made
considerable progress from last year, when only 180 legislators supported the
President in an initial request for aid. On the final vote today, 46 Democrats
and 164 Republicans voted to approve the President's request.

Mr. Reagan apparently did win some votes with his promise on Wednesday to hold
back most military aid for 90 days while stepping up his efforts to negotiate a
settlement in Central America.

Representative Hamilton Fish Jr., a Republican from upstate New York who has
opposed military aid in the past, voted with the President today.

But Representative David R. Obey, a Wisconsin Democrat, summed up the argument
that proved most effective for his party in opposing the request. ''We want to
exhaust the diplomatic options first,'' he said. ''The White House has got to
get serious about doing that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN DEFEATED IN HOUSE ON AIDING NICARAGUA REBELS;
VOTE IS 222 TO 210

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 961 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 20


The House of Representatives today rejected President Reagan's request to send
$100 million to the rebels fighting to overthrow the Nicaraguan Government.

The vote was 222 to 210, with 16 Republicans joining 206 Democrats in rebuffing
the President on what he described as a major test of his Presidency.

Forty-six Democrats and 164 Republicans supported Mr. Reagan, who was calling
wavering lawmakers right up until the vote and asking for their backing.

Compromise Is Expected

Democrats and Republicans alike said that the outcome reflected a deep-seated
confusion and uneasiness in the country over the President's policy toward
Central America. Mr. Reagan, Congressional leaders agreed, failed to convince
enough House members that he has seriously tried to negotiate a peaceful
settlement in the region.

''The public,'' said Representative Thomas S. Foley of Washington, the
Democratic whip, ''is not ready to engage in the escalation of military violence
in Central America until other avenues are fully explored.''

However, leaders in both parties also agree that a majority of Congress supports
military aid for the rebels in some form. In the weeks ahead, they said, the
lawmakers are likely to approve compromise legislation containing such aid.

'It's Not Over Now'

''It's not a one shot thing, it's not over now,'' said Representative Dick
Cheney of Wyoming, a senior member of the Republican leadership. ''I think
eventually we'll pass a package for Central America and it will include military
aid.''

Whatever aid package does emerge from Congress is likely to delay the release of
military support while the Administration is urged to pursue negotiations more
vigorously. Under most proposals now being advanced on Capitol Hill, the money
would be spent only if Congress determined that the Sandinista Government in
Nicaragua was not bargaining in good faith.

Even while they were rejecting the Administration's approach to Nicaragua, many
lawmakers expressed their deepening frustrations today over a situation that
seems increasingly intractable.

Representative Dave McCurdy, an Oklahoma Democrat who is helping to draft an
alternative to Mr. Reagan's plan, expressed the mood of many members of Congress
when he said: ''There's no magic solution out there. It's a very complex,
complicated problem.''

Public's Attitude Noted

The vote today was the latest chapter in a long-running story on Capitol Hill.
Congress voted to cut off all aid to the Nicaraguan rebels in 1984, but agreed
last year to send $27 million in nonmilitary help. In the meantime, private
supporters of the guerrillas organized a fund-raising drive to finance the
purchase of weapons and other supplies.

President Reagan renewed his appeal for military support this year and went on
national television Sunday night to press his case with the people. But in most
Congressional offices the phone calls opposing Mr. Reagan outnumbered those that
supported him.

Representative Cheney cited this lack of public response as a major reason for
today's vote. ''It's a difficult issue to explain to the public,'' he said.
''It's not on the front burner of public consciousness.''

Many Democrats also say that the harsh language emanating from the White House,
which accused opponents of giving aid and comfort to the Communists, alienated
some potential supporters of the President.

''I think their tactics definitely backfired in some areas,'' said
Representative W. G. Hefner, Democrat of North Carolina. ''People just said,
enough's enough. I think guys screwed up their courage and said, I'm not going
to be intimidated, I'm not going to be bullied.''

Memory of Vietnam Invoked

As the debate reached its climax today, opponents of the President repeatedly
invoked the memory of Vietnam. Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill took the floor to close
the debate for the Democrats and said, ''I see us becoming engaged, step by
step, in a military situation that brings our boys directly into the fighting.''

In a highly unusual step, Mr. O'Neill cast his vote early in the balloting. By
tradition, the Speaker votes only in the case of a tie.

Representative Lee H. Hamilton of Indiana, chairman of the Intelligence
Committee, sounded a major theme when he said that the President's policy
''overestimates what war can do and underestimates what diplomacy can do.''

But Representative Claude Pepper, a Florida Democrat who backs the President's
request, said a vote in support of the rebels would be a way of saying, ''We
will not tolerate Communism to be the dominant part of any state in the Western
Hemisphere.''

Representative Robert H. Michel of Illinois, the Republican leader, closed the
debate for his side by turning to Mr. O'Neill and saying in a voice that broke
with emotion: ''Mr. Speaker, I love you. We're great friends and I respect you
sincerely. But I just have to say, today you're wrong, you're wrong, you're
wrong.''

Behind Republican's Vote

But Mr. Michel lost because 16 Republicans abandoned the President and provided
the margin of defeat. One of them was Chalmers P. Wylie of Ohio, who said he had
supported the President's aid request on five previous occasions. He decided to
break with Mr. Reagan this time, he said, because ''I just couldn't see that
those votes have paid any dividends.''

Mr. Wylie said he started to sway when phone calls from his district in Columbus
ran significantly against the President. When Mr. Reagan called him today,
asking for support, the Ohio lawmaker told him no.

''I didn't want to say no to the President,'' Mr. Wylie said in an interview.
''I was a little nervous about it. But I feel good about my vote. I hope the
Sandinistas take it as a sign of peace and friendship.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Reps. Michael Barnes and Thomas Foley (NYT/Keith Meyers) (page
A12)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A Really Joint Chief?

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 740 words


Congress has few more serious issues before it than a little-noticed proposal by
the Senate Armed Services Committee to reorganize the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
This is no mere box-shuffling of the Pentagon's vast bureaucracy. The committee
aims for radical change of the military command structure. But that high goal
risks a high danger: weakening civilian control of the military.

Unity of command is a cardinal principle of battle, acknowledged everywhere from
Napoleon's journals to the U.S. Army Field Manual. But America's armed forces,
luxuriating in superior strength, have no real unity of command below the
President and Secretary of Defense. They are organized by service, not by
mission, and the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines often fail to cooperate, even
in wartime, in planning or procurement.

Division of command between Army and Navy at Hawaii added to the debacle at
Pearl Harbor, and nearly brought defeat at Leyte Gulf. Each service fought its
own air war in Vietnam. The Iran rescue mission failed in part because all the
services demanded a role. In Grenada, the Marines invaded one half of the
island, the Army the other; Army and Navy officers failed to attend each other's
planning sessions or coordinate fire during battle. If the services cannot
cooperate in invading a cabbage patch, how can they coordinate the defense of
Europe or plans for nuclear retaliation?

Coordination is supposed to occur in the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a bureaucracy
led by the Chiefs of each service plus a chairman rotated among them. But each
Chief's highest loyalty tends to be to his own service. And to present a united
front to civilian superiors, the Chiefs often paper over differences and fudge
issues. According to James Schlesinger, a former Secretary of Defense, their
recommendations are ''designed to protect the institutional interests of each of
the separate Services. The general rule is that no Service ox may be gored. . .
. The proffered advice is generally irrelevant, normally unread and almost
always disregarded.''

This common view of the Chiefs' ineffectiveness leaves coordination to the
civilian service secretaries. But the services can outrun them because they have
larger staffs, control more information and lobby Congress for their own
agendas. As a result the United States enjoys four separate air forces while
missions that fall between service roles, like sea and air transport, suffer
neglect.

Recent horror stories about wasteful Pentagon spending have spurred a new
interest in thorough reorganization. The Senate and House Armed Services
Committees as well as the Presidential commission led by former Deputy Defense
Secretary David Packard all favor the same principal remedy: a strengthened
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, with authority to make decisions that impinge on
service interests. He would not prevent the often useful competition among
services, but would be expected to overcome their most wasteful collusions.

The most vigorous opposition to this oft-proposed change comes from the Navy.
With its own army and air force, it has the most to lose from reduced autonomy.
Navy Secretary John Lehman warns that a ''superchairman'' would subvert civilian
control and military responsibility of command.

Sponsors of the change argue that reducing collusion among the services would
strengthen civilian control. They say it would produce more effective military
advice directed by the chairman toward priorities that could fit into fixed,
civilian-designed budgets. The Senate committee also seeks to strengthen the
currently feeble authority of operational commanders over the various service
officers under them.

The wider goal of the proposed reorganization is to stimulate planning and
weapons-buying for missions, not services. At present the Navy lobbies for more
ships, the Air Force for more planes, with insufficient regard to purpose. The
Joint Chiefs horse-trade their services' parochial interests, and Congress,
eager for weapons orders, abets the process. The reformers' intent is to have a
strengthened chairman of the Joint Chiefs match forces to goals and impose on
the services the responsibility and accountability for hard choices that
civilians have too often failed to secure.

Reducing service autonomy is overdue. But any strengthening of the command
structure must indeed also strengthen civilian control. Congress should start
and end with that concern.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Again, the Balanced-Budget Pablum

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 468 words


The balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution, which comes before the Senate
next week, is hypocritical, absurd and maybe dangerous. It would load down the
Constitution with procedural detail that doesn't belong there. If rigorously
observed, it could cripple the economy; if not, it would be trivial or
meaningless. Though it deserves not a single vote, its demagogic appeal assures
it of more than 60 of the 67 required for passage.

The amendment's great champion is President Reagan, despite his dismal budget
record. He steered a similar amendment through the Senate in 1982 but failed to
get two-thirds of the House. The battle then shifted back to state legislatures,
31 of which at some time had already voted for a constitutional convention to
adopt such an amendment. Approval by three more legislatures might have forced
the issue, yet only one has since added its voice. A congressionally approved
amendment would avoid the convention but require ratification by 34 states.

The Senate is debating several texts, all bad. The basic one now starts: ''Total
outlays of the United States for any fiscal year shall not exceed total receipts
to the United States for that year. . . .'' That is a bald deception. Every
state except Vermont has a similar, supposedly ironclad budget limitation but
all get around it by juggling accounts, and Washington could surely devise a way
to exempt Social Security or pork-barrel ''capital expenditures.''

Indeed, a truly escape-proof straitjacket could be disastrous. Since spending
and revenue levels change constantly, the Government could find itself
scrambling to shave $20 billion in the final weeks of a fiscal year. That would
be reckless anytime, and unthinkable in a recession when abrupt cuts could only
make things worse.

Recognizing this absurdity, the amendment's sponsors offer safety valves. They
would permit a deficit by a vote of three-fifths of each house. They would also
let Congress waive the amendment for ''a declaration of war.'' More mischief.
There was no ''declaration of war'' for Korea or Vietnam.

Debate over these escape hatches, however, misses the basic point. What's really
being vented is frustration over the huge Reagan deficits - the same frenzy that
produced last year's arbitary Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law to eliminate deficits by
1991. With that law still untested, the sensible course would be to declare a
time-out from cosmic experimentation. The haphazard spending cuts already
mandated by that new law should discourage anyone from wanting to construct even
greater rigidities by amending the Constitution.

But too few dare to vote against ''a balanced budget'' in an election year. Let
the people resolve to judge their leaders not by what they shout but by how they
spend and spend and refuse to tax.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 21, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
The Good Fight

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


Consider the rejection of Mr. Reagan's Central American policy as a lesson in
geology: the political quakes and tremors that led to the decisive defeat of the
President in Congress yesterday, denying aid to the anti-Communists fighting
Nicaragua's dictator, lay bare the two great stresses on the fundaments of our
foreign policy.

The first is the tension between hawk and dove in the formation of public
sentiment that determines intervention or isolation. The American house has long
been deeply divided over whether early intervention ultimately saves lives (the
Munich analogy) or leads to a quagmire (the Vietnam analogy).

Does this easy hawk-dove classification ignore the subtleties of the argument
over when and where to apply U.S. power? Of course; but there can be no denying
the pervasive difference of mindset that identifies the opposing forces and
underlies their arguments.

The attitude of much of the younger generation of leaders and activists was
hammered on the anvil of Vietnam. The doves among them believe that the defeat
of our intervention there vindicated their movement; the hawks among them, along
with many of the generation that learned to dread appeasement of aggression,
believe with equal intensity that dovish defeatism and opposition emboldened the
enemy and contributed to our defeat.

In the rise of Reaganism and the rejection of McGovernism, we assumed that hawks
had made a comeback. Perhaps we have; in the coming month, a campaign against
''too little and too late'' from the White House, along with specific promise
and denial of Mr. Reagan's campaign help, may reverse today's triumph of the
doves. But the refusal of so many Democrats to flinch at charges of being ''soft
on Communism'' - in an instance, ironically , when the charge is not phony
-shows at least a perception by most representatives that the President has
failed to alert the public to the danger he sees in our hemisphere.

This hawk-dove confrontation over aid to the ''contras'' was healthy. The issue
was clearly drawn; accountability for isolationism is now clearly established,
not to be covered up by subsequent cosmetic votes. Hawks never consider defeat
to be as bad as pre-emptive surrender, and are not ashamed at having fought the
good fight with vigor.

If Mr. Reagan were to accept a thin-gruel substitute in a few weeks from doves
with second thoughts who want to escape voter retribution, he would humiliate
himself and defeat his own purposes. Compromises lead to defeat without
accountability. We must help allies fight to win or not encourage them to fight
at all; not enough is not enough.

The second great stress in our system revealed by the debate and vote this week
is the unresolved question of the war power.

Congress, says the Constitution, has the power to declare war, and the
President, as Commander in Chief, has the power to conduct operations in such a
war. But the war power has never been that neatly divided between branches. Our
bloodiest war, the Civil War, was never ''declared,'' because the North would
not recognize the South as a nation; and Congress considered military operations
and appointments to be well within its purview.

In our time, the senatorial descendants of ''Bluff Ben'' Wade and House
successors to Thaddeus Stevens have wrested back the war power seized by Lincoln
and F.D.R.; during the weakened Presidency after Watergate and Vietnam, the
ground shifted toward greater Congressional war power. In the 80's, the war
power, along with national self-confidence, started to shudder back to the White
House.

Neither the President nor Congress is ever going to win this struggle because
''limited war,'' or informal war, or proxy war, is not covered in our
Constitution. That means the natural division between hawk and dove is likely to
play out its drama in the same arena where the President and Congress fight for
institutional dominance.

This is ''the good fight,'' with the word ''good'' not meaning lusty or
exciting, but ''ethical,'' as in ''the good Book.'' But this constant political
struggle within our polity is not between good and evil, or dictatorship or
anarchy.

The policy and power fight now under way is between good and bad judgment about
protecting our freedom, and about checking executive power without paralyzing
the nation.

Let the specific fight about the contras proceed to a conclusion that does not
split the basic difference; rather, that ends the round with an accountable
victor. Then there will be another round. That good fight is known as the
American way and it works better than any other.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 22, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BISHOP JOHN DOUGHERTY, 78, DIES; A FORMER PRESIDENT OF SETON HALL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 32, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 282 words


The Rev. John J. Dougherty, retired Auxiliary Bishop of Newark and a former
president of Seton Hall University, died Thursday at Holy Name Hospital in
Teaneck, N.J. Bishop Dougherty, who was 78 years old and lived in Tenafly, N.J.,
had suffered a stroke in 1980.

Bishop Dougherty gained national attention as a television broadcaster and as an
early and active critic of the Vietnam War.

He was born in Jersey City and was a graduate of Seton Hall in 1930. He was
ordained at the North American College in Rome in 1933 and retired from official
church service 49 years later.

He was professor of sacred scripture at Immaculate Conception Seminary from 1937
to 1959, and in 1946 he became host of ''The Catholic Hour,'' a radio program
sponsored by the National Council of Catholic Men. He gained national
recognition when the show moved to television in 1951.

In 1958 he became the 13th president of Seton Hall University and five years
later was consecrated an Auxiliary Bishop. He remained university president
until 1969, when he resigned to became pastor of St. Rose of Lima Church in
Short Hills, N.J., where he served until 1977.

An early opponent of the Vietnam War, Bishop Dougherty testified before the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee that the church should be part of the debate
on the morality of the conflict. He also was co-founder of an antiwar coalition
calling for a stop to the bombing of North Vietnam and for negotiation with its
government.

He is survived by two sisters, Cathy Dougherty and Rose Phelan, both of Tenafly,
and a brother, William, of Oradell, N.J.

A mass will be celebrated at 11 A.M. Monday at the Cathedral of the Sacred Heart
in Newark.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bishop John J. Dougherty (Fabian Bachrach,1969)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARKANSAS PAPERS BATTLE OVER MORE THAN MONEY

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 28, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words


Nearly 30 years ago, The Arkansas Gazette's coverage and support of school
desegregation won two Pulitzer Prizes but so outraged the citizens of Little
Rock that the newspaper was almost ruined by a boycott while its conservative
rival, The Arkansas Democrat, prospered.

Even though the 1957 boycott was supported by Gov. Orval E. Faubus, The Gazette
fought back for several years to regain its dominance in circulation and
advertising, and The Democrat slipped into a decline.

Now a newspaper war between The Gazette and The Democrat is being waged in
Federal District Court in Little Rock, pitting two proud and determined
newspaper families with very different political perspectives against each other
in what some experts describe as a struggle to the death of one of the papers.

''However the jury decides, it's going to end one newspaper or the other,'' said
John Morton, a newspaper analyst who testified on behalf of The Gazette.

Antitrust Laws Are Cited

The Gazette, the larger and the only profitable newspaper of the two, has
charged that The Democrat is on the verge of putting The Gazette out of
business, in violation of Federal and state antitrust laws.

At the trial, which began March 10 and is expected to last another week, lawyers
for The Gazette charged that The Democrat had illegally waged a campaign of
predatory advertising price-cutting and other practices calculated to drive The
Gazette out of a market that can support only one newspaper profitably.

Lawyers for The Gazette say The Democrat, which became part of a chain of
newspapers owned by the Hussman family in 1974, has used profits from other
Hussman-owned papers to underwrite operating losses totaling $50 million. The
lawyers say the aim of The Democrat is to operate at a loss until The Gazette is
also dragged into unprofitability and forced to leave the market.

Hugh Patterson, publisher of The Gazette and the leader of the family that owns
it, says his family has some cash reserves and real estate but cannot make up
operating losses for long if the paper becomes unprofitable. The Gazette is not
part of a chain. Because The Gazette has lost advertising to The Democrat and
has also had to cut its rates to compete with those The Democrat offers, Mr.
Patterson says unprofitability is near.

'They're Crybabies'

Walter E. Hussman Jr., publisher of The Democrat and the man in charge of
running all his family's businesses, says his paper has done nothing illegal,
but is merely doing what it takes to survive. He argues that Little Rock can
support two profitable newspapers and that The Gazette cannot stand tough
competition.

John Robert Starr, managing editor of The Democrat, said, ''They're crybabies.''

Either newspaper would be missed in Arkansas, a state that relishes its
political independence. Pundits delight in telling of how, in 1968, Arkansas
re-elected Senator J. William Fulbright, a liberal then in full cry against the
Vietnam War, and went for George C. Wallace, a leading segregationist and a
supporter of the war, as President.

The Gazette, which was founded in 1819 and asserts that it is the oldest
newspaper west of the Mississippi, has long been recognized for the breadth and
quality of its news coverage, which led to a strong circulation even among those
who did not agree with its editorial page.

Under the Hussman family's ownership, The Democrat has become much more
aggressive in its news coverage, while remaining outspokenly conservative
editorially.

But the real newspaper war has been over advertising dollars.

Patterson Declined Offer

When the Hussmans acquired The Democrat in 1974 it was an afternoon newspaper
that had been losing money for several years, and it continued to do lose.
Twice, Mr. Hussman tried to persuade Mr. Patterson to merge the business
portions of the paper in a joint operating agreement that would have left The
Democrat as only an editorial voice, but Mr. Patterson declined.

In 1978, Mr. Hussman took his new tack. At that time, The Gazette had 80 percent
of the advertising and circulation dollars spent in the two newspapers.

The Hussmans made deals with some advertisers to run ads at far below The
Democrat's listed prices, according to undisputed trial testimony. In one case,
testimony has shown, Little Rock's largest department store was given a deal in
which it could run all the advertising it wanted for a year for about $500,000,
which proved to be about one-third of what the advertising would have cost at
the paper's published rates.

The Democrat also gave away thousands of newspapers each week in affluent
neighborhoods so as to provide advertisers with an ample and attractive
audience. The paper also offered free classified advertising to individuals,
which attracted readers. Mr. Hussman also made The Democrat a morning newspaper
to compete head-on with The Gazette.

The Gazette's Profits Drop

In 1985, The Democrat's share of advertising and circulation revenue had grown
to 39 percent, but it still lost $2.9 million, according to Mr. Hussman. The
Gazette, meanwhile, watched its profit level drop from 15 percent in 1977 to 2.6
percent in 1985.

Whether or not The Democrat's go-for-the-jugular competition is a violation of
antitrust law depends on the situation, according to lawyers who are antitrust
specialists.

The Gazette has charged that The Democrat was attempting to monopolize the
market, which is illegal under Federal law. To prove this, the lawyers say, The
Gazette must show that there was a specific intent to acquire monopoly power,
and there must also be a ''dangerous probability'' that the effort to create a
monopoly will be successful.

The Gazette argues that, because the market cannot support more than one
profitable newspaper, the only way The Democrat can become successful is for The
Gazette to be forced out of business. The Democrat asserts that it is not
seeking a monopoly and that the market will support two money-making papers.

The Gazette has asked for damages that could amount to more than $100 million. A
large award could cripple the Hussman empire, which includes six newspapers, a
television station, four radio stations and several cable TV systems. The
Hussman family's holdings are in Arkansas, Oklahoma, Texas and Mississippi.

If The Democrat is forced to stop its aggressive pricing practices, it will
almost certainly close, according to Mr. Morton, because it will have virtually
no chance of becoming profitable. If The Democrat is allowed to continue as
before, Mr. Morton says that The Gazette cannot survive, at least not under
family ownership.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Hugh Patterson (NYT/Becky Gerard; Photo of Walter E. Hussman
Jr.; Photos of titles of Arkansas Gazette and Arkansas Democrat

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VAUDEVILLE WITH A MYSTICAL SPIN

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 7, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1433 words


Many artists, looking back on their careers, remember a single moment - an
epiphany - that crystallized their aspirations. For Bob Berky, the clown artist
who, with the juggler Michael Moschen, is half of the duo who call themselves
''The Alchemedians,'' that moment came 15 years ago in a Toronto hotel room.

''I started out training to be a classical musician and studied the French horn
at the Eastman School of Music, but somehow a career in music didn't feel
right,'' Mr. Berky recalled recently. ''One night after a concert, I went to my
hotel room on the 14th floor. I had a chocolate eclair, and on an impulse I
dropped it out of the window into the vacant parking lot below. When I heard the
thing hit the cement, I knew that that was what I wanted to do. I wanted to make
something move, then have a moment of stillness and then this luscious sound. To
me, that is the essence of comedy.''

For Michael Moschen, who has juggled since the age of 12, the moment of truth
was his discovery of a specific object to manipulate - a crystal ball.

''When I researched the history of juggling in Berlin, I saw the amount of
amazing things people had done in the field, and I was overwhelmed,'' he
remembered. ''It seemed that everything had been done before. Then, in 1975, in
a window, I saw a crystal ball. I was mesmerized by the beauty of it, by the
sense of its being both weightless and heavy, by the appearance of light being
taken into it and also reflected off of it, and by the fact that you can never
see if the surface is moving. My work with crystal balls took me eight years to
develop.''

The same mystical awareness that allowed Mr. Berky, 37, and Mr. Moschen, 30,
these life-changing insights informs ''The Alchemedians,'' their two-hour show
of clowning, juggling, mime and other nonverbal types of performance, which
opens Thursday at the Lamb's Theater. ''The Alchemedians'' is a revised version
of the show that had its premiere last fall at the Brooklyn Academy of Music's
Next Wave Festival. In it, not only crystal balls but everyday objects and an
array of exotic props designed by John Kahn become as animated as the performers
who manipulate them. Not only do the props go through magical transformations,
but many are given an aural dimension through playful, prerecorded percussion
music composed by David Van Tieghem.

The show opens as aluminum mixing bowls of various sizes roll onto the stage,
spinning and clattering like so many miniature worlds in collision. The bowls
become other people who talk to one another and to the performers in taped
conversations, as well as animals, spaceships and the sky pouring down imaginary
rain on Hopi Indian dancers. Then, to the strains of Benny Goodman's ''Sing,
Sing, Sing,'' they become the Alchemedians' wildly uninhibited jitterbug
partners.

In contrast to this merry physical comedy, Mr. Moschen's juggling strikes a
loftier esthetic note. His glistening three-inch-thick crystal spheres become
animated light sources - miniature moons and stars - that affect him almost as
much as he affects them. Sometimes they seem propelled by their own will, trying
to fly from his grasp. At other moments, as he rolls a single, glittering orb
over the surfaces of his body, the interaction between man and object suggests a
ritualistic, balletic search for perfect beauty and balance.

''The basic concept of 'The Alchemedians' is that you have two people who are
both outcasts of a sort attempting to transform objects into gold, although our
gold is not of the 24-karat variety but ethereal and abstract,'' Mr. Berky said.

Along with the popular magic team of Penn and Teller, the comic jugglers The
Flying Karamazov Brothers, and the clown Bill Irwin, Mr. Berky and Mr. Moschen
have been labeled ''new vaudevillians,'' but they find the category too
restrictive.

''We don't fit into any mold,'' Mr. Berky emphasized. ''Are we mime? No, we just
don't talk. Are we jugglers? Well, we manipulate objects, but they also
manipulate us. Are we actors? Yes, there's a thematic through line that has
something to do with emotion, as well as physical movement. We relate to
vaudeville in that we interact directly with the audience in a vaudevillian
way.''

What, besides eclairs and shiny objects, motivated serious theater artists like
Mr. Moschen and Mr. Berky to become jugglers and clowns?

''For me it has been a lifelong fascination with objects and with sports,'' Mr.
Moschen reflected. ''I started playing golf when I was 5 years old and went on
to work in many different sports in which one had to practice for hours and
hours learning to control an object. That translated into juggling when I was
about 12 and later, at 18, I became enamored of dance movement, gymnastics, and
acrobatics.''

Mr. Moschen, who has also worked in ceramics and carpentry, formed a juggling
act with a friend that played for six months at New Jersey's Great Adventure
Amusement Park. After doing solo street performances around New York, he joined
the Big Apple Circus in 1977 for three years, working his way from ensemble
acrobat and juggler to ringmaster. When faced with the choice of going to Las
Vegas and making money or working with a dance-mime company, he chose the
latter. He first encountered Mr. Berky in 1978 at a mime festival in Syracuse
where they were each doing solo material.

''After the eclair incident I put my horn in its case and never picked it up
again,'' Mr. Berky recalls. ''I became very interested in comic structures as
opposed to musical structures and comic rhythm as opposed to musical rhythm.''
After studying theater at the University of Rochester and Cornell, Mr. Berky, a
conscientious objector to the Vietnam war, did two years of alternative service
researching theater techniques with emotionally disturbed children. Then he went
to Maine for three years to study with a teacher. He won notice as a clown
performer at the Edinburgh Festival.

Two years after they first met, Mr. Moschen and Mr. Berky were brought together
by David White, the director of Dance Theater Workshop. With a third clown, Fred
Garbo, they formed a trio that put on two shows at Dance Theater Workshop - ''Is
60 Minutes Enough?'' and the Obie Award-winning ''Foolsfire.'' The best-known
set piece in these jolly, helter-skelter mixtures of mime, juggling and clowning
featured the trio dressed as World War I flying aces playing with inflatable
rubber airplanes. Then, a year and a half ago, when Mr. Garbo accepted a job on
''Sesame Street,'' the trio became a duo.

A more structured show than either of its forerunners, ''The Alchemedians'' is
divided into two sections, the first called ''The Laboratory'' and the second,
''Vital Principles.''

''When we began working together, we came up with the idea of a fanciful
laboratory,'' Mr. Moschen said. ''Metaphorically speaking, in the first act the
bowls supply us with elements of a mixture from which other transformations take
place. In 'Vital Principles,' we take the knowledge that has been attained and
purify it to an essence of personal expression, juxtaposing individual pieces of
crystals and clowning.''

Because they have such different esthetic impulses, Mr. Berky and Mr. Moschen
hope to create something much larger in scope than either one could do by
himself.

''What interests me is the primitive nature of humans,'' Mr. Berky reflected.
''Our history doesn't lie in sophisticated socialized behavior but somewhere in
the unconscious. After my parents died, I sat on their grave and started beating
on the grave marker, and I realized that that's where rhythm comes from. It's
not just something humans decided to try. Today, however, we live in the era of
electronic theater in which people can no longer even accept the primitive. To
me that's the only place to go. How come the aboriginals can predict how many
typhoons are coming through Port Hedland in northwest Australia and the weather
bureau can't? If we're so damn sophisticated, why aren't we getting anywhere?''

Mr. Moschen's vision of the primitive is more ethereal. ''The process of working
with an object,'' he reflected quietly, ''comes close to the perfect alignment
of the stars,''

The final image of ''The Alchemedans,'' in which the two men stand bare-chested,
solemnly twirling torches aroar with fire, answers both men's yearnings for a
transformation that is at once primitive and perfect.

''It's not so much the culmination but the purification of all that has come
before,'' Mr. Moschen explained. ''The mixture of objects, sound and music
finally sparks into fire.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bob Berky and Michael Moschen (NYT/Jim Wilson)

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ROUND ONE;
WHERE REAGAN'S CONTRA PLAN WENT WRONG

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1132 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The rhetorical line could not have been more clearly drawn in the final moments
before the House of Representatives voted on President Reagan's proposed aid
package to the Nicaraguan rebels.

Vote down the President's $100 million proposal, said the House minority leader,
Robert H. Michel, an Illinois Republican, and ''Nicaragua is lost.'' Approve it,
countered the Speaker, Representative Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the Massachusetts
Democrat, and American armed intervention in the region would be all but
inevitable.

Mr. Reagan lost, 222 votes to 210, largely because 16 Republicans broke ranks
despite the threats and blandishments of the White House. But the result was not
as significant as it seemed; it neither sealed the fate of the contras, as the
rebels are called, nor offered any real reassurance to those who fear ''another
Vietnam'' in Nicaragua.

The President, true to tenacious form, immediately vowed to ''come back again
and again until this battle is won,'' and the Democrats, a bit more
surprisingly, conceded that in the end Mr. Reagan would probably emerge with
much of what he sought.

And so the struggle that has marred American foreign policy since the postwar
bipartisan consensus broke down in the frustration and recrimination occasioned
by intervention in Southeast Asia - the struggle between Presidents determined
to confront Communist expansion and legislators determined to limit American
adventures abroad - continues to defy resolution.

Having cut off all aid to the rebels fighting to overthrow the Sandinista
Government in 1984, Congress yielded a bit last year and agreed to send $27
million in nonmilitary help. This year Mr. Reagan sought $70 million in military
aid and $30 million in other funds, described the vote as a watershed in his
Presidency and said that no other course could deny the Soviet Union a North
American beachhead. In a television speech last Sunday night and in other
comments on the issue, Mr. Reagan painted a lurid picture of the Sandinista
regime, a picture that some critics denounced as a caricature. Some of the
President's facts were questioned. Brazil, for example, denied that it had any
radicals supported by Managua, and Mr. Reagan's own Drug Enforcement
Administration questioned his assertion that ''Nicaraguan Government officials
are deeply involved in drug trafficking.'' Jews and Roman Catholics said the
President had vastly oversimplified the case in picturing them as victims of
Sandinista persecution.

'Scurrilous Attacks'

Democratic and Republican opponents of aid also accused Mr. Reagan and his staff
of impugning their patriotism. The President shot back angrily in an interview
with The New York Times that his adversaries had ''engaged in some of the most
scurrilous personal attacks against me - for example, the most dishonest use of
distortions and outright falsehoods that I have heard in a legislative debate.''
He said he particularly resented suggestions that he would dispatch American
troops to Nicaragua if that were the only way to ''save'' it.

The heat of White House partisanship may have cost Mr. Reagan votes; so, almost
certainly, the lack of public support from most Central American political
leaders, memories of Vietnam, a sense among many members of Congress up for
re-election this year that the President's proposal lacked public support, Mr.
O'Neill's unusually intense lobbying against aid and uncertainty about the
Administration's ultimate goal in Nicaragua. Was Mr. Reagan looking for a
military victory, many wavering House members asked, or trying to force
political compromise?

In a last-minute bid for the decisive votes, the President offered to suspend
part of the military aid for 90 days while negotiations were sought. In
retrospect, some White House staff members saw that as a tactical error,
weakening the argument that aid was needed at once. Others disagreed. On Capitol
Hill, few thought it made much difference, and one Democrat described the
''concession'' as ''a game of mirrors'' giving Mr. Reagan no real incentive to
press diligently for negotiations. All he would have had to do was wait three
months - a delay probably inevitable in any case - then proceed to disburse the
full $100 million.

The Senate will vote this week on a measure identical to the one rejected by the
House, except this time the compromise delay will be part of the bill rather
than a separate executive order. The Republicans apparently have the votes to
pass it. Then it will go back to the House for another vote April 15.

Mr. Reagan said in the interview with The Times that some House members had told
him they would switch their votes and support him with the compromise an
integral part of the measure - presumably because they believe that would give
them a chance to record their support for a final negotiating effort. Analysts
of the House believe a few other members will switch their votes, arguing that,
having expressed their doubts, it is time to support the President.

If all else remains the same, a switch of only seven votes from ''nay'' to
''aye'' would produce for Mr. Reagan a majority of 217 to 215. A slightly larger
margin might result from the placement of some other restrictions on the timing
and rules governing the use of military aid.

But that would still demonstrate what last week's vote demonstrated: that there
is no consensus in the country or the Congress behind Mr. Reagan's proposal or,
for that matter, any other Latin American policy. As the Vietnam experience
demonstrated, guerrilla wars tend to be costly and protracted, and, so far, the
considerable moral fervor of even as popular a President as Mr. Reagan, has not
convinced enough voters, or their Congressmen, that the cause is just and the
goal within reach.

The U.S. and Nicaragua

July 1979 ....Sandinistas oust Somoza regime; Carter Administration starts
economic aid.

November 1980 ....After Reagan election, Sandinistas say they want 'friendly
relations' with U.S.

January 1981 ....U.S. suspends economic aid, february wheat sale.

April 1982 ....Nicaragua proposes negotiations with Washington; State Department
says U.S. is not ready for formal talks.

May 1982 ....Nicaragua announces $166.8 million Soviet aid pact.

December 1982 ....Boland Amendment bars until Oct. 1 funds for military
overthrow of Sandinistas.

March 1983 ....Nicaragua says 2,000 U.S.-supported contras are infiltrating from
Honduras.

April 1984 ....C.I.A. mining of Nicaraguan harbors is disclosed.

April 1985 ....President Ortega signscooperation pact in Moscow.

May 1985 ....United States imposes trade embargo on Nicaragua.

June 1985 ....$27 million in nonmilitary aid approved for contras.

March 1986 ....House rejects Reagan proposal for $100 million in aid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Time Out for Nicaragua

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 571 words


The House's rejection of a $100 million aid package for the ''contra'' rebels
last week was as much a test of domestic wills as of foreign policies. President
Reagan and House Democrats, representing broad constituencies, resent and
distrust each other's basic instincts in dealing with Nicaragua. But however our
checks and balances are finally calibrated, the Sandinistas should have no doubt
about Americans' disapproval of their present course. What produced the 222-210
vote against giving Mr. Reagan free rein was agreement to vote again next month
on a better hedged package of sanctions. A more sophisticated American response
requires a comparable step backward in Managua.

Mr. Reagan erred in turning the argument into a test of anti-Communist fervor.
Those who opposed him sensibly doubt that America's interests and democratic
values in Nicaragua can be advanced by an exile army with no impressive
following in that country. The fears of blundering into another Vietnam were
only heightened when Mr. Reagan portrayed all Latin America as a continent of
dominoes waiting to collapse at Nicaragua's touch.

The President's fear is not another Vietnam but another Cuba. And with cause.
The Sandinistas turned to Cuba and the Soviet Union even before the contra
challenge; their intended new order looks to be totalitarian and their ideology
demonizes the United States.

But all these arguments by analogy risk obscuring reality - and opportunity. The
Sandinistas have arrived without a charismatic leader and at a time of global
disenchantment with the Soviet model. Their need for acceptance abroad and
capacity to govern at home has so far impelled them to tolerate open opposition,
led by a hostile Roman Catholic Church. Even as a civil war beckons, some of
their internal critics still speak out.

If the Managua junta will but listen, there is a lesson in Washington's
hesitation about the contras. What unites Americans is fear that a second
Communist tyranny will take root in the hemisphere. What divides Americans is
the wisdom of using force in a region where past interventions are an ugly
memory. The way out is to strive afresh for a negotiated settlement that
assuages America's fear and honors Nicaragua's self-respect.

Congress can hobble Mr. Reagan's resort to violence but it cannot, alone, force
him into a shrewder diplomacy. Managua's conduct also counts. Mr. Reagan has
offered the Sandinistas a cease-fire if they will negotiate with the contras -
some of the very people they fought for years to drive from power. But Arturo
Cruz, a democrat who now speaks for the coalition of rebels, says it would be
enough for the regime to negotiate with recognized opposition groups inside
Nicaragua.

What is there to talk about? Potentially a great deal: how much aid could be had
from the democratic world for a truly pluralistic regime; what military and
economic burdens could be shed if Nicaragua turned away from the Soviet bloc to
genuine neutrality; how much sympathy and support could be found in other Latin
societies by a regime that practices true independence.

America's leaders last week gained another chance to liberate their policy from
simplistic analogies. Nicaragua's gained another chance to escape discredited
dogma. There is no need for another war of intervention or cycle of tyranny to
prove the verdict of recent history: this hemisphere's future belongs to
democrats.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
NAVY'S TALL SHIP

BYLINE: By Dave Anderson

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3, Column 5; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1004 words


JUST when American heroes appeared virtually extinct, David Robinson is now up
there on the horizon, a tall ship, its sails puffed by a fresh breeze in our
Naval history. John Paul Jones spoke like a coach when he snapped, ''We have not
yet begun to fight,'' but he never shot a jumper. Adm. George Dewey steamed into
Manila Bay but he never snatched a rebound. Adm. Chester Nimitz commanded the
South Pacific fleet in World War II but he never blocked a shot.

David Robinson is still a junior midshipman at Annapolis, but for the moment he
is America's most celebrated Navy man, the center of attention in the National
Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.

Al McGuire, the roundball philosopher whose sense of the sea developed on
Rockaway Beach playgrounds, would surely describe the 6-foot-11-inch Navy center
as an ''aircraft carrier.'' But this is a tall ship. Even at 230 pounds, he has
a stick-figure physique that resembles a mast with square rigging. As a
left-hander, his hull lists slightly to port. And like tall ships everywhere,
their decks scrubbed and polished, he projects the charm of another era.

Poised and personable, David Robinson is a reminder that there's definitely
something about a sailor, especially one who is so accomplished in sports.
Whenever a Navy athlete, or an Army athlete for that matter, attains national
acclaim, the nation is attracted to him as one of its own. That happened in
football with Roger Staubach and earlier to Pete Dawkins, each a Heisman Trophy
winner. And now David Robinson is suddenly the nation's basketball player.

If this tall ship's team were to defeat top-ranked Duke in today's Eastern
Regional final, Navy would qualify for next weekend's Final Four in Dallas.

''I always look forward to these kind of games,'' David Robinson was saying
yesterday. ''You get a chance to go out and show what you can do.''

If an upset of Duke were to occur, the temptation would be to compare it to
Villanova's upset of Georgetown in last year's championship game. But after
listening to David Robinson assess Duke and himself, calmly and clinically, a
Navy triumph seems to be more possible than improbable. Never sounding like a
braggart, the 20-year-old from Woodbridge, Va., spoke with the command of an
admiral planning an invasion.

''The key is dominating the boards, and that's what we do best,'' he said.
''Their size is their weakness. I'm not going to worry about getting my shot
blocked.''

Duke's tallest starters are Mark Alarie and Jay Bilas, each a 6-8 senior. Danny
Ferry, a 6-10 freshman, comes off the bench early. But none match David
Robinson's skills.

''I know what I'm capable of,'' David Robinson added. ''I know I should be
dominating the game with my size. You've seen good points in my game, but you
haven't seen it all together - totally dominating a game instead of flashes and
then disappearing. If you have a certain amount of talent, no way you should
play under a certain level.''

David Robinson doesn't disappear often. He's leading the nation with averages of
13 rebounds and 6 blocked shots; he's averaging 22.7 points.

Because of so much basketball lately, he regrets that his Annapolis academic
average has dropped to 2.4. But in an era of outlaw athletes at outlaw colleges,
he is indeed a fresh breeze. The son of a Navy civilian engineer, he chose the
Naval Academy for its ''academics and discipline.'' Now committed to a five-year
Navy hitch, he wouldn't be able to join a National Basketball Association team
until the 1992-93 season. By then he would be 27 years old.

''If there was a way of me getting out of the Navy before that, I'd definitely
think about it,'' he has said. ''But I'm under the impression there is no way.
If something did arise, I would ask.''

According to Marty Blake, the N.B.A.'s scouting director, David Robinson ''would
be it,'' meaning the No. 1 draft choice, if he were immediately available in
next year's draft of college talent. Scouts compare him to the young Bill
Russell, also a stick-figure, also left-handed, also a shot-blocker. But unless
''something'' were to arise that would enable him to be discharged, David
Robinson knows that a multimillion-dollar N.B.A. contract won't materialize for
six years, if then. Not that he's complaining.

''I don't live for money,'' he has said. ''So many people think they are
automatically happy if they have it. I don't necessarily think so. It is a
factor in what I do, but not a big motivating factor.''

Roger Staubach, remember, joined the Dallas Cowboys in 1969 after five years of
Naval service, including Vietnam duty as a supply officer. Bill Bradley joined
the Knicks after two yers at Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar following his Princeton
graduation. And about a year ago David Robinson began to think about an eventual
N.B.A. career.

''But if I never play pro basketball, it's all right, too,'' he has said. ''I
have security. I have the Navy behind me. I have a place to work.''

In his wisdom, David Robinson mentions his plan to be a Naval supply or
intelligence officer as background for an eventual business career.

But for now he's a student-athlete in the best sense. In his sincere
self-analysis, he described himself as ''absent'' during the first half of
Friday night's game with Cleveland State, but over the last six minutes he
scored 12 of Navy's last 14 points, including a short jumper with 6 seconds
remaining that created a 71-70 victory, its 16th in succession.

And if David Robinson were to put it ''all together'' today, Duke will be in
jeopardy despite its 35-2 record, losing only to North Carolina and Georgia
Tech.

''Robinson has the ability to have a big imprint at both ends of the court,''
says Mike Krzyzewski, the Duke coach. ''We'll have problems defending him
inside. And because of his shot-blocking ability, I don't know if we'll be able
to score inside at the other end. The rest of the Navy team looks like the kind
of players I had at Army when I coached there -good solid players.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JOURNEY AMONG TYRANTS

BYLINE: By A. M. Rosenthal; A. M. Rosenthal is the executive editor of The
Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 20, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 10838 words


WHEN I WAS YOUNG AND writing from Korea, I met a boy from Manistee, Mich., as he
was standing guard in the chilly spring along a forgotten front.

He was a private and his name was Robert Zawicki; he was 20 years old.

I thought it quite strange and poignant that this young man had been posted to a
duty whose purpose was to delay for a few minutes - perhaps his last -an enemy
he really did not know, to protect a country he did not know, because of a war
that started when he was 9 years old, playing in Manistee.

That was 25 years ago. I returned not long ago to South Korea for the first time
since those reporting days. American youngsters are still in combat position on
that line, which most of their countrymen remember only dimly, the 38th
parallel. They are strengthened against peacetime torpor by night patrols,
endless training and regimental elan. They still face the reality that the North
Korean enemy just over there, within sight and sound, could attack at any time
of its choosing and that if that happens they are to fight for those few minutes
- long enough to bring up reinforcements.

The soldiers who stand guard and patrol at night and bark out the slogan of the
American Manchu regiment - ''Keep up the fire!'' -are young enough to be Private
Zawicki's sons.

I had felt a sense of kinship and affection for Private Zawicki long ago and
feel it now for the young men who patrol still. They are American soldiers doing
what they are supposed to do and doing it well - intelligent, skilled and alert.

But when I returned, I felt, as in 1961 and through all my adult life, a sense
of deep distaste for the kind of Government the young soldiers of the Manchu
regiment are defending. It was a nasty military regime in Private Zawicki's days
and it is a nasty military regime now.

I know well what the youngsters of the Manchu regiment may not think about much
- that the Government in Seoul might be important to American strategy, but it
is also a Government that they would hate to live under, and would send people
like me to jail.

Of course I know that although the young Americans are standing in defense of a
military government, they are also standing against a tyranny far more despotic,
a Communist dynasty that would not jail or censor men or women who sought the
taste of freedom, but would shoot them. There is no question that the rigid,
unbending dictatorship of the North is more chilling and antagonistic to any
dream of liberty than the Government of the South, and so our choice between
them is plain. But do we really have only that choice between the lesser of
evils? I did not think so when I met Private Zawicki, and I do not think so now.

I know that in South Korea there are men and women who have struggled for years
against American-supported governments, people totally opposed to the Communist
dictatorship of the North, but who believe they are entitled to some of those
things for which they and I believe America stands - what might be called
certain inalienable rights.

The visit to Korea this winter was the first stop in an Asian journey that also
took me to the Philippines and Indonesia. In each country the United States was
confronted with a dilemma that has bedeviled it for almost half a century, ever
since it became the first world power to insist that it stood for political
democracy: how to deal with dictatorships supported by the United States, but
detested by people who want to believe that we really mean what we say.

I arrived in the Philippines as the United States was being forced to pull away
from a dictatorship it had staunchly supported. Change came not only because the
Philippine people were simply fed up and in a revolutionary mood, but also
because of a sudden reassessment by Americans in important places of exactly
what constituted American interests and American security.

It was a special moment in history, but it did not solve the dilemma as much as
it emphasized its importance around the world. IT HAD NOT REALLY OCCURRED TO ME
WHEN I DECIDED to visit Asia a few months ago that there would be any political
thread among the countries I was visiting. I wanted to go to South Korea and the
Philippines because it had been a quarter of a century since I had been to
either. As for Indonesia, although I had spent six years in Asia, that country
always seemed to be on some other New York Times correspondent's beat. This
would be my first visit to a terribly important country, but one that somehow
had always been hazy in my mind. It was not until the last moments of the last
day of the trip, on the way to the airport in Jakarta, that a conversation with
my colleagues - Warren Hoge, The Times's foreign editor, and Barbara Crossette,
our Bangkok-based Southeast Asia correspondent - suddenly brought it together.
We realized in the car that the three countries Mr. Hoge and I had been visiting
were all part of a major dilemma of American purpose abroad: how and whether to
influence governments friendly to us but not at all friendly to their people.

And on the plane to London at the end of the trip, I knew that once again I
wanted to think through the central belief of my political life.

For 40 years I have been involved - as a reporter at the United Nations, as a
foreign correspondent and as an editor - in writing, talking, thinking about
foreign countries and the relationship of the United States to them.

And much of that time I have been out of step philosophically and emotionally
with Governments of my own country and with many people I know who also have
their interests and passions about foreign affairs.

All that time, there was for me only one question that really mattered about any
government: Does it allow political freedom? Does it permit its citizens to
breathe and think and talk and write as free people?

I can only live as part of a free society. Under a repressive government I would
wither mentally and spiritually or be jailed or otherwise disposed of.

I believe all people should be given the opportunity granted to Americans by
accident of birth and through the efforts of those who founded the country and
carried out the vision - the right to live in freedom. Those of us who have been
graced by being born into freedom, or have settled within its arms, have the
obligation to support as best we can those who struggle for what we possess and
cherish.

The enemy of freedom is dictatorship, left or right. I believe that. Where we
have the power to change it, we should. Where we do not have that power, we
should draw a moral and judgmental political line between us and the tyrants,
making this plain to oppressor and oppressed.

But all these years, I've seen my own Government stand behind one tyrant or
another. And I have seen and heard Americans who live and flourish under liberty
- writers, intellectuals, politicians, journalists and scientists - decide that
freedom is really not all that important - for others.

I simply cannot understand it. It may be simply the blindness of the believer -
freedom as religion. But it has been difficult for me to comprehend how free
people can choose tyranny for others. It seems to me so obviously contemptuous
of our own beliefs and so lacking in compassion, so vulgar of spirit.

I grew up in a politically liberal city, went to liberal schools at a time when
to be liberal meant to be for freedom and against oppression. Liberal was
anti-Fascist but also anti-Communist. We understood, many of us, that there was
little to choose, that Communism and Fascism were natural allies. There were
some, of course, who did not really understand this, who were so terrified of
Fascist racism that they did not see it growing on the left.

Now that we have no illusions about the determined expansionism and
anti-Semitism of the Soviet Government, now that we understand that Moscow's
antagonism toward China carries heavy overtones of the ''yellow peril,'' there
would seem to be no reason at all to choose between left and right
authoritarianism, yet so many on the liberal left do.

Nor can I understand why American conservative intellectuals, so many of them
dedicated civil libertarians, allow their anti-Communism, which I share, to
become a rationale for the support of right-wing dictatorships.

Strangely enough, or perhaps obviously enough, the apologists, left or right,
for their favorite tyrannies have almost precisely the same sets of arguments.

You cannot, they say, expect new, poor, tradition-ridden countries suddenly to
understand and to abide by the rules of political freedom. Yet we've seen one
impoverished country after another move from agrarian society to high
technology, from shanty to skyscraper, in a couple of generations. And yet
they're not supposed to have the wit to move from tyranny to freedom.

They also argue that economic progress has to come first, and that democracy is
really too expensive a way of achieving it. This is said in all seriousness, as
if there were evidence that despotism somehow is more efficient than freedom.
The exact opposite seems so obviously true - Western Europe compared to Eastern,
free India compared to Communist China, Israel compared to the Arab states,
Japan compared to the Soviet Union.

And the final argument - freedom yes, but not now, only when the danger from
right/left (cross out one) passes. Quite as if history did not show that
dictatorship leads to more dictatorship, quite as if anybody who lives in
freedom has the right to ask another to wait for it. I WAS NEVER TERRIBLY
DISTURBED BY THE local propagandists or apparatchiks of the various
dictatorships. They had their jobs. I knew that sometimes they weren't too keen
on it, but they were under pressures I have never had to face.

I felt no anger for the Polish journalist who invited me out to lunch in Warsaw
one day and sat me at a table against a wall. I felt sorry for him when the wall
began to talk back and a terrible look of embarrassment came over his face. My
recorded voice, backward, sounded like a maddened Donald Duck. I looked at my
friend, he looked at me, and we both shrugged.

He had been told to do what he did and he did it. I had the passport out of
Poland; he didn't.

And I rather liked the Soviet radio broadcaster I met one sweltering night in a
town then called Hollandia in what then was Netherlands New Guinea. A gaggle of
foreign correspondents from all over the world had flown in to see the running
down of the Dutch flag and the running up of the Indonesian flag.

That night we all sat on the veranda of the only hotel in town and talked a lot
and drank a lot. A Russian radio man named Pavel was the loudest of the
Communists and I was the loudest of the Westerners. He told us we were all
capitalist slaves and I told him that he was a policeman serving the Soviet
tyranny. About dawn, Pavel rose to his feet and proposed a toast:

''We are all colleagues and friends despite our differences.''

I then rose with enormous, careful dignity.

''We can be friends, but we will never be colleagues because I'm a newspaperman
and you're a cop, Pavel.''

I believe Pavel was indeed a cop - I believe most Soviet journalists I've met in
far places were members of the K.G.B. or reported to the K.G.B. But Pavel
profited from the Soviet system and reveled in its toughness and might and
didn't pretend otherwise.

Nor was I perturbed much by third-world diplomats and civil servants at the
United Nations and in Washington who had to apologize for one repulsive military
dictatorship or another. The poor chaps had to go home someday, and mild
contempt was the highest emotion I could muster.

But Americans and American policy - that was another matter. Our own apologists
for tyranny did set my teeth on edge. The writers who visited the Soviet Union
once or twice and decided the people had nice gnarled faces, so it couldn't be
too bad. The playwright who remained an apologist for Stalinism until the last
word, the last breath. The deliciously talented actress who denounced the
American press for building up Solidarity, until the Soviet movie director at
the table told her gently that the Communists in Poland really did not rule
through popular acclaim but because of the Soviet Army.

Most of them are knee-jerkers of the left, but there are plenty of right legs
twitching, too. Such as the conservative think-tankers who do not really like
the South African Government very much but are far more concerned about the
future possibility of black-imposed radicalism than the present reality of
white-imposed apartheid.

So many Americans seem perpetually to be choosing ''tolerable'' tyrannies. They
picket the Chilean Embassy, but never the Cuban. Or the other way around. Or
they quite correctly see the frightening reality of the Somozistas in the contra
movement in Nicaragua, which somehow obscures for them another reality - that
the Sandinistas are oppressive usurpers of a united front revolution. Or the
other way around.

And time after time, all these years, I have heard my own Government talk
freedom but decide to support dictatorship. During my years in India in the late
1950's I saw American policy tilt toward the authoritarian military Governments
of Pakistan at the price of influence and friendship within India. It was not
India's vast size that mattered to me. It was that India was the only major
developing country that not only chose political democracy but also stuck with
it, except for a few ugly years under Indira Gandhi. There were all kinds of
strategy reasons put forward about poor riven Pakistan's military importance.
But I always thought it was not strategy that was so important in shaping the
United States' coolness toward India, but just plain annoyance. The Indians can
be terribly irritating, you know.

I was always struck by the fact that so many American diplomats seemed to get
along so easily with the generals and civilian dictators. I suppose it was
because they could go right in and get a yes or no instead of going through all
that bother of dealing with political leaders who had to explain to their own
people what they were doing. There were exceptions, of course - Ellsworth
Bunker, the elegant American Ambassador to India in my time, who seemed to get
along with the troublesome Indians quite well; Samuel D. Berger, the
quick-minded former labor attache who became the United States Ambassador in
Seoul and soon convinced the local generals not even to think of pushing him
around. (Philip C. Habib, who went on to become a Presidential trouble-shooter
in the Middle East, the Philippines and Central America, was Sam Berger's deputy
in those days. One day, when the generals were attempting one pressure tactic or
another against the embassy, Mr. Habib shook his head in mock sorrow and said
they didn't have a chance, not in an embassy ''where the ambassador is a Jew,
his deputy is a Lebanese and the C.I.A. station chief is a Greek.'') And while
Jimmy Carter stumbled a lot and in the end didn't seem to know where he was
going, his insistence on human rights as one key American policy exposed the
sickening hypocrisy of the Communist dictatorships that talk about freedom
movements and imprison the minds and bodies of their own subjects.

Still, after 40 years, I find myself still puzzled and pained about why my own
country so often does not act as it talks and why many of my countrymen who
demand freedom for themselves don't give much of a damn about it for others. I
thought a lot about this as I traveled in Asia. KOREA: THE TIMES'S TOKYO BUREAU
CHIEF, CLYDE HABERMAN, who also covers Korea, was walking in Seoul one day when
suddenly it turned bitterly cold. His Korean companion whipped off his coat and
presented it to Mr. Haberman, who tried to push it away. ''No, take it,'' the
Korean insisted.  ''You will be cold.'' ''Me? I am a Korean!'' ''I am a
Korean.'' You hear those words quite a bit in Seoul, and you also sense the
pride in a certain staunchness, in a forthright way of speech and manner quite
unusual in Asia.

Korea is a country with a hard climate, a hard history, hard soil. It has
produced a tough, proud, talented people. We used to call them the Irish of Asia
for their adventuresomeness, their individuality, and the way they spoke for
themselves. But in my time, in the 1960's, South Korea was a country barely
recovering from the battering of a war that had raged up and down its land for
three years. Piles of rubble still filled the streets of Seoul, and the city was
dusty, weary looking, ramshackle.

The South Koreans ate poorly, dressed poorly, worked hard and long for nothing
much beyond making do. Ever since, the images in my mind about Seoul were of dim
lights, streets smoky with charcoal, sweat in summer and bone chill in winter,
grayness, farm hills of rock. I had heard of the ''miracle of South Korea,'' but
I didn't really grasp it until I saw it, spectacularly unfolding from the moment
I arrived. A great international airport, fine new roads leading into a city of
score upon score of skyscrapers, vast stadiums, glittering new hotels, shopping
malls spreading miles underground, women dressed with dash, great bazaars
stuffed with the electronic gadgets and computers that are the symbol of upward
and onward, particularly in Asia.

It all meant a lot more than glitz and goods. The skyscrapers, the computers,
the great vistas of new high-rise apartments, were an achievement of muscle, wit
and spirit, talent and work.

These are the same energies that have sent hundreds of thousands of South Korean
construction workers and engineers around the world and made them not only one
of the assets of their country but a reservoir of strength for a dozen newly
burgeoning nations.

It is the same push and determination that drove South Korean fruit merchants to
become the modern personification of the American ethic: success through
individual hard work and to hell with excuses. If you want to make it and are
willing to stretch muscle and mind, why, the United States is the place for you;
Koreans believed it and acted on it.

JUST 30 MILES FROM SEOUL IS THE LINE GUARDED BY THE South Koreans and 20,000
American troops. And just beyond the mined fences there is the country created
by the political cunning of the Soviet Union and the stupidity and naivete of
the United States of America.

Korea was one country throughout history until the August day in 1945 when the
Japanese surrendered to the United States. The Japanese garrison in Korea, which
had kept it under a hard, mean colonial rule for 40 years, was to lay down arms.
The Russians had entered the war a few days earlier and kindly agreed to take
the Japanese surrender in the northern part of Korea, down to the 38th parallel.

Suddenly, the Government of the South, the only legitimate government in the
land, found the entire northern half taken away.

Suddenly, by Russian aggressiveness and American compliance, the Korean nation
was severed, Korean families split, north and south amputated from each other.
Suddenly, in one day, two Koreas were created where only one had existed.

The United States and the Soviet Union also planted civil war that day. It
started one morning in 1950 when North Korea attacked. It lasted three terrible
years. It cost the lives of millions of Koreans and of 50,000 Americans sent to
South Korea's aid by President Harry S. Truman.

North Korea is one of the most rigid police states in the world, ruled by a
total dictator who is passing the country on to his son exactly as in an
imperial dynasty. It has a huge army, trained and armed for offense, and a
people forced to live in social and economic barrenness. The boulevards of
Pyongyang, the capital of North Korea, are broad and long - and empty.

The two countries face each other across the demilitarized zone, where the
Americans and their South Korean allies stand alert, and in the armistice
building where officers of both sides meet to snarl and stare each other down.
Every now and then, an edgy delegation from one Korea visits the other in a
feeling-out process doomed to failure. Unification would mean the death of one
Government or the other, one way of life or the other.

In Seoul, residents delight in the story of the North Korean delegation chief
visiting the city who remarked sourly to a South Korean Government minister that
of course the rivers of street traffic had been staged by the South Koreans, who
had ordered in every car from all over the country to make an impression.

''True,'' said the South Korean. ''That wasn't very difficult. But it really was
a job moving in all those skyscrapers.''

The men of the American regiment help protect the land of South Korea and the
Government of the United States helps protect the Government of South Korea, not
just from the North but from the dissatisfied among its own people. There was a
brief moment, in 1960 and 1961, when South Koreans, for the first time in the
history of the Korean nation, had a chance to reach out for freedom.

The war was over, the harsh Government of Syngman Rhee had been rejected in
riot, and a pleasant, witty professorial politician named John M. Chang had been
elected in the first really free balloting in the country's history.

Mr. Chang's Government ruled - briefly - with some of the confusion that is part
of freedom. Then a wiry little general in elevator shoes, Park Chung Hee, came
along with a few battalions and grabbed power.

If the United States had stayed aloof or expressed displeasure about a handful
of officers using American equipment to destroy a Government cast in the image
of democracy, General Park would have collapsed. I was based in Tokyo then, and
covered South Korea. I remember that, against the advice of Marshall Green, then
the United States charge in Seoul, Washington rushed to recognize the general,
endorsed him politically, and thus became morally responsible for the ensuing
quarter of a century of military dictatorship in South Korea.

A year later, Robert F. Kennedy, then Attorney General, but touring Asia as his
brother's diplomatic and political emissary, met at dinner in Tokyo with some
American correspondents, all of whom had recently been in Seoul. We all felt
that the United States should try to distance itself from General Park, then
busily turning South Korea into a political penitentiary. Mr. Kennedy shook his
head, no.

''My brother and me,'' he said with a grin, ''we like him. He's a feisty little
guy. He's got his boots polished.''

I believe Robert Kennedy changed his mind about the importance of polished
boots, but he had quite accurately reflected the official American attitude
toward Korea - what counted, as far as the United States was concerned, was
stability. Generals were obviously much more stable than elected academics.

General Park was murdered over scotch and dinner one October evening in 1979.
Some of his brother officers did him in with revolvers. A little later, still
other brother officers did his assassins in, and one of the new gang, Chun Doo
Hwan, eventually came out top man. He gave himself a couple of more stars,
''retired'' from the army, put on a business suit and had himself proclaimed
President, which he is to this day. He promises elections in 1988. Who knows?

Whatever he calls himself, or however he dresses, Mr. Chun is a military ruler
and he rules by consent - the consent of his brother officers, whom he pays
well, promotes regularly and with whom he presumably does not have too many
whiskies over dinner. The Chun Government permits a narrow amount of political
expression, controlled day by day. There is almost nothing critical in the
press, but voices are raised in the National Assembly now and again, and
sometimes carefully cordoned street demonstrations are permitted. It is a tense,
increasingly nervous Government, which knows that millions of South Koreans
detest it, possibly most South Koreans. It arrested hundreds recently for the
high crime of being suspected of wanting changes in the Constitution considered.

The South is far better than the North, but it is not good enough for the
millions of South Koreans, who, having once been given the chance of voting,
rather like the idea of voting again, freely. It is not good enough for the
traditionally political university students, nor the intellectuals, nor
opposition parties hampered by the police and the plainclothes goon squads that
are on almost every corner in Seoul.

From time to time, the United States uses its enormous clout with the South
Korean Government on behalf of dissidents. It did that when it pressured the
South Korean Government into releasing Kim Dae Jung, a leading opposition
figure, who was in jail, and allowing him to go to the United States.

Mr. Kim risked his life to return to South Korea in early 1985. Thanks to the
United States, he was not sent back to jail. Instead, he lives under an elastic
kind of arrest in the house where I visited him. He can go out most of the time,
but he is not permitted political action. And nine times the police have showed
up at his door to tell him not to cross his own threshhold into the streets for
a week or two. When I left Mr. Kim, I saw the uniformed and plainclothes police
around the street, noting who went in and out, and making sure to be seen.

Though Mr. Kim is one of the most important men in the country, the American
Ambassador in Seoul does not see him. Lesser American officials do, thus
maintaining contact without annoying President Chun too much. Mr. Kim's
supporters in the schools and streets see all this as toadying to Mr. Chun.

The American position is to hope rather forlornly that President Chun will carry
out his promise of elections. Nobody expects them to be really free, because the
Constitution is now written so that the President can handpick his successor.
And, of course, it has been shown that it is dangerous in South Korea to
campaign for such changes in the Constitution as taking presidential selection
out of the hands of the generals.

The usual reasons given for American support of the military Government (which
would collapse without it) are that the North Korean enemy is very real and
present, and instability in the South is an invitation to the Communists and a
danger to the United States; and that the South Koreans have made enormous
economic strides - even though the economy is declining somewhat - under
authoritarian governments.

The arguments are insulting to South Koreans.

The opposition to Mr. Chun is not pro-Communist. South Koreans fought the
Communists and bled and died for their country when it was ruled by the
autocratic Syngman Rhee. They could be counted on to be at least as patriotic
under a freely chosen government. Americans should pay them the honor of
understanding that. The economic progress of South Korea was created, not by the
officers who run the country, but by individual South Korean intelligence and
drive and skill. Some South Korean businessmen prefer the Chun Government to the
inevitable erraticism of a freely elected government. But they laugh at the idea
that they need the generals to succeed at home and abroad. They may not want to
overthrow the Government now, but they regard it without awe and with some
contempt, and would not weep at its passing.

It always seemed to me when I was in Korea - and it seemed to me again when I
revisited the country - that Americans who insist that political freedom and
economic progress are not mutually exclusive for them or their European allies
are in a decidedly uncomfortable position when they say that our little brothers
in Asia can progress economically only under political despotism. Very
uncomfortable.

And of course the real problem with the rationales is that, whatever logic they
may have for the Americans who put them forward, they are detested by millions
of Koreans who believe that they can have progress and liberty, and that they
are quite capable of defending their country under freedom's flag.

These people - the broad national opposition, the active dissidents, the
students and their families - would probably elect their candidate in a free
election. If they are not given the chance, they will be fighting in the
streets, which the North Koreans would just love.

Meantime, we are being seen in South Korea, a country whose people are close to
us emotionally, who understand and admire America and American ways, as the
supporters of a despotic, disrespected and disliked Government.

It is too bad. It is ironic and bitter in the mouth that this is happening in a
country whose freedom 50,000 Americans died to save and where boys from Manistee
still stand guard and patrol by night. THE PHILIPPINES: TRAVEL TIPS FOR THE
CAPITAL of the Philippines: Check into the Manila Hotel and then head for the
Leveriza district, a mile away.

The Manila is one of the world's handful of truly great hotels - a hotel made
for history. American colonial governors danced here. Gen. Douglas MacArthur
lived here before the war, and then the Japanese military ruled here.

Philippine presidents and their first ladies swept into great halls at the
Manila Hotel. It is a hotel of state, right in the middle of things, and the
city's hectic political life is often played out in full view.

When I was there just before Christmas, as the political struggle was seizing
the islands, politicians held free-for-all press conferences in the open
breakfast room. Political opponents waved at one another in the lobby and they
jostled and joked despite the bitterness of Philippine political life. Just a
few feet away, security guards checked the handbags and packages of everybody
entering.

The Manila is a place of grandeur but also of laughter, pride and bounce, like
the city itself. It's full of talk, action, combat and warmth, like the city
itself. It's a swaggering hotel for a swaggering town.

Seth Mydans, The New York Times bureau chief in Manila, booked Mr. Hoge and me
into the hotel, let us look around the great lobby just enough to feel a little
swaggery ourselves. He and Alice Villadolid of our Manila bureau then took us
right out to Leveriza, a bit of program scheduling as smart as a finger-snap.

Leveriza is a neighborhood. Families live in tiny houses stacked on top of one
another, two or three high, like chicken coops. The coops are full of babies,
naked. The naked babies also play in the streets. Inside the coops, the mothers
nurse more babies or lie sprawled on dirt or wooden floors. There are no
toilets. Most people do not work; they scrounge.

There is a coffin in the street, and I am told it holds the body of a man of
about 50 who lived in one of the chicken coops. There is not enough money to
bury him. His neighbors are gambling around the coffin, taking part in a kind of
raffle to raise money to put the coffin decently into the ground. There is a
great deal of garbage in the street.

There's not much to see in Leveriza. Fifteen minutes, half an hour, is more than
enough time to look around and escape.

A nun, Sister Christine, of the Sisters of the Good Shepherd, spends a lot more
time in Leveriza - all her days and nights, in fact. She lives in a bare house
with a couple of other nuns. They do what they can. They fight the city for a
water tap, teach a little, campaign among their rich friends for a little money
for Leveriza.

They do not preach that the meek shall inherit the earth. They preach that the
poor should get together and fight like hell.

Sister Christine is not a gentle soul. She's a woman full of anger and scorn.
She's angry at the people of her own class - she said she had been a spoiled
wealthy brat - who allow Leveriza to exist. She is full of scorn for priests,
nuns or ministers who think of religion simply in terms of their own
relationship with God. She hates the emphasis on the ''sweet infant Jesus.'' She
talks of the adult Christ, leading and struggling. Some of her friends gave her
placards of the Virgin Mary. Contemptuously she asked for more, not as a
reminder to worship an image she thinks is too pallid, but to cover holes in the
chicken coops.

Sister Christine has rejected her own social past. But she has connections. She
is very politically active, a radical. She spoke with hatred of the man who was
President of the Philippines then, Ferdinand E. Marcos, and his wife, Imelda.
They would not have fared well in any revolutionary court presided over by
Sister Christine. I felt I wouldn't fare very well either under Sister
Christine. I thought her politics were full of automatic, raspy, leftist jargon.
But she was living in Leveriza, and I admired her for that. And when she said
she had never been so happy in her life I knew she was telling the truth.

Of course, every huge city has its fine hotels, often with sub-slums nearby. In
Manila they seemed somehow more dramatic, more sorrowful.

Manila is an intimate kind of place, run by families and feuds, and it seemed to
me there was a kind of intimacy between the Manila Hotel and the politicians in
the lobby and Sister Christine and the people of Leveriza - the immediacy of a
group of people wrestling with one another, who might fall over a cliff
together.

And, of course, I knew that whatever the outcome of the election soon to take
place, the Leverizas and the Sister Christines would still exist. The election
would not give the people of Leveriza more food or jobs or clothe their babies.
Sister Christine made a point of saying that. She knew it, the people of the
neighborhood knew it, and so did the leaders of the Communist army that already
controlled villages an hour's drive from Manila.

For the interested voyager, see the Manila Hotel first and then Leveriza; it
remains a good travel tip.

MANILA TAKES A stranger in. I felt at home again at once, and again reveled in
Philippine warmth and candor. All the time I was there I had the feeling I was
sitting at a table where everybody was talking, arguing, laughing, shouting,
denouncing.

One night I was at the home of a writer who traveled well and comfortably in
East and West, usually on grants of one kind or another. He had plenty of
dollar-a-day servants and fine furniture. He was gay and hospitable. From time
to time, he made it almost but not quite clear that his sympathies were with the
left, and in particular, the New People's Army, the Communist insurgency growing
quickly in the islands.

Also at the table were an academic couple, openly pro-Communist, both admiring
Che Guevara and both manag-ing to look like him. They passed Communist
propaganda publications to some of the foreign visitors and glowered darkly at
the entry of a former Marcos official who had recently joined the opposition.

He seemed startled, reasonably enough, to find himself at dinner with a couple
of people he knew would happily hang him, given the chance. But everybody argued
and nobody walked out.

At another table, in a restaurant, one afternoon, half a dozen intense, bright
young men were gathered. One of them had spent years in a Marcos jail for
political action. One was an executive of a branch of an American company, and
another was a lawyer. And there were a couple of men who were part-time students
and full-time political organizers. They were soft in speech, clearly
intelligent and dedicated. Every one of them was a spokesman for a coalition
that was a front for the political arm of the Communist guerrillas. They were
agents of the insurgency.

One night the table was in an executive suite of a Manila office building, set
by rich, powerful young businessmen who had split with other rich, powerful
members of their families because they had had enough of Ferdinand Marcos. They
said that once they had accepted the corruption of the Marcos Government as a
tiresome reality because they were doing fine for themselves. The price of roc
ing the boat was high - prison, perhaps, and political, social and economic
ostracism, certainly.

But when Benigno S. Aquino Jr., the opposition leader who had been living in the
United States, flew home to Manila in 1983 and was shot on the tarmac, that was
simply too much for them to bear in silence. They exploded out of their
executive suites into political action. They were campaigning, some openly, some
secretly, all passionately, for Mr. Aquino's widow, Corazon.

They were quite as bright and quite as determined as the Communist-fronters at
the restaurant.

Both groups wanted Mrs. Aquino to win. The young businessmen were convinced that
an Aquino defeat and a Marcos victory would bring power to the Communists. The
revolutionaries in the restaurant operated on the opposite assumption - that the
Communists would be helped by an Aquino victory and a Marcos defeat, whether
Mrs. Aquino liked it or not. That was part of the gamble each group made: the
gamble that they could influence Corazon C. Aquino.

One Sunday evening in another living room, Mr. Hoge, Mr. Mydans and I had a
pleasant but curious, and faintly embarrassing, interview with Mrs. Aquino
herself.

In the afternoon, we had heard her talk at one of her first big rallies in
Manila. She appeared early, neat and cool and dressed in the yellow that had
become the trademark of her party.

The rally was very family. The platform was crowded with friends and relatives,
and security men kept trying futilely to push them back so the crowd could see
Mrs. Aquino.

She wandered about, smiled and chatted with friends and kept urging one of her
young daughters to get up and sing to the crowd. The girl sang a teen-age pop
song - a little off key, but everybody around seemed to delight in her
combination of shyness and determination. I did, too.

Mrs. Aquino's vice-presidential running mate, Salvador H. Laurel, who had
stepped out of the presidential race at the last minute to make way for Mrs.
Aquino, appeared late and chatted blithely right through her speech.

She talked about the things she always talked about - Mr. Marcos's corruption,
and herself as the incarnate spirit of her husband. She talked for him and his
ideals, said she would be honest and true and decent, and that that was what she
offered the people of the Philippines, that and nothing more.

She seemed indeed to represent to the crowd what she said she was - hope, a new
chance, an end to Marcos. It was not a wildly enthusiastic crowd, but it seemed
to be a loving one. She was sister and mother, fresh as the new day, for which
so many Filipinos seemed to long. It was impossible not to like her, difficult
to remember that she really hadn't said very much at all.

Mrs. Aquino is a wealthy member of one of the wealthiest land-owning families in
the Philippines, but her home in Quezon City near Manila is modest and warm -
one story, wooden, stuffed furniture, stuffed animals, people com-ing and going,
tea being passed around, entirely relaxed and homey. She and her husband built
it after they were married in 1954. Her husband had worked for The Manila Times.
A number of reporters bought houses on that street, and it was called Times
Street - a nice touch, I thought.

For a couple of hours, Mrs. Aquino answered all our questions. But we kept
looking at one another because she was vague and rambling and answered the same
question in as many different ways as times we chose to put it. She said quite
cheerfully that she couldn't remember the issues that divided her and Mr.
Laurel, and that anyway the people were fed up with promises, so what difference
did it make.

She dismissed the idea of specific programs because, look at Ferdinand Marcos -
he promised so many things, and just see what happened to his country.

When she was asked what she thought about the New People's Army, which is a
vivid threat to the republic, she suggested we talk to a priest she knew who
''is supposed to be one of our experts on Communism.'' She said he had come over
to brief her and assured her that Communism had no chance in the country because
''it goes against the grain of Filipino culture.''

''You could just give him a call,'' she suggested pleasantly.

About Mr. Marcos - she would certainly try him for the murder of her husband
when she became President, but then maybe she wouldn't.

After a while we all got the feeling that it was rather unfair to ask this
candidate for the presidency really tough questions. She was so kindly, so
friendly, so convinced that only honesty and virtue counted, that she was what
the Philippines wanted, and needed, that it seemed quite discourteous somehow to
cause her trouble and to pin her down.

The text of the interview, printed in The New York Times the next day, spoke for
itself in ramble and vagueness. It landed quite heavily among her supporters in
Washington and her Filipino backers in the states. We were told later that some
of her friends in the United States got on the phone to her entourage and said
that nice was nice, but she really should have some answers next time American
reporters came around. The interview resulted in considerable inner-circle talk
and determination that she do more homework herself rather than refer problems
to her friends, even if they were priests and experts.

HEN WE WENT to visit President Marcos, we found him sitting bolt upright behind
a huge desk in a huge office in his huge palace. He did not arouse protective
instincts among American journalists, nor did they feel at all guilty about
trying to pin him down.

He appeared sick, very sick, although he denied it. His skin was stretched tight
on his face, but he talked strongly that day, parried, counterattacked,
sprinkled blame liberally everywhere but in his own di-rection, acknowledged
feuding in his army and said he would take care of it, just give him more time.

He said the Americans were just too worried about the Communists in the first
place and that they were not giving him enough money to fight them in the
second. He was very much in command, and when he made the mere suggestion that I
might not want lookers-on in the room, a half a dozen civil servants scuttled
out.

But we felt listening to him that he was also nervous and running scared. He
knew something was taking place between Mrs. Aquino and the crowds, that
something was changing in the streets, and it took no special wisdom for a
stranger to sense that, no matter what happened, he had lost. If he stole the
election, the world would know it. And if he won honestly, nobody would believe
it.

The assassination of Mr. Aquino and the determination of his widow focused world
attention on the corruption of the Marcos Government, the ''crony capitalism''
that distributed the wealth among his friends, the oppression, the arrests and
the threat of arrest, the high-handed imperial manner of the Marcos family. It
had made it all familiar to everybody who watched television or read a newspaper
in the United States.

That morning at Malacanang Palace, Mr. Marcos was dressed in an elegant
embroidered white shirt in the finest Filipino fashion and his eyes sparkled
with the zest of conversational combat. I made a note that seemed to me to say
everything I would remember: ''He's naked.''

The leaders of the Communist army kept their guerrilla actions at a low level
during the campaign. To do anything else would have been foolish. The leaders of
the Communist Party of the Philippines and its New People's Army are not
foolish. By many Philippine and foreign accounts, they are among the most
dedicated, ruthless, single-minded guerrillas ever turned out by Communist
revolutionary movements. They may be starting to turn to the Soviet Union for
more arms. What they have they captured from the Philippine armed forces or
bought from the private armies of the owners of the huge Philippine estates.

A decade ago, there were several hundred guerrillas. Now the figure the worried
Americans use is ''20,000 up.'' They grew in several ways -brilliant fighting
tactics; using deep local grievances of Filipino workers and farmers as rallying
points; systematic, ruthless terror: arson, murder, torture. In all this they
were helped by the cowardice and ineptitude of corrupt Marcos officials and
officers.

They're closing in for the kill. For that, they need more weapons than they've
been able to seize in combat or buy at home. They may try to get them from the
Soviet Union, but neither the Soviet Union nor China is radical enough for them.
If they get aid from the Soviet Union or Libya or anyplace else, it is quite
possible that in the 1990's the People's Republic of the Philippines will emerge
and the nation will be ruled not by guerrilla terror but by official terror.

It was no secret when I was in Manila that American officials were coming to
think that that might well happen in a very few years. And this fear was
changing American policy. There had been a time when President Marcos could
count almost automatically on support from the United States Embassy in Manila
and from American admirals and generals primarily concerned with the security of
the enormous American bases at Subic Bay and Clark Air Base.

In 1981, Vice President Bush startled Filipinos and Americans who knew anything
about the country by raising a glass to Mr. Marcos and proclaiming him an
adherent of freedom. He probably startled Mr. Marcos, too. Later, Ronald Reagan,
running for re-election, announced one night that the choice in the Philippines
was between Mr. Marcos and Communism. But within a year, a good part of Mr.
Reagan's own Government became convinced not only that Mr. Marcos was corrupt
beyond redemption, but also that his army's strength had been eaten away by
feuds and graft.

American officials were worriedly telling one another that Mr. Marcos had lost
the confidence of the rising generation of the Filipino elite, the men and women
who had to be counted upon to lead the years of military political struggle
against the Communists that lay ahead. More and more Americans in important
places began to feel that President Reagan was wrong, that it was not a matter
of keeping Mr. Marcos in power or facing a Communist Philippines, but, more
likely, speeding a Communist takeover if Mr. Marcos stayed in power.

American diplomats and ranking military officers who supplied the information
and analysis of what was taking place in the Philippines to the Secretaries of
State and Defense and to the White House became convinced that Mr. Marcos had to
go, and soon.

What worried the American military was the growing realization that Mr. Marcos
was so detested that, if he won, the Philippines could blow up, and the bases
would surely be endangered. Americans in high places were saying what enemies of
tyranny had been saying for decades: the real security of the United States
rested on free governments respected by people who had chosen them.

Mr. Reagan and some of the men around him hoped until the very end that somehow
Mr. Marcos, that old fox, might pull it off. But Mrs. Aquino kept gathering
confidence and crowds and day by day it was plainer that morally and politically
she would be the winner.

Americans in Manila, and some of the top young people around her, remained
nervous about the degree of her sophistication. But they believed that she would
grow in office. And Republican as well as Democratic politicians told President
Reagan more and more forcefully, more and more publicly, that he had better put
a lot of public air between himself and the man in Malacanang Palace.

When Mr. Marcos announced victory to a disdainful world, Mr. Reagan finally said
that the Marcos party and the Marcos party alone had committed fraud.

Mr. Marcos went. Quite appropriately, there was a sense of virtue triumphant in
Washington and the rest of the United States. For once we had acted as we
talked, and in time to keep a government we had propped up from collapsing on
our heads. Political virtue and security interests had coincided, always an
exhilarating sensation. Was it just that - a specific American action at a
specific time in a particular country - and only that? I believe it was intended
to be only that - a decision for the Philippines. But I think that it could turn
out to be something much more - a re-examination of America's real values and
real interests far beyond the Philippines. INDONESIA: JAKARTA? NOBODY, I HAD
been told, goes to Jakarta unless he has to. A dump, cesspool of Asia, germs,
sewers, insects, dysentery, oppressive humidity. Just about everybody I knew who
had been to Jakarta had told me that over the years and told me again as I
prepared for my trip. Of course it turned out that I loved the place and can't
wait to get back to Indonesia.

My kind of country, I discovered - rich as a plum pudding in history, sight and
sound, lush in forest, wild at sea, full of spices and tang and mixture of races
and religion.

Noise, crowds, dances, and God in image strung along every roadside in Hindu
Bali in wood and stone. And God without image in the great modern mosque of
Jakarta, a stunning kind of high-tech mosque quite as reverent in feeling as any
of ancient marble.

As I had never been to Indonesia I had no personal remembrance of things past to
deal with, as I did in Korea and the Philippines.

And because there was no upheaval or great economic crisis, no real ''news,'' I
figured that I would be able to put aside the Western journalist's burden of
eternally trying to find out what was going on and rushing out to tell the world
all about it.

Unhappily for me, I was burdened by a certain amount of gleaned information,
which, although it may not dispel ignorance entirely, can, sure enough, spoil
the joys of tourism.

The ruler of Indonesia, General Suharto, presided over one of the more bloody
massacres in recent history, in 1965 and 1966, before coming to power. It took
the lives of an unknown number of his countrymen, perhaps as many as a million.

Suharto and his clique of generals are credited with thwarting a Communist
takeover. But the slaughter and imprisonment of their fellow Indonesians was
caused not only by the necessity of counteraction but also by the determination
to eliminate all opposition, present and future, Communist and non-Communist
alike.

The massacres never quite received the attention they should have in the West or
in Asia. The United States was busy sinking in Vietnam and not inclined to
criticize or examine too carefully just how a potential Communist threat was
being dealt with elsewhere. The West poured aid into the country. The Arabs
contributed handily to Indonesian growth by fortuitously jacking up the price of
oil, one of the country's great resources.

The general and his regime did what they could not to disturb foreign
indifference. They eliminated any real independence of press and speech. They
set the price of open opposition at death in the beginning, jail a few years
later, and economic and professional isolation as time went on.

At the same time, a generation of Indonesian technicians enriched the military
and created an elite of several hundred thousand who occupied the sleek
apartments and offices in the fine new skyscrapers. It is a Government based on
the clearly understood precept that if you go along, you will get along. If you
don't, you won't.

Things are not going entirely well for the Indonesian economy these days, what
with the price of oil dropping. But General Suharto still gets good marks from
American bankers for relative efficiency and receptivity.

Corruption is taken as part of the price of doing business, and Congressional
hearings are not held about how American aid is being used as they were about
Mr. Marcos's Government in Manila.

Mr. Suharto's Jakarta doesn't seem to have the political tension of Mr. Chun's
Seoul. He just doesn't allow the little liberties that cause that kind of thing.
And the restrictions he places on political and intellectual expression make Mr.
Marcos seem positively Jeffersonian.

Yet the United States pays little or no public attention to General Suharto's
ways. And, of course, when the resentment of the students and the intellectuals
explodes and the businessmen get fed up enough with pressure and corruption to
join with the students and the intellectuals, as in Manila, then the United
States will be seen and targeted as the friend and supporter of the dictator.

I could find no hatred of the United States among those few Indonesians I met
who were willing to say they didn't care for Mr. Suharto. No hatred, just
sardonic political distaste. But it is still my kind of country. If the
Indonesians let me, I would like to go back. Meantime, I do wish the United
States would say or  something about Indonesian repression that would make the
small smiles on the faces of the people I met less sardonic when the talk turned
to the United States. BACK HOME: BACK HOME, BUT STILL away. Random thoughts pop
in and out: Could Mrs. Marcos possibly have been serious when she said, after
that lunch at the hotel penthouse, that nobody ever went hungry in the
Philippines - all you had to do was drop a pin in the ocean and pull out a fish,
or reach up and pick a nice fruit. Did she know better or didn't she? I don't
know.

And that general who ran the Government party in Seoul, he said with a straight
face that his Government was softer than the Americans, because in America if
you broke the law you went to jail, but in Korea, why, millions of people were
breaking the law by asking for change and they were not all going to jail, were
they? Did he mean it? I think so.

Markets, ordinary markets - scores of shops in Seoul on a single street selling
warm clothing, dozens of markets in Manila selling clothes, fruits, nails,
records, everything. Each of those Seoul shops, each of those Manila markets
would cause riots in Moscow or Warsaw or Bucharest. Why can't Soviet society
produce enough of all these things that are so ordinary except when you can't
buy them - shoes, pants, an orange, bulbs, screws? Is that really important?
Yes, I think so.

Random thoughts are like peanuts. I push the bowl away and look around me.

Is something going on here, back home? It seemed so to me when I returned.
Writers who could normally be counted on to concentrate on denouncing the United
States are talking rather more about Soviet dissidence.

There seem to be more people who are getting the idea that Mikhail S.
Gorbachev's pretty wife and his snappy suits and little jokes are not terribly
important, and that he is not really out to change the Soviet tyranny but make
it rather more efficient.

Even Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou of Greece and his propaganda minister,
Melina Mercouri, are not quite as chic as they used to be, and the idea may take
hold that when they praise the Soviet Union and denounce the United States, they
probably do really mean it.

And suddenly, the Government of the United States helped the Haitians march
Jean-Claude Duvalier out of the country. That was very nice. A happy day for
Haitians and for Americans.

One day, in the paper, there is a report from Santiago, Chile, that the United
States Ambassador, Harry G. Barnes Jr., had told the local President in boots,
Augusto Pinochet, to his face, how we looked at things: ''In our country we have
concluded that the ills of democracy can best be cured by more democracy.'' Good
for you, Harry Barnes. But while we may have concluded that for our own country,
the fact is that we have not really concluded that it holds for all other
countries. So wearily often, Harry, so many other diplomats, and scholars, too,
keep telling us that local culture and history and religion make political
freedom impossible in one place or another, and what's more that it is a kind of
cultural imperialism to believe otherwise.

This not only ignores history - Korea, Haiti, India, Japan, the Philippines, and
all those other peculiarly stubborn nations whose people have shown themselves
quite capable of comprehending freedom. The ''local culture'' rationale also
provides a dandy excuse for the dictators of countries longing for a return to
liberty, such as General Chun of South Korea. It also serves leaders of
countries whose people have not yet known it - such as President Mobutu Sese
Seko of Zaire, and whoever is in charge in Vietnam. It is a rationale quite
handy for the Russians in Afghanistan, too.

We do seem to be learning, but slowly, on a kind of case-by-case basis, as if
the whole idea is rather strange to us, and we have to be taught the idea of
political democracy all over again, every time.

Usually, it is the people who are not supposed to be able to quite know how to
handle political freedom who have to remind us how much it means to them.

We did not do much to help the people of Haiti deal with the despotism of the
Duvaliers for decades. When we did get around to helping the Haitians kick Baby
Doc out, it was plain that we could have and should have acted years earlier.

In the Philippines, we finally put space between ourselves and Mr. Marcos, and
then helped push him out. But for much too long we identified our interests with
his, and it took an angry people to make us aware that their interests were
ours. The lesson for other countries under dictatorships will be that the United
States will pay attention only to a strong, united opposition. Pragmatism and
self-interest are not evil reasons for taking action. But if there is no sense
of a political constancy in the national vision, we are always having to define
what our self-interests are all over again.

Then it becomes a matter of expediency, which often ties us up with the local
dictator, and separates us from the local people until it is too late.

American Governments find themselves supporting one dictatorship or another,
usually of the right, and our intellectuals become apologists for one
dictatorship or another, left or right. Government and intellectuals stare at
one another in amazement, not understanding that they are looking in the mirror.

That means that when we do see we are going down with the local tyrant, it is
often too late. The disaster in Iran was not that we ''deserted'' the Shah, who
did not have a clue as to what was going on in his own country. It was that we
stuck with him so blindly, so long, that we ourselves did not know what was
going on and couldn't see Khomeini at the door.

We did not create the Sandinistas by ''deserting'' General Somoza; we made them
possible by sticking with him too long.

We were probably in time in the Philippines. Will we be in time in South Korea?

YES, THERE SEEMS to be something going on, but the double standard is still
deeply rooted. How many American churchmen picket the Soviet Embassy to protest
the enslavement of Afghanistan?

Afghanistan? The Soviet occupation gets hardly a word around dinner tables in
New York and Washington. The fact is that Soviet expansionism and aggression -
the most sweeping political-military movement of the second half of the 20th
century - has reached its ultimate success. It is simply taken for granted,
almost not worth commenting on anymore. And no rallies are held, either, to
protest Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia and Laos.

As for Nicaragua, the double standard has existed almost from the beginning. The
United States Government tolerated and supported the brutal regime of Anastasio
Somoza. Now the Sandinistas are in power, after taking over a diverse popular
revolt against him. But the United States is still allowing ex-Somozistas to
play important roles in the revolutionary movement against them. It is not only
deeply insensitive, but also plays into Sandinista hands and will probably
destroy any real opposition to them from the outside. Not until the United
States helps to create and backs an anti-Sandinista movement that is also
plainly anti-Somozista, I believe, will there be any chance of decent change in
Nicaragua.

Western European and American liberal supporters of the Sandinistas seem to me
equally blind - blind to the reality that the Sandinistas are imposing a
Soviet-style state that will be as ruthless as General Somoza's was. Or maybe
those supporters just don't care.

When I think of my visit to Nicaragua four years ago, I think of many things,
including the Managuan businessman who had fought General Somoza and who told me
of the months he had spent in a Sandinista jail for political opposition -
months in feces. I think about him quite a bit.

Much of the double standard is simply callousness and apathy. A lot of it is
revealing of political leanings. In a sense it is an acknowledgment of the
dismal reality that picketing and protests and journalistic poking-around may
have some impact in places such as the Philippines or Indonesia or South Africa,
where the West has some strength, but that when it comes to the Communists, they
do not change because of what the rest of the world thinks, nor do they retreat.
Name the governments imposed by Communist occupation or political domination
that were overthrown by protest. The Russians have shown in Poland that they
know how to deal with mass political opposition; Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski is not
about to fly off into the Russian equivalent of Hawaii.

As for foreign journalists, the Communists generally handle that bit of
irksomeness simply. They close the doors. I could travel in South Korea, but not
the North. I could visit the Philippines, but not Cambodia. I could move around
freely in Indonesia, but in the Soviet Union I was never able to go to the only
really interesting intellectual attraction, the city of Gorky, where Sakharov
sits and sits. I never even bothered to ask.

But where do we go, what do we do? What should our policy be? Simply, to act in
our belief and interest. Our belief is political freedom and our interest is
political freedom. We will not be able to achieve them for others all the time
or even much of the time. But what we can do is stand up for what we believe in,
all the time. And we can reject all tyrannies, including those we have tolerated
as individuals and as a government because they seem to be the enemy of our
enemies.

That requires two things: vision and constancy. Haitians, Filipinos, Koreans,
Afghans seem to have no great confusion about what they really seek from us.
Neither do the Czechoslovaks, or the Poles who hand roses to Americans in the
streets of Warsaw. All they want us to do is stand up for what we want for
ourselves, every time.

We do not promise what we cannot deliver. We do not implicitly encourage
Hungarians to take on Soviet tanks, as we seemed to do in 1956, not unless we
are willing to send real help. But we do intervene wherever we can and however
we can. We intervene as we would wish others to intervene were we the
imprisoned. We intervene politically where we can - by pressuring Seoul to allow
decent elections and free campaigning, by trying to squeeze the Russians to let
a few more prisoners out of the country.

Where we can do more, we should. Harry Barnes was on to something. Just
recently, the United States called for international condemnation of Chile
because of human rights violations. And now there are sounds from the Reagan
Administration that other right-wing dictatorships may find the weather in
Washington a little cooler.

Now seems the time to tell Augusto Pinochet of Chile his time is drawing to an
end, or to use economic leverage to make things tight for General Jaruzelski,
which might mean that the Soviet Union would have to come to his economic
rescue, and not American banks and taxpayers. We can do that. Where we can do
nothing more than just stand up and shout, as a government and as individuals,
that is not nothing. It counts.

I have yet to meet or hear about a fighter against oppression who has not wanted
to be remembered - aloud. The Jews in the Nazi ghettos would have wanted to be
remembered aloud. Perhaps not so many would have been murdered. But they were
not remembered while they lived.

I do not know of a Soviet or other Eastern European dissident who objects to the
phrases ''captive nations'' or ''evil empire.'' And when I heard American
businessmen in Manila talk admiringly of the Marcoses or American diplomats in
Jakarta praise General Suharto, I wondered how that would sound in the political
prisons on Luzon or Java.

When I read once, in my own paper, an interview with a Soviet drama director
that never even mentioned the plays and books that were forbidden to be
presented or read, or that even brought up the question of censorship, I
wondered how that would resonate in a Soviet political cell.

Figuring out exactly how things would sound in a political cell strikes me as
the most important policy of all. Because if we really listen hard enough as a
government, and as individuals, we can indeed hear, and the chances are that we
will be hearing ourselves.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of South Korean troops on parade (Kaku Kurita/Gamma-Liaison);
photo Ferdinand Marcoc (Susan Meiselas/Magnum) (Page 22); photo of anti-Marcos
demonstration (Melvyn Calderon/J.B. Pictures) (Page 22); photo of South Korea's
Chun Doo Hwan (H. Edward Kim/Contact) (Page 24); photo of Indonesia's Gen.
Suharto (Roland Neveu/Gamma Liaison) (Page 25); photo of downtown Seoul
decorated with portra

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WITH THE BORING PARTS LEFT OUT

BYLINE: By Edward N. Luttwak; Edward N. Luttwak is a senior fellow at the
Georgetown Center for Strategic and International Studies. His most recent books
are ''The Pentagon and the Art of War'' and ''Strategy and Politics: Collected
Essays.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1637 words


ACTS OF WAR The Behavior of Men in Battle. By Richard Holmes. Illustrated. 436
pp. New York: The Free Press. $19.95. SOLDIERS A History of Men in Battle. By
John Keegan and Richard Holmes with John Gau. Illustrated. 288 pp. New York:
Elisabeth Sifton Books/ Viking. $22.95.

THE great success of John Keegan's ''Face of

Battle'' - the origin of both books here reviewed, different as they are - owed
much to the quality of its prose, but also reflected widespread approval for Mr.
Keegan's depiction of war. By careful selection, Mr. Keegan effectively conveyed
a variety of intensely personal experiences of combat, many by literary men,
most of whom were British, while leaving offstage the very idea that war might
be purposeful, or even necessary. The author can hardly be criticized for
writing on his chosen subject and not another, but the effect of this book on
many readers could be more seriously misleading than traditional or official
military historiography ever was. True, such writings reduce the groans,
screams, bleeding and death itself to the cold enumeration of casualty figures,
but on the other hand, they do set the human experience of battle in context -
as a very rare, almost incidental, consequence of the preparation for war,
rather than as its logical outcome.

The new school of military historians, exemplified by Mr. Keegan and Mr. Holmes,
emphasizes battle as opposed to war but, as Mr. Holmes concedes in his own book,
''Acts of War,'' the two decades or so of the Napoleonic Wars encompassed
''perhaps two hundred days of pitched battle.'' It was the same in both world
wars. From my own rough estimate, even for troops in frontline units, as opposed
to the greater number in the rear services that were never in battle at all, the
experience of war mostly consisted of training, watching and endless waiting.
American soldiers drafted after Pearl Harbor, mustered in England and landed in
Normandy in 1944, engaged in actual combat for a few weeks at most during the
next 11 months until V-E Day; in fact, they waited for less time than the many
British soldiers conscripted in 1939 and kept in home defense units for six
years, or the German troops kept in Norway after 1940 to resist the invasion
that never came. Even on the Eastern Front, where Germans and Russians were in
contact over four years, months passed between the days of intense battle, with
such rare exceptions as the Stalingrad fighting, which lasted for weeks at a
time.

More recently, during the 1967 Six-Day War between Arabs and Israelis, there
were battles each day. But during the next Arab-Israeli conflict (Oct. 6-24,
1973, a mere 18 days), the frequency of battle was much diminished: there were
not more than eight or nine days of combat on any large scale. Even now, as the
Iran-Iraq war continues, without an end in sight, combat, as distinct from
skirmishing, desultory artillery exchanges and the occasional air raid, accounts
for perhaps three days in every four months.

Battle is a rare experience in another way as well: those soldiers who actually
fight are so few. Both Mr. Keegan and Mr. Holmes know this but they do not draw
proper conclusions from it. During World War II sub-marine and bomber crews,
German panzer troops and a few other such categories, while amounting to a very
small fraction of the tens of millions in uniform, accounted for a very large
proportion of total days in action. The majority served in rear support
organizations, and even those who counted as being in the combat echelon were,
in many cases, quite remote from any actual fighting - in headquarters, depots
and supply units. Since then, of course, the greater complexity of weapons has
produced a further increase in the proportion of rear service units within the
total, even in armed forces with a less lavish overhead than that of the
American forces.

In the Six-Day War, the Israeli Army mobilized some 250,000 men and women in
uniform but not more than one in eight or nine were exposed to combat. By 1973,
with some 400,000 Israelis in uniform, the proportion further declined: the 5
percent of tank crewmen, elite infantry, pilots and sailors accounted for
perhaps 90 percent of the days in action, during which the fighting might occupy
a few hours.

Shelby L. Stanton's important book, ''The Rise and Fall of an American Army:
U.S. Ground Forces in Vietnam 1965-1973,'' explains among many other things the
rarity of combat in an army exceptionally sophisticated, and his forthcoming
work, ''Anatomy of a Division,'' contains revealing numbers: on May 1, 1970,
when the First Cavalry Division with 18,095 men was fully engaged in the
Cambodian incursion, only 7,401 men were in firebases or forward locations where
they might experience combat. At the time, less than one-third of the United
States Army was in Vietnam; and of the 400,000 soldiers or so in the country,
less than a quarter were in divisions or other combat forces - and then only for
a few days. What Mr. Stanton's figures therefore show is that even in the case
of a division fully engaged in a major battle, less than half of that quarter of
one-third was exposed to combat -and then only for a few days.

Once we recognize that battle is no more characteristic of war than copulation
is of marriage, we begin to understand why the upkeep of military forces in
peacetime and perseverance in armed conflict can still survive the human
experience of combat, instead of being swept away by the outrage of those who
have been in its hell and have come back to tell the tale. Personal experience
of battle can easily persuade those who participate in it that no purpose of
state, not even self-defense and certainly not conquest, can justify its deadly
brutalities. But those who can be so persuaded are so few -and the experience is
so brief - that the impact is not lasting. Even those war veterans who have
actually witnessed combat tend to recall the comradeship and the intensity of
life more vividly than the horror and degradation; and they rarely become
pacifists.

Moreover, just as battle is a rarity even in war, the occasional wars of some
countries are themselves rarities in comparison with the unending war
preparations of almost all countries, whose aim indeed is to make war
unnecessary by either dissuading aggressors or intimidating weaker powers.
Battle is therefore the exception, and not the logical culmination, of military
endeavor. Both ''Acts of War'' and ''Soldiers'' obscure this fundamental truth,
which alone explains the otherwise inexplicable persistence of the phenomenon
they try to describe.

''Soldiers'' is a frankly commercial enterprise, a large-format companion volume
to a television series, replete with illustrations and with a foreword by
Frederick Forsyth, a successful mystery writer to be sure but not the Clausewitz
of our age, nor the Michael Howard. After an introductory chapter on ''The Face
of Battle'' and on fighting spirit, the authors offer a concise survey of land
warfare (some air, no sea) past and present, branch by branch, with separate
chapters on the infantry, cavalry, artillery, armor, engineers, air power
(mostly tactical), command, logistics, and irregular war by commandos as well as
by guerrillas and terrorists. A chapter on the experience of the war (more
''Face of Battle'' material) and an earlier one on casualties complete the book,
whose material is largely derived from the record of the last century of
European and American wars. There are introductory paragraphs on Greek and Roman
warfare, and some medieval episodes are mentioned, but nothing - ancient or
modern - is included about Asian warfare (except insofar as Europeans and
Americans were involved), and in the books' Anglocentric perspective the brief
adventure of the Falklands War looms larger than all the wars of the Middle
East, which have been the true crucible of the forms and techniques of
contemporary warfare. Well-written, free of inaccuracies, the book serves its
purpose, and may also inadvertently inspire youngsters to seek a military
career: by the usual reduction of soldiering to battle, without the routine that
is its essence, it makes the former seem as exciting as the latter. Richard
Holmes's book, ''Acts of War,'' is far more ambitious. It stands within the same
Anglocentric and ground-war perspective that includes much American material in
its span but it does not provide much on the far greater German experience of
war, very little of the Russian, and almost nothing of the Middle Eastern or
East Asian experience. The author presents his subject in sequence -soldiering
and training (''Mysterious Fraternity''), life at the front (''The Painful
Field''), combat itself (''Epitome of War'' - characteristically), the resulting
wounds and death (''Pale Battalions''), the fear that is their consequence
(''The Real Enemy''), why men fight all the same, in spite of fear
(''Competition, Diffidence and Glory''), more on the same (''Precarious
Valour'') and attitudes toward the enemy (''I Am the Enemy'').

Mr. Holmes declares his lack of sympathy for ''anthological'' military
history,'' but goes on to fill his pages with citations. He describes his
purpose as analytical, but after a swift run-through of theory (Freud, Adler and
Jung in two pages), he goes on to provide an essentially literary distillation
of individual experiences; the sacrifice of clarity for elegance in his chapter
titles reveals his true priorities. The author himself cites but does not make
any visible use of Martin Van Creveld's recent book ''Fighting Power,'' a highly
readable and fully documented analytical comparison of discipline, leadership
and combat morale in the American and German armies during World War II, which
contains the answers that elude Richard Holmes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of German, Turkish, French and British combat soldiers

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By Newgate Calendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 729 words


Bertie Denham's TWO THYRDES (St. Martin's, $15.95) is a father-and-son story
told in alternate chapters labeled ''Then'' and ''Now.'' The events concerning
the father, Lord Thyrde (pronounced third), who was killed in action, take place
during World War II. The son is of the here and now.

Both men have to clear themselves of suspicion of espionage. The father becomes
a pawn in a game involving a missing document of incalculable importance to the
war effort. The son is framed for murder by somebody at a reunion dinner. Both
stories are very much linked together. There also is an attractive subplot about
the loving restoration of a vintage Rolls-Royce that had been owned by the
father. That too has its place in the resolution of the story. And, come to
think of it, there is a pair of romances, one sweet, the other sour.

''Two Thyrdes'' is a curiously attractive book about two peers, and it has been
written by Lord Denham, the Government chief whip in the House of Lords. It is
rather quiet, populated mostly by upper-class figures who speak in polite
cadences. There is a murder and a certain amount of action, but the author
relies mostly on character to make his points. Every figure in the book is
sharply delineated. Some are people of warmth and urbanity; some are
objectionable; all of them live and breathe.

In A LITTLE DARLING, DEAD (St. Martin's, $14.95), Jack S. Scott has temporarily
departed from his series about Detective Inspector Alfred Stanley Rosher to give
us a bright young police officer named Pete Parsons. But the wry style remains
much the same. Thus we can add to the volume of ''Sayings of Jack S. Scott''
such pithy remarks as this, about a police doctor: ''For some reason he sounded
testy. Fat men in tweed hats often do. It is probably glandular.'' The plot has
to do with a girls' school. A student has been murdered, and it is immediately
apparent that three of her friends have secrets to hide. Detective Chief
Inspector Parsons and his sergeant, Wammo Wimbush, a handsome and very macho
pair, make a big impression at the school. But their investigation bogs down,
and it takes some fortuitous circumstances to break the case. When it does
explode, it takes a lot of people with it.

THE WABASH FACTOR by E. V. Cunningham (Delacorte, $14.95) is well written and
moves alertly along. Mr. Cunningham - who is actually Howard Fast - writes about
Masao Masuto of the Beverly Hills (Calif.) Police Department and also about
Harry Golding of the New York City Police Department. This is a Golding book.

Various important politicians start dying, apparently of natural causes. It is
Lieut. Golding's wife who suggests that the deaths are more than a coincidence.
As Golding starts investigating, he runs into something bigger than he is. Soon
his family is in danger, and he bundles his children off to Ireland. Attempts
are made on his life. Strings are pulled so he goes up on departmental charges.
People in a position to give him information are eliminated.

In other words, a one-man-against-the-world story. As the pages in the book
dwindle, the reader starts wondering how on earth Golding can get out of the
mess in which he finds himself. He does, sort of, but no thanks to him. The
ending is something of a fabricated cop-out involving authorial manipulation.

John Francis Cuddy, the Boston private eye who first appeared in Jeremiah
Healey's ''Blunt Darts'' (1984), is back in THE STAKED GOAT (Harper & Row,
$14.95). A close friend of Cuddy's from Vietnam days is killed, and Cuddy is
determined to see justice done. As he digs into the case, he finds that the
solution has to do with something that happened during the war.

Cuddy has not changed. For a tough private eye, which he is, he has some unusual
habits. One is going to the grave of his wife and having long discussions with
her. Another is his tendency to break into tears at every opportunity. No
Continental Op he. One of the waterworks sequences is an unintentional parody of
alienation writing: ''We started crying at about the same time, crying with each
other and for each other and for all the slights and hurts and tragedies that
had piled up since the last time either of us had another to hug.'' Fortunately,
there is some sensitive writing to balance this kind of lachrymosity. Maybe in
future books Cuddy will be able to exorcise his ghosts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of actor John Getz (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GRACE ABOUNDING IN BOTSWANA

BYLINE: By Leslie Marmon Silko; Leslie Marmon Silko is completing a novel about
the Southwest.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1568 words


WHITES By Norman Rush. 150 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $14.95.

A CHILDHOOD spent on the Laguna Pueblo

Reservation in New Mexico brought me to the conclusion that the third world is
not just poor, developing nations. The third world is any place dogs roam
freely, howl and bark all night, and defecate and breed on the streets. Last
autumn in southern China I discovered that the Chinese understand what dogs are
good for - good for lunch, good for dinner, and tasty with noodles and greens.
The way the Chinese explained it, European colonialists used to feed their pet
dogs while Chinese starved. Plains Indian tribes had good dog recipes too, until
Christian missionaries arrived with their sentimentality for their pets.

Dogs and attitudes toward them reveal a great deal about the values of a
culture. In ''Whites,'' an admirable collection of short stories set in
Botswana, a nation that shares a border with South Africa, Norman Rush shows
that he understands this. Mr. Rush was co-director of the Peace Corps in
Botswana from 1978 to 1983. In ''Official Americans,'' Carl, a middle-aged State
Department official stationed in Botswana, has his personal and professional
life virtually destroyed by barking dogs that belong to his neighbor, the
powerful Minister of Labor. He is beset by a maze of conflicting values and his
own weakness and lack of conviction. When a local police commander recommends an
arsenic compound for the dog problem, Carl is sure that this is commonly done
but is uncomfortable with the directness of the Botswana approach. But nights of
lost sleep take their toll and he consults Ione, a colleague's wife who passes
the time dabbling in the occult.

Ione is a spiritual shopper, moving from one belief or cult to another.
Contemporary American culture seems to offer her no more than this. Ione knows
that something peculiarly American rejects commitment to any belief. Absence of
real commitment is what's attractive about overseas assignments, she says:
''It's because it isn't our country and we can't help what happens. We can offer
people advice and we get paid for it. . . . Hey!, but we're not responsible for
what happens if Africa goes to hell, because we've done our best.'' She
persuades Carl to try a local shaman who claims to have a cure for dogs that
bark all night. When he undergoes a ritual in which he is given a series of cuts
on his back, Carl first experiences ''the sensation of conviction. The ritual
felt real to him for the first time.'' But Carl lacks the courage to keep this
conviction. He panics, assumes the ritual wounds are infected, and attempts to
hide them from his wife and the doctors. Carl does all the wrong things, treats
himself with antibiotics and nearly dies. But his confusions over the legitimacy
of the shaman's ritual and his moment of conviction are resolved. Barking dogs
next door are less likely to spoil a night's sleep again; the antibiotics Carl
took were ototoxic, and have left him deaf in one ear.

The ''new'' Africa Mr. Rush reveals in his stories is full of contradictions. It
is a cross-cultural hybrid that grew out of African independence and ancient
tribalism, but also out of hundreds of years of white colonialism and apartheid
both official and unofficial. But many of the cultural elements Europeans shoved
down African throats have lost their charm for whites. In ''Bruns,'' an
anthropologist from Stanford University goes into the bush to study indigenous
nutrition, but learns ''the sad fact is you go into the middle of nowhere and
people are eating Simba chips and cornflakes and drinking Castle lager.''

Where different tribal cultures once coexisted with only sporadic raiding or
battles, the danger of genocide now looms. After all, black Africans have had
intensive instruction from European colonialists, the best teachers of racism
and genocide. In ''Thieving,'' the narrator suffers because of de facto
apartheid still operational even in the ''new'' African nations like Botswana,
which gained independence in 1966.

''Whites'' is about disillusionment and loss of conviction. Whether it was the
Peace Corps in Botswana or Vista volunteers on the Laguna Pueblo Reservation in
the 1960's, a sizable portion of a generation set out with great enthusiasm to
share what they believed was valuable: white America's wealth of information and
technical resources. The failure of American idealism and technical resources
that Mr. Rush describes in these stories, and the subsequent disillusionment -
both national and personal - are second only to the Vietnam War in their
continuing impact on the direction of American foreign and domestic policy
today. Mr. Rush's whites can no longer tote the ''white man's burden'' because
they can't even lift themselves - their loss of conviction is so profound.

Mr. Rush attempts to articulate what Americans or whites in general may be able
to salvage where the legacies of apartheid and colonialism make it almost
impossible to live and remain decent human beings. His characters struggle to
maintain a connection with the world, always hoping for even a small measure of
grace. Most whites in Mr. Rush's Botswana are too weak to grasp the considerable
opportunities Africa offers them. Occasionally his characters manage to secure a
little personal integrity, but only at great cost. Carl is deaf. Mokgalagadi,
the narrator in ''Thieving,'' is crazed. In ''Bruns,'' the anthropologist
narrates with such icy detachment that she might as well be reporting from
Uranus.

A middle-aged American woman in ''Instruments of Seduction'' becomes a
seductress, a choice that's hers, a role in which she is not just going through
the motions or fooling anybody. Only this woman, and a dentist, Frank, in
''Alone in Africa,'' manage to grasp the possibilities for personal salvation
Africa offers them despite all its contradictions and ugly colonial legacies. By
choosing the profession of sexual seduction, the woman makes wonderful use of
Botswana's ''certain atmosphere of allusion to death.'' She not only fashions a
sense of self and identity that keeps her humanity intact, she also manages to
realize how the terrifying atmosphere of Botswana can actually be used to
deliver her from isolation and loneliness. FRANK, the dentist, actually has
Botswana's bounty of generosity, intelligence and vitality rain down on him in
the person of Moitse, a woman who comes and proposes to be his maid while his
wife is out of town. The voluptuous warmth of all that is good in Botswana is
offered to this man as a simple gesture of kindness, an offer of comfort that is
both humane and wise. Yet Frank must make the choice. All the arguments, the
inhibitions he could succumb to, must be swept aside. In the end, there's
probably still enough grace available in Botswana alone to save us all. All
that's required is the vision to see it and the courage to open the door.

The cynicism and self-loathing, or worse yet, the self-righteousness that often
appear in fiction about whites in the third world are a dead end, whether the
writer be black, ''colored'' or white. It isn't just whites who must face up to
moral and political failures in the third world today, Mr. Rush seems to be
saying. ''Whites'' is an admirable beginning; because the longer stories work
best, I hope he will deliver us a novel soon. The world could use a few more
books from human beings like Mr. Rush. A COUNTRY BEGINNING WITH 'B'

In 1978, Norman Rush and his wife of 21 years, Elsa, volunteered to work for the
Peace Corps in Africa. The only problem was which country to sign up for. ''We
both have French in our backgrounds,'' Mr. Rush said in a telephone interview
from his home in New City, N.Y. ''They originally had us slated for Zaire. But
we turned that down for political reasons - we didn't want to live in a
kleptocracy.

''We were then slated for Benin, but in the final round of interviews we ended
up at the Botswana desk, since both start with 'B.' We had a positive feeling
about Botswana as a country that was democratic and worthy, so we signed up.''

Over the next five years, Mr. Rush and his wife lived in Botswana's capital,
Gaborone, overseeing all the Peace Corps programs in the country, traveling
throughout southern Africa and taking in a wealth of impressions that were to
form the background for Mr. Rush's first collection of stories, ''Whites.''

For Mr. Rush, the decision to go to Africa was sparked by ''the promise of
adventure, of going to a part of the world we hadn't seen and were interested
in.'' Reared in the San Francisco Bay area, Mr. Rush was a conscientious
objector during the Korean War, and served nine months of a two-year sentence
for draft resistance at the Federal prison in Tucson, Ariz. Released on parole,
he attended Swarthmore College, where he majored in modern European history.
After college he worked as a rare-book dealer in New York, and then taught
history and English at Rockland Community College, writing fiction in his spare
time.

''I wasn't able to do any actual composition of stories while I was in Africa,''
he said. ''What I did was to accumulate an immense quantity of notes and ideas.
I was overwhelmed by the cultural and emotional ironies of the situation, and
returned with cartons of undigested material. When I arrived I started with the
top of the first box I brought back.''-Mark A. Uhlig

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MIND/BODY/HEALTH;
WORDS THAT HEAL -- DOCTORS TALK ABOUT THEIR WRITING

SECTION: Section 7; Page 33, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1388 words


The Book Review asked 10 men and women who work in the field of medicine and
also write about it how their books have affected their place in the discipline
and their relations with patients. RICHARD RESTAK, neurologist: ''The Brain.'' I
don't discuss my writing with medical colleagues any more than I discuss my
patients with journalists and editors. With patients, the situation is more
complicated. They often can tell if their doctor is interested in them for
themselves or only as background for a book. I constantly remind myself,
therefore, that my patients are like patients in every age and every place: they
seek a cure or some palliation for their suffering or, at the very least,
someone who will accept them, listen to them and thereby help them in ways that
cannot always be explained. PENELOPE LEACH, psychologist: ''Your Baby and
Child.'' One day I was a research psychologist discussing Apgar scores (a
measure of newborns' physical condition) with medical colleagues. Next day I was
a mother, asking my baby's Apgar and being told, ''Leave that to us.'' Still
resenting the authoritarianism, the chauvinism of some doctors dealing with
people they insist on addressing as ''Mother,'' I have learned how deep a
communication gulf there can be, even when doctors acknowledge parents' rights
and try to explain. Sick children mean anxious parents who may be unable to hear
the doctor's messages. Parents say that honest medical information, absorbed
calmly from books and magazines, radio and television, paves the way for
understanding. When panic strikes, though, only a long-term relationship with
the doctor safely bridges the gulf between the layman and the professional. I
therefore honor colleagues who strive to practice personal medicine within an
increasingly high-tech and institutionalized profession.

PAULA J. ADAMS HILLARD, obstetrician-gynecologist: Contributing editor, Parents
Magazine.

I view my writing as a logical and natural extension of the way that I practice
obstetrics and gynecology. Because I am both a physician and a mother, I am able
to write about the medical aspects of pregnancy and birth without neglecting the
ways in which these events are experienced. My writing for the general public
earns me no academic credit. But to me, the obvious link between my practice at
the University of Cincinnati Medical Center and my writing is that in both roles
I am an educator. In the profession of obstetrics and gynecology in particular,
and medicine in general, the perspective of a woman educator is still uncommon.
WILLIAM NOLEN, general surgeon: ''Crisis Time.'' Just before my first book,
''The Making of a Surgeon,'' was published in 1970, I asked my editor what he
thought the reaction of my fellow physicians would be. ''They'll be jealous,''
my editor said, and he was right. It is fun to be part of the writing world, and
I certainly can understand why some doctors might envy me. I don't think my
writing career has influenced my patients much, though. Litchfield, Minn., is a
small town (pop. 5,000) in a small county (pop. 18,000), and I was quite well
known before I started writing. Those who liked and trusted me came to me for
operations, those who didn't went elsewhere.

LYNDA VAN DEVANTER, health consultant: ''Home Before Morning: The Story of an
Army Nurse in Vietnam'' (with Christopher Morgan).

My relations with patients have been sharpened and deepened by my writing. They
are more than willing to see us health care professionals as human beings. My
relations with colleagues, however, have been polarized by my writing. Almost
without exception, people take sides, as if there were sides to take. Some want
me to create an image of us as saints; some want us shown as ne'er-do-wells out
to wreak havoc on the world while lining our pockets with gold in the name of
Hippocrates and Flo Nightingale; and some, weary of trying to maintain either of
the extreme facades, want to see us portrayed as the human beings we are. In the
most personal writing I've done, my motives, ethics, values, training, courage
and objectivity have all been praised by some and challenged by others. In
actual patient care, the focus is on others; in writing, the focus is on you,
your feelings, ideas, perceptions. Without those elements, writing, for me,
would be no more than a series of nurses' notes on a chart.

OLIVER SACKS, neurologist: ''The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat.''

''The following notes on my own case have been declined by every medical journal
to which I have offered them . . . but as one or two people on whose judgement I
rely have advised me to print my narrative with all the personal details, rather
than in a dry shape . . . I have yielded to their views.''

So Silas Weir Mitchell, a young neurologist of rising reputation, opened ''The
Case of George Dedlow,'' which he published, with some hesitation, in The
Atlantic Monthly in July 1866. This case, mildly fictionalized but based on one
personally known to him, was distinguished by a minuteness of clinical
description, a degree of empathy, a brilliance of language and a boldness of
imagination he had never dared show in his medical articles. It kindled the
imagination of the public and the annoyance of his colleagues. I cannot help
identifying with Mitchell's predicament, his equivocal position between medicine
and literature - though, unlike Mitchell, who wrote many novels later, I have no
literary aspirations whatever, only the desire to report clinical reality in all
its richness. T. BERRY BRAZELTON, pediatrician: ''Working and Caring.'' Having
been trained for medical pathology, I found, when I completed my pediatric
training, that I was competent to treat childhood illnesses but not to respond
to parents' requests for guidance in bringing up their children. Although it is
not the sole responsibility of the medical community to compensate for the loss
of the extended family and resulting parental self-doubt, no other discipline is
as well situated and conditioned to participate in and influence family life.
Writing for parents has strengthened my belief that it is both necessary and
possible to combine these medical and social values.

FITZHUGH MULLAN, pediatrician: ''Vital Signs: A Young Doctor's Struggle With
Cancer.''

When I was a medical student first seeing patients, I was staggered at the
differences in people and families that I observed - in their responses to
illness and health, to each other and to me. I visited the world of one person
after another - on that person's own terms - and had the extraordinary
opportunity to observe those lives. The physician is a naturalist of the human
being, a role that has enriched and, really, governed my writing. Writing, in
turn, has had a special effect on my role as a doctor. A patient recently
announced to me, ''I read a book by you. I know all about you.'' She was
satisfied, even delighted. Writing provides for a democracy and intimacy between
doctors and their patients and colleagues that is unusual and gratifying.

DAVID HILFIKER, family practitioner: ''Healing the Wounds: A Physician Looks at
His Work.''

As a physician working amid the poverty and oppression of the inner city, I am
often overwhelmed by my patients' vulnerability and powerlessness. Writing is my
chance to think about what could be, what should be. When we shove the poor into
ghettos, we cut off the hurting, abandoned part of ourselves, refuse to deal
with the victim within us, reject our own brokenness. Writing about my work
brings a balance. Doctoring is my roots, writing my wings.

DAVID EISENBERG, clinical research fellow: ''Encounters with Qi: Exploring
Chinese Medicine'' (with Thomas Lee Wright).

The physician's task is said to be ''To cure sometimes, to relieve often, to
comfort always.'' This is impossible without a respect for words and their
power. Writers weigh every word. Physicians must do the same. A diagnosis often
comes largely from the patient's words. Knowledge, motivation and reassurance
come from the doctor's. When used wisely, words and feelings always comfort,
often relieve and sometimes cure. When misused or forgotten, they cause side
effects more devastating than those of pills or hardware. Writing compels me to
make room in the black bag for words and their magic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of symposium participants

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 24, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STATES FORCED INTO LEAD ON HOUSING FOR POOR

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1723 words

DATELINE: LOUISVILLE, Ky.


In an old neighborhood here that has been plagued for decades by poverty and
abandonment, residents were surprised recently to see a cluster of new houses
for low-income families going up on Breckinridge Street.

More surprising was the discovery that the construction had been initiated by an
unexpected source: the State of Kentucky.

While the Federal Government and city governments in Kentucky have been active
for decades in efforts to restore urban slums, the state government, based in
the small city of Frankfort and historically attuned to the needs of rural and
suburban areas, had never taken the lead in trying to solve the problems of old
industrial cities.

Yet what is happening in low-income housing in this industrial city, with its
high concentration of urban poor, is typical of initiatives that state
governments are beginning to take in many areas, while the Federal role in
coping with such concerns has steadily declined in the 1980's. These include
industrial development, job training, health, welfare and the environment.

''In the last three years the states have emerged as new engines of innovation''
in many areas, say Denis P. Doyle and Terry W. Hartle, who have been tracking
state initiatives in education at the American Enterprise Institute, a private
research organization in Washington. ''They have been exercising leadership at a
time when the Federal Government has increasingly been paralyzed.''

In a recent study of the changes taking place, the Council of State Governments
said the initiatives had been fueled by the belief of almost all state officials
that Federal efforts would continue to decline and that many localities did not
have the resources to fill the gap left by Federal budget cuts.

U.S. Aid Wanes

Federal aid to state and local governments has been declining since 1978 and is
to be cut even more over the next three years under the new Federal
deficit-reducing law. President Reagan's budget proposal for the 1987 fiscal
year calls for a $16 billion cut in state and local aid, 19 percent of the
current amount.

Beyond this, officials say such programs as Social Security are expected to take
an increasingly larger share of domestic spending, leaving less and less for the
wide array of programs that can be cut from the budget.

The new initiatives are uneven and frequently tentative, the council said, but
states that have been known for many years for their dormancy are now searching
for new ways to meet the demands of citizens, regardless of whether new revenue
and new taxes are involved.

In dealing with housing, the states' collective efforts have not approached the
multibillion-dollar Federal role that reached its peak in the 1970's. But in
virtually every state there is new activity and commitment toward helping the
poor and those with marginal income to find homes they can afford.

Wealthier states are putting new money into the effort. New York, New Jersey,
Connecticut, Massachusetts and other states with a history of housing assistance
have increased their appropriations for housing, and California has earmarked
$20 million a year from offshore oil taxes for low-income housing.

Less wealthy states, like Kentucky, which have looked almost entirely to
Washington for funds for housing and community development, have been turning to
various devices and innovations to move their governments into the housing
assistance business.

Board Has Wide Latitude

Here, the new initiatives are almost all the work of the Kentucky Housing
Corporation. Its board of directors, appointed by the Governor, has wide
latitude in deciding how its resources will be used; it does not have to go to
the Legislature for approval.

''Our housing corporation,'' Gov. Martha Layne Collins said recently in noting
the decline of the Federal role in housing, ''is the most effective tool at hand
for providing decent, affordable housing for thousands of our citizens.''

Over the last year, the corporation's initiatives included these efforts:

* Establishing a housing trust fund that is expected to lend nearly $1 billion
at low interest to help low-income people buy homes.

* Awarding a $1.24 million grant to help pay the salaries of Vietnam veterans
hired by builders of low-income housing, a move designed both to find jobs for
veterans and to subsidize construction.

* Starting a program under which it initiates the construction of homes in
clusters of four to eight in urban neighborhoods. The program is based on a
belief that the cluster homes will not be so vulnerable to the surrounding
blight as homes standing alone and that their sale on the private market will
induce builders and real estate agents to return to inner-city areas.

* Beginning grants to help low-income elderly homeowners throughout the state
make repairs to save energy.

Loans at Low Interest Rates

These initiatives were in addition to the corporation's standard practice of
providing home loans at below-market interest rates to people throughout the
state with marginal incomes in much the same way the Federal Housing
Administration has operated nationally.

The recent surge of activity is an example of how state and local officials,
along with a large number of private groups, say they have achieved results in
ingenious ways without vast new outlays of money.

Many areas of Kentucky have fallen on hard times in the past few years because
of the loss of old industrial plants and a recession in coal mining after the
boom of the 1970's. Unemployment in Kentucky rose to 10.4 percent in January
while the average for the nation was 6.7 percent.

In submitting her budget to the Legislature in January, Governor Collins
proposed increases for education, prisons, health and tourism but not for
housing, even though she has acknowledged an increasing need in that area.

''There is not any money in the Legislature for housing,'' said F. Lynn Luallen,
executive director of the housing corporation. Because of this, he is looking to
the corporation's own resources to put its initiatives into operation.

Resources Seen as Substantial

For a capital-poor state like Kentucky, those resources are substantial and
growing. The corporation was founded on a modest scale in 1972, primarily to
supplement what the Federal Government was doing on a large scale in housing
loan subsidies and guarantees.

It made home loans from its sale of tax-free bonds, obtained at such a low cost
over the years (less than 3 percent) that it could charge below the market rate
for its loans and still make money. It now makes loans at rates ranging from
7.25 percent to 8.5 percent.

The corporation now has assets approaching $1 billion, a staff of 60 people and
a steady income from administering the Federal Government's rent subsidies for
low-income families throughout the state, subsidies the Government is committed
to make over a period of years even though it has virtually stopped making new
commitments.

One area in Louisville where the new homes are going up and where the
corporation is making loans for rehabilitating old buildings is the city's
California neighborhood. In decline for more than two decades, the neighborhood
consists of open spaces where houses once stood and of narrow, one-story
structures in various stages of decay or repair, some within the shadow of old
warehouses or distilleries.

Like similar neighborhoods in old industrial cities throughout the country, the
California neighborhood is home to the black underclass: welfare families, the
unemployed and those who work for marginal wages.

Progress Toward Rehabilitation

Kathi Whalen, director of the corporation's urban programs, said such
neighborhood nonprofit groups as New Directions had been working for years to
restore it as a place where people want to live and had made substantial
progress toward rehabilitation.

Yet the decay has persisted. On some blocks it is not uncommon to see a
beautifully restored house beside a dilapidated one. As in many cities
throughout the country, residents say it is hard to know which will prevail, the
spread of decay or the rehabilitation efforts.

Because people in Louisville honor tradition, Mrs. Whalen said, the new and
restored houses are made to resemble the old, even to their oblong shapes with
the narrow part facing the street. Such houses are common to inland river
cities, apparently because they were once taxed according to their front footage
rather than by the square foot.

Three of the new houses were built in a factory and brought to the site in
modules, but they have touches of Victorian gingerbread common at the turn of
the century, when the neighborhood was built.

Such considerations are important to making people want to stay in the
neighborhood after years of seeing others move out, Mrs. Whalen said. Because of
the subsidies, a three-bedroom house with skylights, carpets, dishwasher and
insulation, designed for working families with an annual income of about
$19,000, sells for $41,000 with mortgage payments of about $370 a month. The
rehabilitated homes, within the reach of welfare families, cost much less;
payments on a two-bedroom home, for example, are less than $175 a month.

State Has Some Advantages

Whether the state's efforts over the next few years will prove more successful
than Federal efforts in the past remains to be seen. But state officials say
they have certain advantages.

One is that the state, running smaller and simpler programs than the Federal
Government, is better able to work with the complex of city government,
neighborhood and private groups now operating in joint ventures in most poor
urban areas.

The board of the Kentucky corporation consists of seven state officials and
seven leaders of the real estate and development industry. As a result, Mr.
Luallen said, the corporation has been able to attract help from the private
sector. One example is the entry of homebuilders to the California neighborhood
for the first time in many years.

Nationally, the American Homebuilders Association recently urged its members to
become involved under state leadership in new construction in inner-city areas.

''There is a lot we can do,'' Mr. Luallen said. ''But we can't begin to meet the
need without some Federal assistance in the future.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: FIRST ARTICLE OF A SERIES TO APPEAR PERIODICALLY ON INNOVATIVE EFFORTS
BY STATES TO OFFSET FEDERAL BUDGET CUTS.

GRAPHIC: photo of Anthony and Audrey Phelps (NYT/Keith Willisams) (page A15)

TYPE: SERIES

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 24, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. LEGISLATOR IN MANAGUA BACKS USE OF ADVISERS

BYLINE: By STEVEN KINZER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 825 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, March 23


An influential Democratic Congressman, Representative G. V. Montgomery of
Mississippi, said today that American military advisers should be part of any
aid that Congress votes for Nicaraguan rebels.

''I am convinced that if contra aid is passed in the Congress, we will have to
provide U.S. advisers and trainers to work with the freedom fighters in the use
of this military equipment,'' Mr. Montgomery said as he and three other members
of Congress ended a two-day visit to Managua.

''It would be a very serious mistake on our part not to furnish these
advisers,'' he said.

Two weeks ago, the White House spokesman, Larry Speakes, said the Reagan
Administration would be willing to send United States military trainers to
Honduras to work with the rebels, who are known as contras, if Congress lifted
the prohibition on that.

Favors Aid to Rebels

Representative Montgomery voted in favor of the Administration's request for
$100 million in aid to the rebels in the House of Representatives on Thursday.
The request was defeated 222 to 210.

Representative Montgomery and Representative George Darden, Democrat of Georgia,
who voted the same way, said they would continue supporting Administration
policy toward Nicaragua.

Mr. Darden said he and Mr. Montgomery had been told at a White House meeting
last week that the United States was not contemplating any military action
against Nicaragua.

''President Reagan assured us there would be no American troops sent into
Nicaragua, nor would there be any type of invasion,'' he said. ''If the United
States wanted to invade Nicaragua, it would have done so long ago.''

The two other visiting legislators, both of whom opposed the Administration's
aid request last week, said their positions had not changed either.

'Time Is on Our Side'

''As one who voted against the contra aid, I believe that my position was right
because I think time is on our side,'' said Representative Kenneth J. Gray,
Democrat of Illinois. ''The economy is going downhill. I think this place is
going to fall of its own weight economically.''

Representative Sander M. Levin, Democrat of Michigan, said he was leaving
Nicaragua with the impression that the crisis here is ''more intractable than I
thought.''

''It's even more complicated when seen here than from Washington,''
Representative Levin said. ''I'm for negotiations now, but I am skeptical they
will work.''

During their visit, the four legislators met with religious activists and with
opposition labor, business and political leaders. They also conferred with Vice
President Sergio Ramirez Mercado.

The House vote on Thursday rejecting aid to the rebels remains a main subject of
discussion in political circles here. It is widely assumed that Congress will
ultimately approve some form of aid.

Vietnam Actions Recalled

A prominent Sandinista commander, Deputy Interior Minister Omar Cabezas, said in
a televised interview that Congress had apparently reached ''a consensus to
destroy us.''

''The Democrats and Republicans agree that they should give money to kill us,''
Commander Cabezas said. ''Some want to kill us one way, others want to kill us
another way. They only differ on how or when to give the aid.''

''It's like saying, Omar, how do you want to die?'' he said. ''Do you want a
Pepsi-Cola with arsenic, which is faster, or a Coca-Cola with strychnine, which
is slow?''

On the same television program, Vietnam's Ambassador in Managua, Nguyen Dinh
Bin, likened the policy of the United States toward Nicaragua with its conduct
during the Vietnam War. He recalled that the American presence in Vietnam began
in the form of military advisers.

In neighboring Costa Rica, President-elect Oscar Arias Sanchez said the House
vote against aid to the contras ''opens an opportunity for the Nicaraguan
Government.'' He said the Sandinistas should open talks with their opponents.

Guatemala's new civilian President, Vinicio Cerezo, made a similar appeal. He
said that in the wake of the House vote, the Sandinista Government should ''open
a space for dialogue.'' ---- Goal Called Ballot-Box Ouster WASHINGTON, March 23
(UPI) -Two of President Reagan's top aides insisted today that the
Administration's goal in Nicaragua was a ballot-box ouster of the Sandinistas.

The two, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and Donald T. Regan, the White
House chief of staff, were responding to questions about the ultimate goal of
helping Nicaraguan rebels in light of President Reagan's comment last week that
the plan was ''to get rid of'' the Sandinistas ''one way or another.''

''By getting rid of them, we could also get rid of them at the ballot,'' Mr.
Regan said on the ABC News program ''This Week.''

''This did happen in the Philippines, it could happen down there,'' he said.

Mr. Weinberger, who spoke on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press,'' said
President Regan meant ''overthrowing policies'' of the Sandinistas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rep. Kenneth Gray and G.V. Montgomery (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 24, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Using Guns to Push Policy Can Backfire

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 268 words


To the Editor:

Tad Szulc has performed a valuable service (Op-Ed March 16) in reminding us of
the parallels between the situation in Cuba at the time of the Bay of Pigs
disaster and the current situation in Nicaragua. But the Bay of Pigs is only one
case study in the recent history of military adventure. Consider what has
happened since:

* The U.S. employed military means in Vietnam, and ended up with more or less
the opposite of what we intended.

* Argentina employed military means to regain the Falkland Islands, and as a
result the Falklands will remain British for the foreseeable future.

* Israel sent a military force into Lebanon, and the outcome was to destroy
Begin and weaken Israel, though the P.L.O. remains alive.

* The Soviet Union sent military forces into Afghanistan some years ago, and now
seems about to pull out ignominiously, having failed to achieve its objectives.

* Iraq started a little war against a weakened Iran, to regain border lands, and
has ended up losing more border lands.

Mr. Reagan himself has said that in thinking about Central America we should
remember the kind of world we live in. Well, that is the kind of world we live
in: military efforts are a dismal failure. They fail for both West and East,
they fail for both Jews and Arabs, they fail for both developed and developing
nations. The record has a clear lesson: because of the kind of world we live in,
the last thing we should do in Nicaragua, if there are important policy
objectives at stake, is to resort to or sponsor military measures. NEWTON GARVER
East Concord, N.Y., March 18, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 24, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
By Hate Possessed

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 752 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Not for many years has this country known a political atmosphere as vicious as
Washington experienced in the days leading up to the House vote on aid to the
contras. And it is not over. For a number of reasons, the Nicaraguan issue will
continue to poison our politics.

First, we have a President who is obsessed by the subject. The Sandinista
Government is his Moby Dick. Like a political Ahab, he pursues it beyond reason,
beyond humanity, beyond safety. In his frustration, he spews out rage and hate,
fear and falsehood.

When he spoke to the nation a week ago, urging military aid to the contras, his
misstatements of fact were so flagrant that they troubled even those inured to
Reagan fantasies. He said the Sandinistas were ''deeply involved in drug
trafficking,'' but Mr. Reagan's own Drug Enforcement Administration knew of no
such thing. He painted Brazil red on a map, though just a week earlier his
Assistant Secretary of State for the region had assured Brazil that we saw no
Red menace there.

Does Mr. Reagan know such statements are untrue when he utters them? Or does he
sincerely believe them in spite of the evidence? But those interesting questions
need not be explored for present purposes. In either event, it is the obsession
with Nicaragua that drives the President to the extreme.

The obsession, moreover, rests on a broad foundation of ideology. Anti-Communism
is a crusade for Ronald Reagan. Hence the question of how to deal with the
Sandinistas is one not of practical judgments but of purity and patriotism.

Those premises, psychological as much as political, led so easily to the methods
used by the President and his men in the contra aid debate: the lurid language,
the McCarthyite smears, the deliberate attempts to frighten Democrats. The end
justifies the means.

The use of fear as a tactic was particularly striking. McCarthyism in its
original form was an incoherent cry of frustration by people who had long been
denied power. But here an atmosphere of fear, of maps dripping red, was created
by an Administration that had been in power for five years.

The paranoid style in American politics, Richard Hofstadter called it. When it
appears, it inevitably corrupts political discourse and the decision-making
process. The hunt for supposed Communists in the State Department crippled our
ability to understand and deal rationally with the new China in the 1950's, at
terrible cost to United States interests.

For all those reasons, we can expect the Nicaraguan issue to go on poisoning the
atmosphere. But there is another reason, not so much ideological as factual.

In 1969, Henry Kissinger said of Vietnam that it might not have mattered much to
the United States originally in terms of geography or resources. But after years
of involvement in the war, he said, America had a vital stake in Vietnam: its
own credibility. That same reasoning will be advanced as to Nicaragua, beyond
doubt. For here again, the United States has gone in by degrees, starting
surreptitiously and building up the commitment to the point where those who made
the policy have an independent interest in not being seen to fail.

The Central Intelligence Agency started in 1981 with a modest covert operation.
It selected the contras, installed former Somoza officers as their commanders,
fixed their objectives, advised them on terrorist methods.

When the operation became public knowledge, Congress objected. But with all the
debates since then, the United States commitment to war against the Sandinistas
has grown. And there is no reason to think that the involvement is going to end
now. To the contrary, the expectation in Washington is that Congress next month
will approve an increase in support for the contras, hedged only with some
rather meaningless requirements for negotiation.

In those circumstances, President Reagan will surely find failure of the contra
war unacceptable. But it is failing. No serious analyst, sympathetic to the
contras or not, sees any chance of their winning. The idea that $100 million in
U.S. aid will bring them victory is laughable.

What then? The President is indignant at the idea that he might send U.S. forces
into Nicaragua. But if not, and if Nicaragua is so vital, how will he react to
failure of the policy? He will intensify the divisive rhetoric and call for more
of what has failed.

At least there is one Tip O'Neill with the courage to say what is happening. For
the rest, we can only await the painful correction of history.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 24, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOR NBC, TROUBLE AT 'A-TEAM'

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1018 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, March 23


There are tides in the life of a television series, but what is happening to
''The A-Team'' this season is beyond the normal ebb and flow. In the last few
months, suddenly and without warning, ''The A-Team'' has been been upended by a
riptide.

That ''The A-Team'' was in serious trouble became apparent last Dec. 3, when the
stunt-laden series about four soldiers of fortune lost in the ratings to
''Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer.'' For the first time, ''The A-Team'' - which
had been the sixth highest-ranked show last season -tumbled into third place in
its prime-time slot on Tuesday night.

Whether the show can be resuscitated is far from certain. However, other shows
that were losing their vitality have been helped by plot changes, character
substitutions and other measures that Hollywood uses to cure anemic ratings.

Both NBC and Stephen J. Cannell Productions, the producer of ''The A-Team,''
refuse to talk publicly about the series. Privately, an NBC executive said that
the network probably would not decide whether to renew the show, which is
currently in 33d place for the season, until the second week in May. NBC intends
to announce its fall schedule on May 15 and will wait to see the strength of its
new pilots before renewing ''The A-Team'' or letting it go under.

Ex-Vietnam Commandos

''The A-Team'' stars George Peppard as Hannibal Smith and Mr. T as the master
mechanic B. A. (Bad Attitude) Baracus, members of a crack commando unit in
Vietnam who were wrongfully imprisoned by the United States Army and escaped,
only to be pursued each week by fanatic Army officers. It went on the air in the
spring of 1983, when NBC - which is now leading the three networks in the
Nielsen ratings - was stuck deep in the cellar. It was the network's first step
up the cellar stairs and, from the beginning, it was a blockbuster. The only NBC
series in the Top 20 shows that first year, it was strong enough to make a hit
of ''Remington Steele,'' the show that followed it.

This year, ''The A-Team'' has been poleaxed by a change in audience taste.
Driven by the success of ''The Cosby Show,'' situation comedies about
well-meaning families are in. ''Who's the Boss?'' and ''Growing Pains,'' the
show's competition on ABC, beat ''The A-Team'' easily each week. ''Who's the
Boss?,'' starring Tony Danza as a man who gets his 13-year-old daughter out of
Brooklyn by taking a job as a housekeeper in Connecticut, is in 13th place for
the season. ''Growing Pains,'' which stars Alan Thicke as a psychologist with
three children who has his office at home, is in 20th place.

''The question is not why 'The A-Team' is sliding down the tubes so fast but
what took it so long,'' says Todd Gitlin, director of the mass-communications
program at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of ''Inside
Prime Time,'' a book that analyzes prime-time television. ''It is a pure formula
show in which the characters are obsessively repeating the same adventure. It's
a pratfall show which is part of what's appealing to kids, but kids are fickle
and wear out new toys real fast.''

New Tricks to Win Viewers

There are tricks that can be tried when a series begins to slip, and ''The
A-Team'' is trying a number of them. One recent ''A-Team'' was concocted around
the extremely successful game show ''Wheel of Fortune,'' with two ''Wheel of
Fortune'' hosts appearing on the adventure series. Such a ploy is an attempt to
appeal to a different audience. Guest stars have also been used to add
excitement. The Feb. 11 show featured Boy George; his Culture Club band
performed three songs. This Tuesday, the wrestling star Hulk Hogan and the
Chicago Bears lineman William (the Refrigerator) Perry lend the team a hand in
fighting racketeers.

But some of the best ways to revitalize a show are unavailable to ''The A-Team''
because of the cartoonish nature of the series. According to James Brooks, the
co-creator of ''The Mary Tyler Moore Show,'' ''Lou Grant,'' ''Rhoda'' and
''Taxi,'' his way of revitalzing was to throw a character into a new life
situation, with no knowledge of how things would work out. ''When we separated
Lou Grant and his wife, we didn't know if they would get back together,'' he
says. ''We gave Andy Kaufman a psychic breakdown on 'Taxi.' The eight shows that
led up to getting Rhoda married were fabulous shows. She got married and
everything went dry. So we got them divorced, something that clearly didn't help
the ratings.''

''The normal life cycle of a television show used to be five or six years,''
says Norman Lear, the creator of ''All in the Family,'' which stayed on the air
nine years. ''If the characters don't grow and/or if new directions aren't
taken, its life will be dramatically shorter. On 'All in the Family,' we knew we
needed a new ingredient to explore our fifth year. So Gloria became pregnant.''
After six years, ''Maude,'' another of Mr. Lear's title characters, was
appointed to Congress to finish the term of a Congressman who had died. ''We
were prepared to take the show in a radical new direction,'' says Mr. Lear,
''but Bea Arthur decided not to continue.''

'Two or Three Years Is Plenty'

''Commercial considerations aside, I think a show should last two years for the
good of the American public,'' says Gene Reynolds, the co-creator of ''Lou
Grant'' and the original producer of ''M*A*S*H,'' a series that lasted 11 years.
''After that, you begin to repeat yourself. To enrich, divert and entertain the
American public, two or three years is plenty. 'All in the Family' is a great
example of a show overstaying its welcome, with its impact long since lost.''

''The A-Team'' will be making one change in character this spring. A woman,
played by Tia Carrere, will jump aboard the crashing vehicles with the rest of
the team in the year's last episode. The character, also named Tia, is the
Rambo-like daughter of a Vietnam veteran. That last show, a cliffhanger, centers
around whether she is worthy to join the team next season. But whether ''The
A-Team'' will be back next season is the real cliffhanger.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mr. T., Hulk Hogan and William Perry

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Yes, It Is Worse for Vietnam Combat Vets

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 491 words


To the Editor:

Joseph R. Kurtz Jr. seems not to be aware of readjustment problems of some of
his fellow Vietnam veterans.

We are involved in a research project with Columbia University to examine the
effects of combat on Vietnam War veterans. The goal of our study, which began in
early 1983, is to determine the effects of military service on the socioeconomic
status, well-being and level of satisfaction of veterans who served in the
Vietnam War period - in Southeast Asia and elsewhere. The first report disproves
Mr. Kurtz's idea that the public is being duped.

The initial findings reflect that the average annual income of veterans who were
involved in heavy combat is $3,000 to $4,000 below that of their noncombat
peers. Among some Vietnam veterans in the study the differential can be as much
as $5,000 less than veterans the same age, with the same educational level.

Of those involved in the most intense fighting, 25 percent have been divorced,
compared with 12 percent in the group that saw little or no fighting. Nearly 10
percent of the heavy-combat group has been divorced two or more times, double
the rate for the comparison group.

Comparative data on self-reports of general health, and life satisfaction and
happiness, show highly significant differences among Vietnam veterans who were
in the heaviest combat, compared with light-combat and noncombat groups. Their
general health reports more closely resemble men 10 to 20 years older who did
not see combat. Of those who served in Vietnam, 38.7 percent state they had
experienced a mental, nervous or emotional breakdown, or at some time felt as
though they would.

This confirms both the stressful effects of the combat experience and its effect
on the combat veterans, who bore the brunt of the war and its aftermath. Yet, we
consider these findings the tip of the iceberg, because the Vietnam veterans in
this study are members of the American Legion, part of a group that has
resocialized sufficiently to join and participate in a veterans' organization.
If we have observed such problems in this group, then there are large numbers of
Vietnam veterans who were engaged in intense battle who are far worse off.

Thousands of Vietnam veterans have achieved positions of authority and
responsibility in government and the private sector. However, many of these
seemingly readjusted veterans continue to experience physical and psychological
symptoms. Experts have estimated that 40 to 60 percent of the Vietnam veterans
who saw combat suffer or will suffer some symptoms of post-traumatic stress
disorder.

Audie Murphy, the most decorated G.I. in World War II, said you really never get
over war. For some of our Vietnam combat veterans, the war has never ended, and
many continue to pay a price for their military service. JOHN F. SOMMER JR.
Deputy Director, National Veterans Affairs and Rehabilitation Commission The
American Legion Washington, March 10, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Yes, It Is Worse for Vietnam Combat Vets

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 439 words


To the Editor:

Although Joseph Kurtz Jr. attempts to make an important point about Vietnam
veterans, his obvious anger confirms for me why he left so much unsaid. Having
served in the infantry and overcome severe readjustment problems, and
subsequently worked to help other Vietnam veterans, I have to question Mr.
Kurtz's facts and opinions.

Veterans Administration's statistics indicate that the overwhelming majority of
Vietnam vets have integrated well into society, hold jobs and have families. Of
the 15 percent to 20 percent who have readjustment problems, the vast majority
are combat vets who for the most part can't be persuaded to seek treatment. Even
veterans who are financially successful and appear well adjusted often need some
type of counseling, but will not seek it because they won't openly identify
themselves as Vietnam vets.

Which brings me to the crux of Mr. Kurtz's point, that Vietnam vets are faking
it. In part he bases his conclusion on his father's World War II experience, yet
he trivializes an important point. Not only did we not return to gratitude, but
we were even shunned and despised. The welcome home and treatment as heroes did
much to alleviate the readjustment problems combat vets of any war usually
experience. Many World War II and Korean vets experienced psychological problems
that remained hidden until recently because it wasn't popular to admit to them.
Some Vietnam vet counseling centers have been receiving inquiries from these
older vets, now seeking help.

The guys I see have had legs blown off and can't get special equipment from the
V.A.; they have nightmares about a buddy's death and don't tell anyone until
they contemplate suicide, or they are simply relieved to discover that other
vets who aren't messed up still experience combat-related anxieties from time to
time. But mostly I hear one thing from vets who haven't got their act together
-give me a job, and the rest will take care of itself.

I've often heard the argument that Vietnam produced sharp differences in
identity, readjustment and perspective between combat and noncombat vets. The
Kurtz article makes it difficult to resist that idea. Yes, I've met plenty of
vets who blamed Vietnam for their troubles, including dope and crime. Most were
behind bars and probably would have been anyway. They are in the minority and
aren't the ones seeking help. Were the Joseph Kurtzes truly concerned, they
would turn their energies to helping vets instead of resorting to easy
criticism. ALBERT B. SINGERMAN President, Westchester-Putnam Chapter, Vietnam
Veterans of America Montrose, N.Y., March 10, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

LAWMAKERS BACK ACTIONS ON LIBYA

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1201 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 24


Members of Congress today generally expressed support for the action taken by
American warplanes against Libyan land and sea targets, but the chairman of the
House Foreign Affairs Commitee charged that President Reagan had not fully
complied with the War Powers Resolution of 1973.

The chairman, Representative Dante B. Fascell, said the deployment of American
naval forces off the coast of Libya ''constituted from the outset a situation
where imminent involvement in hostilities was a distinct possibility clearly
indicated by the circumstances even prior to today's development.''

'The Right Course,' O'Neill Says

While some lawmakers said they needed more information to say for sure whether
military action was justified, leading Democrats and Republicans in the House
said they agreed with Mr. Reagan's actions against Libya and its leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi.

''The Administration's handling of this matter is on the right course. Its
actions in protecting America's armed forces in international waters are
justified,'' said Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr., the Speaker of the House. ''Based upon
the briefing given me at the White House,'' Mr. O'Neill continued, ''the
American planes attacked by Libya today were on a peaceful mission in
international waters. Libya had no right to shoot at our planes.''

Representative Robert H. Michel, Republican of Illinois and the House minority
leader, said: ''The information I have suggests that we were fully within our
rights, engaging in military maneuvers in international waters. As far as I'm
concerned, Libya engaged in an act of provocation that warranted our response.''

The War Powers Resolution, an effort by Congress to avoid repeating the
circumstances that led to escalation of United States military involvement in
Vietnam, proscribes the deployment of United States forces in hostile situations
for more than 90 days without Congressional authorization for a longer stay.

Under the law, the President must report to Congress within 48 hours after he
introduces United States forces ''into hostilities, or into situations where
imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances.''

The President is also required by the law to notify Congress if American forces
are sent ''into the territory, air space or waters of a foreign nation while
equipped for combat, except for deployments which relate solely to supply,
replacement, repair or training of such forces.''

The resolution was passed into law over the objections of President Richard M.
Nixon, who argued that it would seriously undermine the nation's ability to act
decisively in times of international crisis.

A Letter to Reagan

In a letter to President Reagan, Mr. Fascell, a Florida Democrat, said, ''I
recognize that the actions of Libyan leader Qaddafi are contemptible in every
respect. His repeated support for terrorism and his direct aggression against
neighboring states merit the world's harshest condemnation.''

However, Mr. Fascell said, ''We must respect and abide by our own laws and
constitutional procedures. In that connection I believe your Administration's
actions in the Gulf of Sidra have failed to adequately satisfy the requirements
of the War Powers Resolution.''

Senator Strom Thurmond, Republican of South Carolina, said, ''The United States
has the right and the duty to protect and defend itself when attacked, as it was
today, without provocation.''

''The attack against U.S. ships occurred in international waters, despite what
the Libyan Government has contended,'' Mr. Thurmond, the president pro tempore
of the Senate, said after he received a briefing on the incident this afternoon.

''I believe the United States has acted responsibly in retaliating against acts
of aggression perpetrated'' by Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, Mr.
Thurmond said.

'Right of Self-Defense'

Senator John W. Warner, a Virginia Republican who served as Secretary of the
Navy from 1972 to 1974, said he did not regard the action by the United States
as a provocation. ''My reaction is that the President made the correct decision
in protecting the lives of American service personnel,'' he said. ''We were
attacked and the President reacted.''

Mr. Warner said the United States had ''exercised its right of self-defense''
against Libya. In response to a question, he said he had no reason to believe
that the United States was trying to provoke Mr. Qaddafi or to test his resolve.
''The U.S. Navy has been operating in these waters for many years,'' he said.

Senator Larry Pressler, Republican of South Dakota, a member of the Foreign
Relations Committee, said, ''If we were clearly in international waters, our
actions were justified.'' But, he said, he did not have enough information about
the incident or the location of American ships to say whether the United States
had provoked Libya.

'Trying to Draw a Response'

Mr. Pressler said the United States was, ''in essence, taunting'' the Libyan
leader. ''Pretty clearly we were laying the groundwork, trying to draw a
response from him,'' the Senator said.

The incident off the coast of Libya came four days after President Reagan
suffered a serious political setback in the House on a major foreign policy
issue. By a vote of 222 to 210, the House rejected Mr. Reagan's request to send
$100 million of assistance to rebels fighting the Sandinista Government of
Nicaragua. The Senate is scheduled to take up the request this week, on Tuesday
or Wednesday.

Several Congressional aides said the conflict with Libya appeared to divert
attention from Nicaragua in the same way that the United States invasion of
Grenada, on Oct. 25, 1983, drew attention away from the explosion that killed
more than 230 Americans in Lebanon just two days earlier. The bombing of the
Marine compound in Beirut had eroded support for United States military
involvement in Lebanon, but Mr. Reagan generally received Congressional support
for the invasion of Grenada.

'We've Made Our Point'

Senator Jim Sasser, Democrat of Tennessee, said the United States had made its
point in the Gulf of Sidra today and that ''perhaps this is the time to pull
back.''

''I think we've made our point that we're not going to be intimidated and that
we intend to operate in international waters, and perhaps now is the time to
withdraw from those waters,'' Mr. Sasser said. ''I hope that when we return, we
will return in company with some of our NATO allies, particularly the British,
French and perhaps Germans.''

Senator John Heinz, Republican of Pennsylvania, said the Libyan attack on
American aircraft was ''the latest outrageous act'' by Colonel Qaddafi. American
forces were ''operating in an area that even the Soviet Union does not recognize
as Libyan territorial waters,'' he said, referring to the Gulf of Sidra.

Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, the vice chairman of the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence, said he was not surprised by today's incident. The
only surprise, he said, is that the Libyans fired more than one or two missiles
at the American planes. Colonel Qaddafi ''had to know what the U.S. response
would be,'' Mr. Leahy said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CHARLOTTE CURTIS;
POWER FOR THE POOR

BYLINE: By Charlotte Curtis

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 829 words


FRANCES FOX PIVEN and Richard A. Cloward simply won't give up. The two
professors never forget that in an affluent nation the poor are powerless. They
still seek ways to pull these people into the national decision-making process
and they have been working toward that goal for 20 years.

When they - she, a political scientist, he, a sociologist and social worker -
began to collaborate, their research indicated that many people who should be
getting welfare were not. They figured reform would come when the poor
themselves took the initiative. And that's what happened.

Welfare rolls were flooded. The war on poverty began. Power, or at least some
power, came with participation. A theory and a strategy became the description
of a reality. Then came the agonies of the Vietnam distraction, the backlash, a
conservative turn, the ''me'' decade in which those who had seemed to care
turned their attention inward , and Ronald Reagan. What is notable, Dr. Piven
says, and she and Dr. Cloward foresaw it, is Registration, say scholars, should
be simplified and taken directly to the people. that despite efforts to diminish
the welfare state, it is ''battered, but mainly intact.''

''America was supposed to have turned against the programs,'' she said. ''But
we've never seen survey data to support that. In fact, support for the programs
has steadily increased over the five years the Administration has tried to
dismantle it.''

Dr. Piven is slim and brunette, her hair short and naturally curly. Dr. Cloward
is tall and gray-haired. They live in Columbia University's celebrated Claremont
Avenue housing with books, cats, the sun, hanging plants and a view that takes
in a lot of the campus. And they work with the devotion of those for whom
scholarship is life's greatest pleasure.

''Americans may be skeptical about welfare,'' she said. ''But they think it's
better to have it than not.''

''Of course the programs aren't what they ought to be,'' Dr. Cloward added.
''But if they were abolished or significantly weakened everybody knows what
would happen: Old people and children would starve.''

Still, the welfare state has powerful enemies. As pressures to trim the Federal
budget grow, somebody will discover yet another woman in mink collecting half a
dozen checks. A dozen, even dozens, of horror stories could show up. And, as is
so often the case in a headline-driven society, a lot of people will forget the
millions who have never violated the law.

''Aid to Families and Dependent Children is the pariah group,'' Dr. Cloward
said. ''But the Administration doesn't really care about A.F.D.C. It's a device
they use while quietly slashing at other programs.''

If rhetoric is all, what is one to make of the plight of the homeless? As Drs.
Piven and Cloward see it, the battle is usually waged on the wrong front. In New
York, good people fight for beds, clean bathrooms and decent food in shelters
for the homeless. Harvard students confronted their administration over
barricades erected to keep the homeless away from hot-air vents. The students
won. The barricades came down and the homeless were permitted to hover over the
vents.

''It's bizarre,'' Dr. Piven said. ''A large proportion of the homeless lost
their housing. The real question is not about beds, toilets or hot-air vents.
The real question is, Where is the housing? That rarely comes up.''

The scholars see the vote as the way to empower the poor. They want registration
simplified and taken directly to the people, especially to welfare and
unemployment offices and all the other governmental agencies that deal with the
poor. To this end, in 1983 they helped found and are officers of the Human Serve
Fund, ''serve'' being an acronym for Service Employee Registration and Voter
Education.

Funding wasn't easy, but they managed. The Governors of Texas, Ohio, New York
and Montana responded to their efforts in 1984 by directing that registration
assistance be provided by all state agencies. West Virginia and New Mexico
restricted the services to public welfare offices. Cities agreed to help. The
backlash was inevitable.

If the poor should actually follow through and vote in the high percentages of
other registered groups, and, though arguable, the scholars are convinced they
would, the national agenda could change, and change significantly. Lots of
people, Democrats as well as Republicans, don't want that.

Dr. Piven and Dr. Cloward were disappointed, of course. But they, Human Serve
and other groups in the registration movement are still at it. They have devised
a strategy for a major coalition in 1988. They will be out attempting to win
friends and influence politicians in the November elections.

In the meantime they write magazine and Op-Ed articles on the subject, teach
(she at the Graduate Center, City University of New York; he at Columbia's
School of Social Work), research more books and papers, and cannot really
understand why so few people care.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 26, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MAINE SAYING NO TO U.S. NUCLEAR WASTE PLAN

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1169 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Me., March 25


Six hearing officers from the Department of Energy are in town to gather opinion
on the possibility of storing highly radioactive nuclear waste here, but if they
had any question it was answered on the way in from the airport. Utility poles
are covered with signs reading ''No!''

Similar sentiments have become common in several cities in the Eastern half of
the country in recent weeks as the Energy Department, which for years has been
studying sites in salt beds and volcanic formations in the West, has begun to
focus on a dozen underground granite structures in the East.

The reaction, from here to Minnesota, is that the selection process is flawed,
that the Department of Energy's computer has made a mistake and that there may
be a safe way to dispose of the waste, ''but not here.''

The department is establishing sites for the storage of tens of thousands of
tons of wastes from nuclear reactors and nuclear bomb factories that will be
dangerously radioactive for thousands of years. On Jan. 16 it listed 12 areas as
''potentially acceptable sites'' - two in Maine and one in New Hampshire; two
each in North Carolina and Virginia and one in Georgia; three in Minnesota and
one in Wisconsin. Last week it began hearings to gather public comments.

''We're the forgotten state, but for this nuclear dump we're the first to be
thought of,'' said Mary-Rose Starr, a Portland artist testifying in a City Hall
auditorium draped with ''No!'' signs. The state has high unemployment and low
wages, she said, and if one of the sites here is eventually chosen, ''even the
vacation people won't come to Maine.''

According to Gov. Joseph E. Brennan, ''There has been nothing like it since the
Vietnam War.''

One of the Maine areas, an underground granite structure of 385 square miles
designated the Sebago Lake Batholith, supplies 25 percent of the state's
drinking water, he said, and is such a bad choice that ''I think the D.O.E. must
be embarrassed.'' But he added that simply being considered for nuclear waste
had depressed real estate values.

Outside, protesters wearing yellow plastic bags labeled ''radioactive wastes''
held plastic cups of water with flashlights pointed into their bases, so they
glowed in the dark.

In Minnesota, with three proposed sites and four more back-ups, a state
commission has been working for months to find holes in the department's work.
''Our geological survey says we don't know if there's granite down there, and we
don't believe the Department of Energy knows, either,'' said Thomas J.
Kalitowski, chairman of the Minnesota Governor's Nuclear Waste Council.

'Someone Else's Children'

At a nine-hour hearing today in Maine, even some of the speakers recognized the
problem of provinciality.

''If we should manage to elude D.O.E.'s flying fickle finger of fate, I don't
think we should congratulate ourselves on shifting the risk to someone else's
community, someone else's children,'' said Sharon Osborne, a guitar maker from
Damariscotta. Anyone who thinks the disposal technology is safe enough for
another area, she said, ''should have to have the stuff under their own bed.''

In fact, in addition to selecting the right kind of rock, the design of the
repository and the form of packaging are still undetermined. This has not
reassured the crowds at hearings.

Both Maine and Minnesota have applied unsuccessfully for an extension on the 60
days allowed to comment on the proposed sites. The list of the 12 Eastern sites
on which field work will be done is to be issued in final form this fall, and
work would probably not start before 1988.

In Washington, the department says it is not surprised by the reactions.

''The activity and the interest has been predictably negative, and very
intense,'' said Ginger King, spokesman for the Office of Civilian Radioactive
Waste Management. Informational hearings drew crowds of up to 4,000 people, she
said, often in sparsely populated areas.

A Complicated Search

The department is in the early stages of a complicated process by which it is
supposed to find two sites and build on one of them by the end of the century.
The Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 requires a vote by Congress before work is
started at a second location but also limits the capacity of the first
repository to a level that appears to assure that a second site will be needed.

It was 30 years ago that the Federal Government began investigating the
suitability of several sites in the West, and three of them are now leading
candidates in a ''first round'' group. They are Hanford, Wash., where the
Government has extensive nuclear facilities; an area adjacent to the Nevada test
site where nuclear bombs are detonated, and an area in Deaf Smith County in
northwestern Texas.

The 12 announced on Jan. 16 are part of the second round, although this group
might produce the first site, if all the first-round sites are ruled
unacceptable. More probable, according to experts, is that a first-round site
will be chosen for a repository and the others will go into a pool with the
second-round sites for a second location.

In northern Maine there is talk of landowners' drilling wells and exploding
charges in the bottom of them, to make the rock unsuitable. ''Cracked granite is
superior to radioactive granite,'' said Alan Philbrook, of the Maine Nuclear
Referendum Committee.

Turn-of-the-Century Target

Many opponents favor closing nuclear reactors, which produce radioactivity, but
other opponents of a nuclear waste repository have concentrated on what they see
as flaws in the selection process.

''It's schedule-driven,'' said John W. Morley, a geologist with the state of
Minnesota. He said decisions were being made before they were technically
justified, to be ready by the end of the century. France will not have a
permanent disposal technology in place before 2015, he pointed out, and will
still be ahead of Japan, Sweden, Britain and other countries with nuclear power
programs.

The alternative to burial now is to store the wastes in pools of water at
reactors, or dry in above-ground buildings, for later disposal.

Another area of criticism is the decision to limit the search in granite sites
to the eastern half of the country. Because the first-round sites are in the
West, the department has decided that the second repository should be in the
East. However, the type of geologic structure under consideration in the second
round, crystalline granite structures that were formed when molten rock
solidified without reaching the earth's surface, also exists in the West.

''There were some very arbitrary elements to the way decisions were made,'' said
Brooks B. Yeager, the Washington representative of the Sierra Club.

Another complication is that the degree of success in containing the wastes may
not be known for hundreds of years. ''They've got the advantage of no one being
around to say, 'I told you so,' '' said Mr. Kalitowski. ''It's not very
comforting to know that's the case.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of proposed sites for radioactive waste in U.S. (page A12); photo
of Frieda Huwyler and Margaret Knight (NYT/Neal Boenzi) (page A12)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 26, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LIBYA FORCES REPORTED INFERIOR TO MANY IN REGION

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 926 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 25


Although it comes as no surprise that Libya's forces are no match for the United
States Sixth Fleet, military analysts say its air, naval and air-defense forces
are also inferior to those of many Middle Eastern nations.

Some military officers pointed to the ineffectiveness of Soviet-built
air-defense missiles against United States Navy fighter aircraft.

''When you see that they're 0 for 12 against us, they can't be very good,'' an
officer said this morning, when the number of missiles fired by the Libyans was
thought to have been a dozen.

Israelis Pay Scant Attention

A Middle Eastern specialist noted that Israel, which is generally considered to
have the best intelligence service in the region, devotes relatively little
attention to Libya because the Libyans are not considered to be a threat.

In sum, a military officer said: ''Are the Libyans a force to be reckoned with?
No.''

Libya, a nation of 3.5 million people, has armed forces totaling 73,000 people,
mostly in an army of 58,000 that is not much involved in the clashes with the
United States. The Libyan Air Force has 8,500 airmen and the Navy 6,500 sailors.

Illiteracy is a critical weakness in learning to operate modern weapons,
according to a specialist. In addition, industry is rudimentary and does not
produce young people with technical skills.

Dependent on Foreign Advisers

Libyan forces, as with much of Libyan society, are heavily dependent on foreign
advisers. From 1,200 to 1,800 Soviet military advisers are said to be on duty in
Libya, along with East German, Syrian, Pakistani, Palestinian and North Korean
military and technical advisers.

The Libyan Air Force is said to be particularly dependent on foreign pilots for
training. But Libyan pilots are said to be only moderately effective, military
analysts said, as they are generally not highly rated.

In arms and equipment, a military officer said, ''the Libyans have more hardware
than they can use.''

Most of the Libyan aircraft, missiles, small warships and tanks come from the
Soviet Union, although the Libyans have acquired some from France.

The Libyan Air Force has 535 combat aircraft, including 143 MIG-23 fighter
interceptors. The MIG-23 has been the backbone of Soviet air-defense forces.

The MIG-21, of which the Libyans are reported to have 55, is an older
interceptor. and another interceptor, the MIG-25, is 25 years old in design.

The largest concentration of jet aircraft intended to attack targets on the
ground are the Soviet-built SU-20's and SU-22's, which are stripped down export
models of older Soviet attack aircraft. Two of those jet fighters were shot down
over the Gulf of Sidra by American Navy fliers in F-14's in August 1981.

The Libyans are also reported have seven Soviet-built TU-22 bombers, which are
able to fly at supersonic speeds in short bursts but carry only bombs and are
not equipped for missiles. A few of the planes are still flown in the Soviet Air
Force.

Missiles Installed in '85

According to the International Institute of Strategic Studies in London, the
Libyans began installing SAM-5 long-range air-defense missiles at three sites
late last year.

Pentagon officials said only one site, that near the town of Sidra, had become
operational. That was the installation that American officials say has been
struck twice by missiles in the last two days. The other two missile sites are
near Benghazi and Tripoli, a spokesman for the institute said.

Each site was believed to have six missiles, in addition to the radar and
control center to make the missiles operational. Libyan soldiers were reported
to have received more than a year's training in the Soviet Union. It was not
known if Soviet advisers are at the sites in Libya.

Weapons specialists said the SAM-5, although having a speed three and a half
times the speed of sound and able to reach 85,000 feet, was designed to shoot at
bombers and could not maneuver quickly enough to hit a jet fighter flown by a
skilled pilot.

The larger portion of Libyan missiles are SAM-2's, which first became
operational in the Soviet Union in 1959 and which were used extensively to
defend North Vietnam in the Vietnam War.

At sea, the main Libyan force is made up of attack patrol craft that displace
less than 400 tons each but are able to make 40 knots and to fire antiship
missiles at ranges up to nearly 40 miles. They have been the primary targets for
American attacks.

Each of Libya's 10 Combattante-class craft acquired from France has a crew of 27
sailors, and the 12 Osa-class vessels obtained from the Soviet Union have
complements of 30 sailors. Three Susa-class vessels from Britain are operated by
20 sailors, and 14 Sar ships built in Turkey have crews of 23.

The military analysts had few good words for Libyan seamanship, pointing out the
desert heritage of most Libyans and confirming reports that they tended to get
seasick when under way.

According to Jane's Fighting Ships, Libya has six Soviet-built submarines of the
Foxtrot class, which are older diesel vessels able to make 16 knots submerged.
They carry 22 torpedoes each and have crews of 78.

By contrast, the United States has three aircraft carriers off Libya displacing
80,000 to 90,000 tons each, several cruisers of 8,000 to 9,000 tons and a fleet
of 25 other combatants. The carriers carry about 275 warplanes.

Although the Navy does not discuss submarine movements, each carrier is usually
screened by two to four nuclear-powered submarines. Each is armed with more than
20 advanced torpedoes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: chart of key Libyan military forces

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 26, 1986, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LOSING THE FIGHT TO HOUSE THE NATION

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 364 words


To the Editor:

Your March 16 article on the affordability crisis in the nation's housing, ''Why
So Many Are Priced Out of the Market'' (Week in Review), is correct in its
thrust. However, it is worth noting that affordability's twin -availability - is
a major part of the housing equation that needs to be addressed if we are to
arrive at a sensible national housing policy.

How does the Reagan Administration address these related problems? It proposes
eliminating all new funds for rental-housing development grants, for
constructing public and Indian housing, and elderly and handicapped housing, and
for Federal housing assistance programs.

The Administration also proposes a freeze in the ''fair market rent'' for the
largest low-income rental-assistance program, Section 8, and elimination of that
program's annual inflation adjustment. If you are asking yourself how the
Department of Housing and Urban Development can freeze a ''fair market rent'' at
the previous year's level and still call it ''fair,'' then you are beginning to
understand what housing advocates are up against. These two proposals hit
particularly close to home, as more than 2,000 tenants in my district benefit
from the Section 8 program. The Administration's one concrete initiative, a
voucher program to aid approximately 50,000 families, is hopelessly flawed
because it incorrectly posits the existence of an adequate supply of cheap
rental housing.

As my colleague, Representative Barney Frank, chairman of the Subcommittee on
Employment and Housing has said, ''I think what H.U.D. has done here has been to
adopt the George Aiken strategy'' -referring to the former longtime Republican
Senator from Vermont -''which he took with regard to the Vietnam War. They have
solved the housing shortage by declaring victory and withdrawing.''

H.U.D. housing assistance funds have been cut 64 percent since 1981. We are in
no position to declare victory and walk away. There is little light at the end
of this tunnel. And, until this Administration takes a leadership role, that
little light grows dimmer and dimmer. THOMAS J. DOWNEY Member of Congress, 2d
Dist., N.Y.

Washington, March 17, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTERLETTER

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 27, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW HANDBOOK ON V.A. BENEFITS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 128 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 26


The latest edition of the Veterans Administration's benefits handbook has been
issued, with updated information on programs and services.

The 87-page booklet ''Federal Benefits for Veterans and Dependents'' sells for
$1.75 and can be obtained from the Superintendent of Documents, United States
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402.

The booklet outlines such benefits as medical care, education, pensions,
insurance, home loans, job training and burial assistance. It also gives
information on medical benefits for veterans exposed to Agent Orange and
radiation, and for those suffering from stress disorders.

Addresses and phone numbers of all V.A. offices, medical centers, national
cemeteries and Vietnam veterans counseling centers are listed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 27, 1986, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RUSSELL F. HARNEY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 26, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 118 words

DATELINE: CHARLESTON, S.C., March 26


Russell Francis Harney, a retired Navy captain who was in charge of daily news
briefings in Saigon in the Vietnam War and more recently was associate editor of
The News and Courier in Charleston, died at home Tuesday of cancer. He was 54
years old.

He was assigned to Stuttgart, West Germany, in 1975 as director of public
affairs for the United States military in Europe, North Africa and the Middle
East.

Since retiring from the Navy in 1978, Mr. Harney was an editorial writer and
later associate editior of The Evening Post.

Mr. Harney, who was born in Worcester, Mass., graduated from the Naval Academy
in 1953 and earned a master's degree in journalism in 1968 from the University
of Wisconsin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 28, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NAVY USED NEW ELECTRONIC TACTICS AGAINST LIBYA THAT PROTECTED PILOTS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1378 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 27


In its air attacks on Libyan missile sites and naval craft, the Navy has used
new tactics that military analysts in and out of Government said today had
enhanced the safety of its pilots without reducing the effectiveness of its
firepower.

In the clashes around the Gulf of Sidra, the analysts said, the Navy used
''standoff'' tactics, with pilots staying away from their targets and firing
guided missiles at military installations. They also depended more on
electronics to pinpoint these targets than the Navy had in the past.

The tactics had been developed in the wake of criticism of the performance of
Navy fighter planes in Lebanon in 1983 from people within and outside Navy
aviation, including Secretary of the Navy John F. Lehman, himself a reserve
aviator.

In Lebanon, Navy aircraft flew to their targets and dove to drop bombs on enemy
forces near civilian areas. The tactics were like those used more than a decade
before in Vietnam.

Electronics Play Key Role

In the attacks in Lebanon, electronics did not play much of a role, the analysts
said.

But over the Gulf of Sidra, electronics played a key role in enabling American
aircraft to evade missiles fired at them and to hit the Libyan radar
installations. The Navy flew Prowler aircraft packed with electronics to
determine, or ''steal,'' Libyan radar frequencies so American missiles could
ride the beam down to the Libyan radar site and destroy it.

In addition, the Prowlers jammed Libyan radar scopes so operators could not
locate American aircraft, and they scrambled Libyan communications. They emitted
false radar signals to deceive Libyan ground controllers, making them shoot away
from Navy planes.

Electronic sensors aboard Navy planes warned pilots when they were being
''painted'' by Libyan radar and when missiles had been fired at them, permitting
them to dive or make sharp turns to evade the rising missiles.

In sum, the advantage of the electronic warfare and the standoff tactics was
that Navy aviators were safer. The Navy has said no flyers or aircraft were lost
over the Gulf of Sidra. In Lebanon, two Navy planes were shot down by
surface-to-air missiles, with one flyer killed, one captured and one escaping by
parachute.

Targets Couldn't Be Seen

But the disadvantage of the Gulf of Sidra operation, the analysts said, was that
targets could not be seen while they were under attack. Standoff tactics could
not have been used, they said, if the Navy had been ordered to hit targets close
to civilian areas. In such cases, the pilots would have been ordered to view the
targets first.

After the losses in Lebanon, critics asserted that the Navy had used outmoded
tactics and weapons.

That led to new training in which standoff weapons and tactics have been
emphasized, naval officers said. Much of the training has taken plan at the
Fallon Naval Air Station in Nevada.

Over the Gulf of Sidra, Grumman EA-6B Prowler electronics planes played vital
roles throughout the engagement. They first flew well away from Libyan radar
sites, where they could pick up radar frequencies and changes in frequency made
by the Libyans.

That information was transmitted to the aircraft carriers America, Coral Sea and
Saratoga and given to weapons officers, who would fly aboard Vought A-7 Corsair
attack planes armed with HARM, or high-speed anti-radiation, missiles.

When the Corsairs launched their attacks 10 to 12 miles from the Libyan radar
installations at the town of Sidra, the HARM missiles locked onto the Libyan
radar beam and followed it at supersonic speed toward the ground. Each of the
four missiles fired will cost $231,000 to replace in 1987.

If the Libyans changed radar frequencies while the Harm was on its way, the
missile's sensors picked that up and its computer ordered the missile's radar to
switch to the same frequency. When the missile hit the target, 145 pounds of
high explosive shattered the radar dish.

That was confirmed, according to Pentagon officials, by satellite photographs
taken after the second attack on the radar site at Sidra. They said no Navy
reconnaissance planes flew over Libya. With the radar out, the Libyans could not
longer fire missiles. When the Libyans prepared to fire SAM-5 missiles at Navy
planes, the analysts said, the Prowlers sent signals that gave false targets.
Those signals were also read by radar in the SAM-5 missiles, sending them to
explode harmlessly in the sky or to fall into the sea.

In addition, the Prowlers jammed Libyan radar scopes on the ground so operators,
instead of seeing symbols that represented American aircraft, would see blank,
fuzzed or all-white screens. Communications between the radar dishes and the
control center were also jammed.

Meanwhile, in the sky, electronic sensors in all Navy aircraft warned pilots
when they had been spotted by Libyan radar and when missiles had been fired at
them. To evade, the pilots twisted and turned to reduce their own radar profiles
and to avoid showing their tail pipes to missiles that might be heat-seekers.

The military analysts said that evading the SAM-5 was not difficult for agile
Navy aircraft because the Soviet missile was designed in the early 1960's as a
long-range, high-altitude missile intended to shoot down less maneuverable
planes, such as the American B-52 bomber. The SAM-5 was not designed to follow
twisting fighters.

To attack Libyan naval vessels, all of which are small, the Navy armed Grumman
A-6 Intruder attack planes with Harpoon missiles, which are launched from low
levels, drop to skim the surface and then pitch up to dive on the target. From
the air, they can hit a ship over 100 miles away after having been guided by an
inertial navigation device and then by homing radar as they near the target.

The A-6's also dropped ''Rockeye'' cluster bombs, each loaded with 247 small
warheads intended to pierce armor. After the Intruders fired Harpoons, they
closed on the target to drop the Rockeyes, which damaged and probably sank a
Soviet-built Libyan corvette armed with surface-to-air and surface-to-surface
missiles.

While those engagements were being fought at relatively low levels, Grumman F-14
Tomcats and McDonnell Douglas F-18 Hornets maintained a high-altitude patrol
over the gulf. They were assisted by Grumman E2-C Hawkeyes, which are
radar-equipped planes that could have spotted Libyan fighters had they risen to
challenge the Navy planes.

But naval officers here said no Libyan planes were seen over the gulf after the
fighting started, presumably because they would have gotten in the way of the
Libyan missile shots. Two Libyan jets were shot down over the gulf by F-14's in
a brief fight in 1981.

When the cruiser Yorktown, which is equipped with the advanced Aegis system of
sensors, computers and fire control devices, spotted a Libyan fast-attack craft
approaching in the dark, it fired two Harpoon missiles with unknown results.
Navy Reviewing the Results The Navy at first said the Libyan craft had come
within 10 miles of the cruiser, which was well within the Libyan ship's missile
range. The Libyan ship was spotted when it turned on its radar.

The Navy also said at first that the Libyan ship had been sunk. Today, however,
naval officers said the incident was being reviewed and the details of what
happened were not clear.

Not much has been said about whatever went on under the seas in and around the
Gulf of Sidra because the Navy rarely discloses submarine operations. So far as
is known, none of the six Libyan Foxtrot-class submarines, which were obtained
from the Soviet Union, put to sea.

In normal operations, each of the American aircraft carriers would be screened
by two to four nuclear-powered submarines. Thus a safe presumption would be that
the American fleet included at least six submarines.

In normal practice, the submarines would have positioned themselves so they
could have detected and torpedoed any submarines that approached the carriers.
Reports from Europe said Soviet submarines in the Mediterranean stayed well
clear of the Sixth Fleet so as not to be mistaken for Libyan submarines.

In addition, the Yorktown and two other Navy ships that entered the Gulf of
Sidra are equipped with advanced anti-submarine sensors and weapons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: diagram

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 28, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Kemp Shows a Film

BYLINE: By Wayne King and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 136 words


Representative Jack F. Kemp sponsored a showing in the Rayburn House Office
Building Tuesday night of a film made by Accuracy in Media, the conservative
organization headed by Reed J. Irvine that frequently complains of what it sees
as liberal bias in news coverage. The film, ''Television's Vietnam: The Impact
of Media,'' is narrated by Charlton Heston.

Does this mean that Mr. Kemp, an undeclared candidate for the 1988 Republican
Presidential nomination, endorses the overall campaign of Accuracy in Media? His
press secretary, John Buckley, replied: ''The Congressman is one of the world's
strongest supporters of accuracy, small 'a,' in media, small 'm.' He is a friend
of Reed Irvine and thinks he does some good work in analyzing trends in the
media, but it's not an organization he's working with.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 28, 1986, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: CAST CHANGES IN 'AUNT DAN'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1028 words


AT the beginning of Wallace Shawn's ''Aunt Dan and Lemon,'' a sickly but
terribly polite young woman known as Lemon addresses us, ''the dear audience,''
from her London parlor and promises ''a special treat - a night at the
theater.'' It's the only time the audience can relax with the assurance that Mr.
Shawn is in sync with the customary order of things theatrical. The next two
hours bring us a rude play in which incidents of murder and raunchy sex
intermingle with monologues about economic Darwinism in England, the role of
menial labor in industrialized nations and the moral imperatives of Henry
Kissinger's foreign policy during the Vietnam War. The last time we see Lemon,
she is no longer quite so endearing. In the same English tea-party cadences of
her initial greeting, she defends the crimes of Nazi Germany.

No wonder that ''Aunt Dan and Lemon,'' one of the few long-running serious
American plays of the season, has also been a hotly debated and frequently
misunderstood work. That notoriety won't dissipate with the installation of a
new and excellent all-American cast - succeeding the previous Anglo-American one
- in Max Stafford-Clark's staging at the Public Theater.

The recasting - which requires the production's two new stars, Pamela Reed and
Kathy Whitton Baker, to stretch themselves well beyond type - brings inevitable
shifts in nuance. The terrific Miss Reed matches her predecessor, Linda Hunt, in
gravelly wit and surpasses her in creating a complete emotional profile for Aunt
Dan. Miss Baker (of the original ''Fool for Love'') is also good, although she
works a shade too hard to achieve the ethereal nature of the mesmerizing first
Lemon, Kathryn Pogson. To a repeat visitor, all that's noticeably missing from
''Aunt Dan'' are the hilarious cameo appearances that the playwright himself
contributed the first time around.

Mr. Shawn's writing still seems among the most original to be found in a recent
American play. That originality, of course, accounts for the controversy. Mr.
Shawn has thrown away many of the crutches of realistic playwriting in ''Aunt
Dan'': He veers constantly in tone (from surrealistically comic to mournful to
morbid), is longer on speeches than plot, and refuses to offer those
intellectual resolutions that allow us to go home with the comfort that all the
world's problems have been tidily settled for a night. (The absence of
ideological or moral closure is why even the play's detractors can't stop
talking about it.) By leaving ''Aunt Dan'' open-ended, Mr. Shawn has left
himself open to accusations of giving a forum to Nazi apologists, of defending
the Vietnam War and of slyly attempting to slur Henry Kissinger.

The playwright is innocent of all these charges. He is guilty of having written
a mordant comedy for those who really listen in the theater - as opposed to
those who hear only what they want to hear. ''Aunt Dan'' is about how the big
lies - the lies that lead to a Nazi Germany, the lies that promote any poisonous
political movement or idea - can be created and spread even in supposedly
civilized societies. Mr. Shawn's dramatic method, not as naive as it looks, is
itself a microcosmic demonstration of how that frightening process works.

The play's premise is as simple as its intentions are sophisticated. ''Aunt Dan
and Lemon'' is a memory piece in which the adult Lemon recounts her childhood
infatuation with one of her parents' best friends, a brilliant, American-born
Oxford don affectionately nicknamed Aunt Dan. With a Jean Brodie-like magnetism
(both sensual and cerebral), Dan convinces her young, worshipful charge that
Kissinger is a prayerful martyr, that journalists are ''filthy, slimy worms''
and that revolutionaries are the creations of Berkeley and the Sorbonne. Dan
also introduces Lemon to her swinging London pals of the 1960's - a group of
money-mad and sexually indiscriminate bon vivants.

Dan is a clever, articulate advocate for her beliefs and hedonistic private
behavior. But there may well be holes in her logic - false analogies that Mr.
Shawn insists that we smoke out ourselves. The intellectual corner-cutting
increases when Lemon grows up and starts to think up her own warped variations
on her mentor's syllogisms. By the time Lemon is defending the Nazis, we've
either uncovered the sleight-of-hand in her specious argument or not. To the
extent that Lemon outwits us, we begin to see just how the smartest thugs of
history have persuaded their educated constituents to rationalize and
countenance immoral national behavior.

As it's easy to understand why ''Aunt Dan'' has surprised those who expect
political plays to be either polemics or debates, so it becomes clear why Mr.
Shawn has affronted both the doctrinaire left and right. The only person in
''Aunt Dan'' who even attempts to counter its title characters' beliefs is
Lemon's mother (Ellen Parker) - and she does so with vague appeals to the heart.
Such feelings fall between the cracks of most ideological debate, and the mother
is quickly silenced as a mushy-headed fool. But if the play's brainier
characters have no use for such bleeding-heart sentimentality - even, pointedly,
when it's administered by a nurse at a death bed - Mr. Shawn knows that
compassion, among individuals and nations alike, is what sometimes must rescue
the world from the charnel house. ''Aunt Dan and Lemon'' continues to provoke
the audience in new and shocking ways so that we might reawaken to an old,
unfashionable but possibly urgent cause. Birth of the Big Lie AUNT DAN AND
LEMON, by Wallace Shawn; directed by Max Stafford-Clark; scenery by Peter
Hartwell; costumes by Jennifer Cook; lighting by Christopher Toulmin and Gerard
P. Bourcier; sound by John del Nero and Andy Pink; associate director, Simon
Curtis; associate producer, Jason Steven Cohen. A New York Shakespeare
Festival/Royal Court Theater Production, presented by Joseph Papp. At the
Public/Martinson Hall, 425 Lafayette Street. LemonKathy Whitton Baker Mother and
June and FloraEllen Parker Father and Freddie and JasperPaul Perri Aunt
DanPamela Reed Andy and MartyLarry Pine MindyMargaret Whitton RayKenneth Ryan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Pamela Reed (Carol Rosegg)

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 29, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AID TO CONTRAS: CONGRESS EDGES TOWARD PACKAGE

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1017 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 28


Congress, although wrestling with the ghost of Vietnam, seems to be moving
toward giving President Reagan the military aid he wants for the insurgents
fighting to oust the Nicaraguan Government.

The debate Thursday in the Senate resounded with echoes of Vietnam. Mr. Reagan's
nightmare of the domino theory - Central America's falling like a row of
dominoes unless Nicaragua was stopped from spreading revolution -was pitted
against the critics' nightmare of American servicemen fighting and dying for an
uncertain and questionable cause.

The Senate backed Mr. Reagan, 53 to 47.

''That the President will get some military aid for the contras has been a
foregone conclusion from the beginning,'' said Norman J. Ornstein, a
Congressional analyst at the American Enterprise Institute. ''Members of
Congress ultimately want to protect their flanks while making their points.''

Believed to Be Matter of Time

He and several legislators and their aides said they believed it was just a
matter of time and more talk before majorities in both houses attained a formula
for backing Mr. Reagan's $100 million aid package to the anti-Sandinista rebels,
known as contras.

Only the most secure politically and the most committed ideologically are likely
to resist at least some military aid, in the judgment of many of those engaged
in this legislative contest.

As some of them will acknowledge privately, it is almost impossible for most
legislators not to agree to something in the face of the nightmarish
consequences Mr. Reagan says the country faces if no aid is provided.

Even some who oppose aid seem to believe there is a possibility that Mr. Reagan
might, just might, be right about the domino theory in Central America even
though the countries of Southeast Asia did not fall like dominoes after the loss
of South Vietnam.

Political pressures are pushing mainly in the direction of more aid -especially
military aid. Enough Democrats who said they either believed in the aid or did
not want to be branded as soft on Communism joined with the bulk of Republicans
to make a majority. By all accounts, the Sandinistas contributed significantly
to this outcome by their most recent raid into Honduras, but perhaps mostly by
lying about it.

Votes on Two Amendments

The political balance showed up less in the final 53-to-47 tally than in the
votes on two amendments. One to ban military and humanitarian aid was defeated,
74 to 24. The other, to approve only $30 million in humanitarian aid for the
time being, lost by 67 to 33.

In the view of many on Capitol Hill, the only thing that would derail the
Administration's request for all or part of the $70 million in military aid
would be quick and mounting public fright that American troops might actually be
sent into combat in Central America. That specter, the opposite of the Reagan
dominoes, was exactly what many Democratic critics were trying to conjure up in
the debate Thursday.

Thus, the debaters squared off on Thursday, much as their predecessors argued
matters out about Vietnam two decades ago. Opponents of aid hammered away at the
parallels between Nicaragua and Vietnam, at the idea of walking slowly into a
quagmire and called instead for negotiations. Aid proponents responded that
negotiations would get nowhere without more force and that the aid was a
substitute for American troops.

Senator Dale L. Bumpers, Democrat of Arkansas, recalled one of the most dramatic
moments in the Vietnam debate, the 1964 vote giving President Johnson
wide-ranging authority to use force, apparently after a North Vietnamese attack
on American ships in the Gulf of Tonkin.

Mr. Bumpers said he remembered ''my predecessor in this body, Senator
Fulbright,'' referring to J. William Fulbright, thought of his support for the
Tonkin Gulf resolution was a ''fatal mistake.''

Comparisons to Vietnam

Mr Bumpers added, ''A hundred million dollars in the scheme of things around
here is not very much money, just as sending 50 military advisers to Vietnam in
the early 1960's seemed innocent enough.''

Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, quoted a long list of promises
about avoiding a ''wider war'' in Vietnam made and broken years ago by past
administrations.

Senator Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana, the chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee, came back with the standard argument of past
administrations. ''I simply fail to see, in common sense terms,'' he said, ''why
there will be any vigor in the negotiations whatsoever without the military aid
or threat of such aid coming to the contras.''

And the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, lashed out, as Vietnam
proponents once did. A vote against the aid, he said, ''amounts to an expression
of faith in the Sandinistas.''

Judging from interviews with some Senate aides, it was difficult for them to be
sure whether their bosses actually believed in the nightmares they were
conjuring up. As Mr. Ornstein put it: ''A number of Democrats don't believe
American troops will be sent in, but they feel it's their best argument, and the
more thoughtful ones also are worred that the Administration has no real
strategy.''

The House, which voted to oppose aid to the contras two weeks ago, 222 to 210,
will shortly take up the issue again. The prevailing view there seems to be that
some form of aid will be approved at that time and that some military aid will
then be agreed upon in the conference meeting between the Senate and the House.

Apart from those in both houses who are firmly for or against the aid, there is
a more somber feeling being expressed in the corridors, and sometimes in formal
debate as well. This was captured Thursday by Senator Dave Durenberger,
Republican of Minnesota, who reminded his colleagues of the real problem they
faced.

''We should not forget that whatever decision that we make today will cost
Nicaraguan lives.'' he said. ''If we approve the President's request, many
innocent and a few guilty people will die. If we deny this request, much the
same will occur.''

It was just so with Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 29, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Schedules Return Of Remains of 21 to U.S.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 102 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 28


Vietnam has agreed to turn over to the United States, on April 10 in Hanoi, at
least 21 sets of remains thought to be those of American servicemen,
Administration sources said today.

Vietnamese and American officials have also agreed to hold another series of
technical talks next month on the search for Americans missing since the Vietnam
War, the sources said.

American officials had said the Vietnamese disclosed in February that they had
the remains of at least 21 people to turn over. Washington had proposed
receiving them on April 1, but the Vietnamese did not accept that date, the
sources said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 29, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Dept. of Hostilities

BYLINE: By Wayne King and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 320 words


Once the White House had decided to send the Sixth Fleet into the Gulf of Sidra
and risk a military confrontation with Libya, one question was how to do it
without setting in motion the provisions of the War Powers Resolution of 1973.
And so, State Department officials say, lawyers there and at the Pentagon were
prepared when the House Foreign Affairs Committee complained about not being
consulted.

The War Powers Resolution, passed over a Presidential veto, was a reaction to
the undeclared war in Vietnam and was intended to limit Presidential discretion
in sending American troops into hostilities without consent of Congress. Opposed
by every President since it was enacted, it says the President must consult with
Congress before introducing the armed forces ''into hostilities or into
situations where imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the
circumstances.''

The Foreign Affairs Committee complained in a letter to the White House that
sending the Sixth Fleet into the Gulf of Sidra, fully expecting a military
reaction from Libya, constituted just such a situation.

But yesterday, in a letter to the committee signed by William L. Ball, assistant
to the President, the Administration said it did not believe that ''the
resolution was intended to require consultation before conducting naval
maneuvers in international waters or air space'' - an interpretation that would
eliminate roughly two-thirds of the world from provisions of the resolution if
the action was characterized as ''maneuvers.''

The letter said that the question had been ''carefully considered'' and that
Administration lawyers had concluded, ''The operations did not place United
States forces into hostilities or into a situation where imminent involvement in
hostilities was clearly indicated by circumstances.''

A disgruntled committee staff member characterized the response as ''blatant
arrogance.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MARCOS'S FORTUNE: INQUIRY IN MANILA OFFERS PICTURE OF HOW IT WAS ACQUIRED

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2098 words

DATELINE: MANILA, March 29


With one of his lesser-known presidential decrees, Ferdinand E. Marcos once
ordered that a remote island in the South China Sea be made into a preserve for
African animals. It was to be a natural sanctuary, he said.

More than 120 families of poor farmers and fishermen were then forced from their
homes on the island, Calauit, 275 miles southwest of Manila, and herds of
giraffes and zebras, impala and bushbuck were imported from Kenya at Government
expense.

There they roamed the grassy plains and rolling hills undisturbed, except for
hunting parties from the presidential palace. The leading hunter, according to
an official of the new Ministry of Agriculture and Food, was Ferdinand Marcos
Jr., who flew in by helicopter.

''They turned it into a private hunting ground which we've now discovered was
costing the Government 600,000 pesos a month,'' or $30,000, said the official,
Carlos Dominguez, a deputy minister. ''It's unbelievable in a country where kids
are starving to death.''

A Small Example

The island is only one of the smaller examples of how Mr. Marcos, his family and
friends converted much of the Philippines into their personal preserve.

Some details of the Marcoses' activities were known before their flight from the
presidential palace aboard a United States helicopter on Feb. 25. But in the
last month, Government investigators have uncovered new evidence here that has
stunned Filipinos with its scope. From this evidence, it seems that hardly an
industry or a company or an angle escaped the attention of some member of the
Marcos entourage.

So far, the Government commission charged with recovering the Marcos wealth has
seized $150 million worth of property in the Philippines, including more than a
dozen companies and a number of bank accounts.

There are, in addition, 30 buildings in the Philippines that were built and
maintained at Government expense for Mr. Marcos and his wife, Imelda, according
to the commission. They range from beach resort hotels and museums to
mountaintop mansions. They sprinkle this archipelago from Mr. Marcos's home in
Luzon in the north, to Leyte, his wife's native area in the south.

Rolls-Royce and Dialysis

Customs officials have identified 400 cars that the Marcoses and their
associates imported without paying the normal 300 percent duty on foreign
automobiles. Among them were a Rolls-Royce and a Cadillac for Mrs. Marcos and
dozens of Mercedeses for her brothers and sisters.

There were also five kidney dialysis machines for Mr. Marcos that were
discovered in Malacanang, the presidential palace. The commission said they had
been taken from Manila hospitals without payment. Mr. Marcos is said to have
suffered from a degenerative kidney disease. He denied the reports.

But far more important was the Marcos business empire.

Operating with the absolute power he bestowed on himself by declaring martial
law in 1972, Mr. Marcos developed a series of techniques that were almost
guaranteed to bring a fortune to him and his associates, the material uncovered
by the commission indicates. During this same period, the Philippine economy's
growth rate was declining, and it was piling up a foreign debt of $26 billion.

Decrees and Influence

Among the instruments Mr. Marcos used were presidential decrees that exempted
favored enterprises from government audit, including the Philippine National Oil
Company, the largest firm in the country, which was run by Mr. Marcos' close
associate, Geronimo Z. Velasco. Another such enterprise was the Manila Bay
Casino, controlled by Alfredo Romualdez, a younger brother of Mrs. Marcos.
Several days after Mr. Romualdez fled with the Marcoses, $3.25 million in cash
was found in a van from the casino at his house.

There were also the judicious use of presidential influence to install Marcos
relatives in the Bureau of Internal Revenue, where they were in a position to
help family members evade taxes, investigators now say, as well as bribery to
insure that records of certain corporations vanished from the Philippine
Securities and Exchange Commission.

Even Government figures on the country's gross national product were manipulated
to forestall doubts by foreign bankers about the deteriorating economy,
economists now report.

Easy Loans, Bad Debts

Friends of the first family also found it remarkably easy to borrow huge amounts
from foreign banks; they needed only the guarantee of one of the country's
Government banks. If the firms went bankrupt, the Philippines was left holding
the debt.

Today the Development Bank of the Philippines classifies $9.59 billion as bad
loans, a figure equal to triple the national budget. Most of these are to firms
linked to Marcos associates. The National Bank of the Philippines has a list of
300 bankrupt companies to which it loaned money, ranging from hotels and textile
factories to sugar mills and petrochemical complexes.

The simplest technique of all - the takeover - may have been the most lucrative
for Mr. Marcos. When he spotted a choice business, he took a percentage of its
stock for himself, Government investigators charge. The shares could be endorsed
in blank or held on the President's behalf by a dummy company set up by one of
his friends, such as Jose Y. Campos, the head of the largest pharmaceutical firm
in the country; Rolando Gapud, a banker, or Benjamin Romualdez, his wife's
brother.

Fate of an Oil Venture

The process is illustrated by the fate of Seafront Petroleum and Mineral
Resources, one of a number of oil exploration companies that sprang up in the
mid-1970's with reports that huge oil reserves might lie in the South China Sea
off the island of Palawan.

Seafront was established in 1973 by Alfonso Yuchengco, an entrepreneur in the
insurance business. He began by buying an option on 1.5 billion shares of the
firm for $3 million, and got a promising offshore concession where, in late
1975, he began drilling for oil in partnership with Amoco and Salen, a Swedish
firm.

But in early 1976, according to a statement Mr. Yuchengco has given to the
Government commission, ''Marcos called for me and said he wanted the options
granted me by Seafront to be transferred to him or one of the companies fronted
by his cronies.'' Mr. Yuchengco was in Japan and could not be reached to
elaborate on what was in the statement.

'Signed Unwillingly'

According to Mr. Yuchengco's statement, Mr. Marcos asserted that because
Seafront's concessions ''were outside the Philippines territorial waters, he had
to give some shares to the political and military officers of the countries
surrounding the Philippines so they wouldn't cause any problems.'' The only
countries he might have been referring to were China, Vietnam or Indonesia.

In any case, the statement relates, on April 5, 1976, Mr. Yuchengco ''signed
unwillingly an assignment of option in favor of Mid-Pasig Land Development
Corp., for the consideration of one peso,'' then about 15 cents. Mid-Pasig was
controlled by Mr. Campos, who last week acknowledged to the Government
commission that he had been Mr. Marcos's secret financial adviser until 1981.

Seafront's Swedish drilling partner, Salen, had also been given an option to buy
1.278 billion shares at a cost of about $2.8 million. But before Salen could
purchase them, Mr. Marcos ''instructed'' Mr. Yuchengco to transfer the shares to
him ''for some ridiculous consideration,'' Mr. Yuchengco told the commission.

A Call From a Marcos Associate

This time the shares were turned over to Independent Realty Corporation, which
was controlled by Mr. Campos and Mr. Gapud, who took over as Mr. Marcos's chief
financial consultant in 1981.

There were still 1.8 billion shares of unissued stock in Seafront, but by now
there was feverish excitement in the Philippines over the offshore oil drilling.
During a trip to South America, Mr. Yuchengco said, he received a call from
Herminio Disini, another of Mr. Marcos's associates. Mr. Disini wanted all the
unissued shares put under the name of a company called Relcom, and he ''wanted a
reply within 24 hours or else,'' Mr. Yuchengco asserted.

This time, Mr. Yuchengco said, he received no payment at all.

A Presidential Announcement

When the first well was completed in 1976 it was found to be dry, except for
small amounts of gas. Mr. Velasco, the chairman of the Philippine National Oil
Company and Minister of Energy, reported this to Mr. Marcos, Mr. Yuchengco said.
But the next day Mr. Marcos went on national television to announce that a major
oil strike had been made and that oil was flowing from the Seafront well.

The disclosure prompted a stampede on the local stock exchanges, allowing Mr.
Disini to sell off his block of 1.8 billion shares at a profit of $9.5 million,
Mr. Yuchengco contended.

News of the sale of such a large block of stock then led to a 65 percent drop in
Seafront's price over the next few days. Mr. Marcos again went on television,
this time to announce that he had ordered an investigation into why the stock
had dropped despite his earlier announcement of an oil strike, and who had
profited.

'The Biggest Hypocrisy'

This, Mr. Yuchengco said, was ''the biggest hypocrisy of all time.''

Another key technique by which Mr. Marcos appears to have been able to siphon
off hundreds of millions or perhaps billions of dollars from the Philippine
economy was the creation of Government monopolies wherever possible. Under Mr.
Marcos's aegis, the country's two major export products, sugar and coconut oil,
were both turned into virtual monopolies run by associates, as were essential
imports such as oil and meat.

A study this week by a team from the newly reconstituted Philippine Sugar
Commission charged that as much as $1.5 billion had been drained from the sugar
business, which Mr. Marcos had put under the control of Roberto S. Benedicto, a
classmate and fraternity brother at the University of the Philippines law
school.

Mr. Benedicto also assembled a business empire of his own that included vast
sugar plantations; several sugar mills; two banks; Northern Lines, a shipping
company that carried most of the Philippines's sugar; three television stations;
a newspaper, and an insurance company, Integral Factors Corporation.

An Insurance Monopoly

Under a presidential decree, Integral Factors had a monopoly on insurance for
all Government corporations and its premiums last year were worth $25 million.

The advantage of these monopolies, a United States diplomat said, ''is that you
control everything and can earn a margin on every operation without anyone being
able to check.''

One problem for the Government commission is how to disentangle Mr. Marcos's
shares in these companies from those of his associates and other legitimate
investors.

In the last week, for instance, investigators have found that Mr. Marcos
secretly owned large portions of all three major telecommunications firms in the
country.

In 1967, when a nationalization drive Mr. Marcos fostered forced the GTE
Corporation of the United States to sell off its 26 percent share of the
Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company, the shares passed to Mr. Marcos.
Government investigators say his shares in the company, which is listed on the
American Stock Exchange, are worth more than $15 million.

Other Communications Firms

Similarly, Mr. Marcos managed to acquire 39.9 percent of the Philippines
Communications Satellite Corporation, originally a Government-owned firm. These
shares, which were held for him by front companies such as Independent Realty
and Mid-Pasig under Mr. Campos and Mr. Gapud, are worth $19.95 million,
officials say.

In addition, the president of Eastern Telecommunications Incorporated, Manuel
Nieto, said earlier this week that Mr. Marcos owns 24 percent of that firm,
worth another $4.5 million.

The stockholders of record are Cable and Wireless, a British firm, with 40
percent; Mr. Nieto with 20 percent; Mr. Benedicto, the sugar czar, with another
20 percent, and Jose Africa, Mr. Benedicto's law partner, with the remaining 20
percent. But Mr. Africa, in an interview, said that he, Mr. Benedicto and Mr.
Nieto were each holding 8 percent for Mr. Marcos, who had not had to pay for his
stock.

Mr. Nieto, who had served for 10 years as Ambassador to Spain, described himself
as an ''absentee president'' who didn't know what was really happening. But when
asked whether he had resisted Mr. Marcos's efforts to acquire part of the
company, he replied: ''If you were in my place, would you have resisted?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ferdinand E. Marcos in 1976 with Geronimo Z. Velasco examining
a sample of oil (UPI)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRYING TO USE THE MILITARY AS AN INSTRUMENT OF DIPLOMACY

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 973 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WITH quick precision, President Reagan inserted American armed forces into two
complex international problems last week, demonstrating again the measured
activism with which he has tried to inch the United States out of its deep,
post-Vietnam aversion to using military power in support of foreign policy. But
the two moves, against Libya and Nicaragua, were so fleeting, so low in risk for
American servicemen and so tangential to the basic conflicts that they also
showed the severe restrictions on America's power.

It is still not very far to the outer limit of this country's tolerance for
military entanglement. Mr. Reagan stepped across that line by sending American
troops to Lebanon in 1982 and 1983, but was flexible enough to pull back when
the involvement grew protracted, costly and ineffectual. He stayed within the
limit with the invasion of Grenada in 1983, where the brevity of the fight and
the clear-cut victory satisfied his public's penchant for happy endings. Last
week, too, the engagements were brief and painless for the United States, with
forces of the Mediterranean Sixth Fleet hitting Libyan missile sites and patrol
boats for two days running, and United States Army helicopters ferrying Honduran
troops into a border area to counter an incursion by the army units of
neighboring Nicaragua. Not a single American was hurt.

But few serious conflicts have neat conclusions. And judging from the worried
observations of many Congressmen as the Senate narrowly appoved Mr. Reagan's
request for $100 million in aid to Nicaraguan rebels, the specter of an
indefinite, losing military commitment continues to revive the trauma of the war
in Vietnam 11 years after the fall of Saigon. ''That is the issue I think my
people respond to more than anything else - Vietnam,'' said Representative David
E. Bonior, Democrat of Minnesota.

The Use of Muscle

Since World War II, the United States has passed through periods of
assertiveness and hesitation about using its muscle. In seeing military force as
a tool of foreign policy, President Reagan is more in the mold of Presidents
Truman, Kennedy and Johnson than of Presidents Eisenhower, Ford and Carter. The
Eisenhower years were marked by caution; the Nixon years began with intensive
attacks on North Vietnam and ended in withdrawal and defeat; the Ford and Carter
Administrations inherited the wounds of the war and the resulting sense of
impotence, and rarely used the military. Now, the Reagan Administration finds
the country in a phase of transition, perhaps to an earlier mood.

''It is a reversion,'' said Richard K. Betts, a military analyst at the
Brookings Institution, a movement toward a pre-Vietnam frame of mind in which
''intervention and moderate use of American military power were quite common,''
he observed. ''People want to be strong and be astride the globe, but they don't
want to spill their blood and get into entanglements.''

An awareness of such ambivalence may explain why the Reagan Administration used
the tactics it did last week to gain the instant political support needed for
rapid military decisions. In both the Libyan and Nicaraguan cases, longstanding
problems were highlighted and made to seem like extraordinary events. The
Nicaraguan assault on rebel bases in Honduras, coming amid Congressional debate
on aid to the insurgents, was described by the White House and the State
Department as the largest and deepest penetration of Honduran territory ever,
but a senior American intelligence official minimized it as rather routine,
similar in size and locale to numerous other incursions.

Lessons of Lebanon

In the Libyan case, White House aides asserted that the show of force was
prompted by Libyan agents' having ''pinpointed'' American diplomats for possible
attack. But Administration experts on terrorism said there was nothing new in
the Libyan surveillance of American embassies and personnel, a constant concern
for years. Formally, the Administration sent the fleet into the contested Gulf
of Sidra to exercise navigational rights. But officials calculated that Libya
would shoot and provide cause for retaliation that would punish Libya for its
support of terrorism. (Qaddafi says he won, page 2.) Not that officials take
lightly the threat of Libyan-sponsored terrorism or the forward posture of the
burgeoning Nicaraguan army. But a superpower's military force is a blunt
instrument, not a stiletto. It is not fine enough a tool to fight terrorism. It
does not work well against nationalistic insurgencies, as the Soviet Union has
learned in Afghanistan. And the more often military power is used in futility,
the less formidable it seems.

In Lebanon, the projection of military force without sufficient political
commitment from the American people proved damaging. As long as the American
battleship New Jersey was steaming silently off the coast, it was a threatening
image of power. When it fired its huge guns, mostly missing, Lebanese militiamen
relaxed and the threat shrank. Finally, the October 1983 truck bombing of the
Marine headquarters in Beirut, in which 241 servicemen died, replaced the New
Jersey as a symbol of American power, or the lack of it.

''The threat of force is very important to diplomacy, including the use of
force,'' said Mark Falcoff, a specialist on Latin America at the American
Enterprise Institute. ''Reagan knows there's a limit to what he can do without
consensus.'' In his weekly radio talk yesterday, the President said, ''American
power, as long as it used wisely and justly, is an undying symbol of hope for
oppressed peoples around the world.'' Since Mr. Reagan also speaks with
patriotic fervor about the dangers posed to American security by such countries
as Libya and Nicaragua, he forces himself to back his words with action from
time to time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Libya; Photo of the Carrier Saratoga off the coast of Libya;
Photo of Libyan vessel hit by U.S. missile in the Gulf of Sidra; Photo of Col
Maummar el Qaddafi

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN AND THE PHILIPPINES: A WINNING STYLE

BYLINE: By Leslie H. Gelb; Leslie H. Gelb is The Times's national security
correspondent based in Washington.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 31, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2566 words


TWO EVENTS OF FAR-REACHING SIGNIFIGANCE for American foreign policy occurred in
the last several weeks. One was the Reagan Administration's role in the peaceful
transition of power in the Philippines. The other was President Reagan's
proclamation of support for ''democratic revolutions'' and human rights. But as
with any success or policy change, the risks of misunderstanding and
misapplication are enormous.

The success of the American role in removing Ferdinand E. Marcos without
bloodshed lay in President Reagan's style and his awareness of the limits of
American power. But it is questionable whether this style - willingness to
delegate to knowledgeable subordinates, restraint, patience and realism in
recognizing a losing horse - can also work in bringing about a nuclear arms
treaty with Moscow or a Middle East peace agreement. And it should be remembered
that the part the United States played was relatively minor, despite its
importance, and reflects a triumph of style rather than policy.

Mr. Reagan and his top aides, apparently realizing that they had not addressed
the broader policy issue in their actions on the Philippines, followed up with
the President's March 14 message to Congress. Its importance was seen as
establishing some balance in Administration policy on human rights. There would
be no more double standard, it seemed to say, in tolerating dictatorships of the
right but not of the left. And yet, this message is seen by many Administration
diplomats as well as critics as being packed with pitfalls: in confusing
anti-Communists with democrats, in fogging over profound differences between
political revolution and socioeconomic revolution; and in possibly misusing
human rights as a cover for covert military aid without a clear sense of policy.

Virtually everyone grants that Corazon C. Aquino and her backers deserve the
lion's share of credit for the unseating of Mr. Marcos; that they handled
themselves with skill and integrity. It seems equally clear, however, that if
Washington had approached the situation as it often has in similar situations in
the past, by getting too closely involved, it could have made things worse.

Liberals and moderates generally talk about the limits of American power in the
world, yet often act as if nothing were beyond Washington's control.
Conservatives usually proclaim the great deeds that can be done with American
power abroad, yet often act with great restraint.

The historical record indicates that Mr. Reagan's predecessors, from President
John F. Kennedy on, would probably have been far more intrusive than he in a
situation involving an eruption of popular dissatisfaction with a dictatorship.
''Other Presidents and other Secretaries of State would have been in there hands
and feet, trying to micromanage every move, making com-mitments and involving
themselves in machinations from which they could not untie themselves,'' said a
veteran American diplomat. That was certainly the case with Mr. Kennedy's
handling of the overthrow of Ngo Dinh Diem in South Vietnam in 1963 and
President Jimmy Carter's efforts in Iran and Nicaragua and, in fact, Mr.
Reagan's own immersion in Lebanon in 1982. But this time, this President stayed
above the daily fray and resisted the temptation to manage the minutiae of
fast-unfolding events. He did not try to impose Washington's wishes on Manila's
realities. He did not seek to engineer who would succeed whom or conspire with
the players. He was thus able to roll with events.

One can just imagine some previous administrations, for example, trying to
manipulate events in Manila either by sticking with Mr. Marcos publicly far
longer than Mr. Reagan did, or by secretly negotiating with a Marcos crony to
assume power instead of Mrs. Aquino, or trying to promote the military
alternative to Mr. Marcos and Mrs. Aquino while saying publicly that Mrs. Aquino
was the only choice.

Mr. Reagan, however, relied heavily on midlevel officials rather than keeping
all important decisions at the top. But he always made the major decisions. This
meant that people familiar with the country and the people, such as Michael H.
Armacost, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs and former Ambassador
to Manila, were actually involved in decision making. That might not sound like
much, except when it is remembered that administrations in the recent past
hardly ever did it this way. Also, because many of these experts were
nonpolitical, they helped Mr. Reagan garner bipartisan support. Above all, they
reinforced Mr. Reagan's own instincts to remain as flexible as possible.

Mr. Reagan resisted pressure from both American liberals and conservatives to
take sides. There was one major blunder, when he said that both sides had
cheated in the Feb. 7 presidential elections. But he quickly recovered, kept his
lines of communication open to Mr. Marcos, and did not desert him until the end.
Thus, he was the only one at the end with the credibility to tell Mr. Marcos
that he must not use force against the Aquino camp and that he had to leave
quietly. In the last 10 days, he also leaned sufficiently toward the Aquino camp
so that they knew he was helping. He let them know that they would not have to
get rid of American military presence in order to depose Mr. Marcos.

And whatever his loyalty to Mr. Marcos, in the end he did desert the dictator.
That is no small matter, given the historical propensity of American Presidents
to go down to the bitter end with such dictators. Mr. Reagan waited and waited,
so that it appeared that Mr. Marcos had fallen without any push from the United
States.

An essential ingredient in doing this was his standing as a conservative. Unlike
a liberal or moderate Democrat or moderate Republican, Mr. Reagan seemed totally
safe from attacks by the right wing, if he needed to get tough with Mr. Marcos.
As Robert S. Strauss, former chairman of the Democratic Party put it: ''Reagan
didn't have to worry about being attacked by Reagan.''

Nevertheless, it seems highly doubtful that this style for dealing with rapidly
moving crises in the third world would translate well to other places and
issues.

William G. Hyland, a moderate conservative who is editor of Foreign Affairs,
doubts, for example, whether Mr. Reagan's style ''can achieve an arms-control
breakthrough.'' This calls for negotiations and compromise, something Mr. Reagan
was not compelled to do in the Philippines. Nor as Mr. Hyland and others with
experi-ence in such negotiations know, can Presidents stimulate these
compromises by delegating to subordinates. That is a recipe for deadlock.
Compromises, and there are scores of them in any arms treaty, can be made only
at the White House and with the active participation of the President.

Nor can Mr. Reagan count on events to save the day for him in Moscow as they did
in Manila. Soviet leaders are unlikely simply to come around to the
Administration's view. The Soviet Union, as Mr. Reagan himself often says, is a
power at least equal to that of the United States.

And diplomats familiar with the Middle East do not believe that the situation
there will mature by itself to the point where Washington can then intercede to
pull things together. Past Middle East agreements were the product of daily
diplomatic slogging. That is how Henry A. Kissinger did it in 1973, and how
President Carter achieved the Camp David accords in 1978.

The crisis in the Philippines required patience. Diplomatic breakthroughs demand
high-level action and a genius and will for finding compromises.

And, while Mr. Reagan's style was highly successful in the last weeks of the
Marcos reign, his policy up to that point contributed only marginally to the
outcome.

In his first four years, Mr. Reagan embraced the dicta-tor. That was very much
in keeping with the American tradition of letting Mr. Marcos do pretty much
whatever he wanted. It was assumed that doing something about his blatant abuses
and corruption would endanger the two critical American bases in that country.
In the middle of one of the Presidential debates of 1984, Mr. Reagan said that
the only alternative to Marcos was Communism.

But around the turn of the year he allowed his subordinates to begin a policy of
distancing the Administration from Mr. Marcos. By this point, it was widely felt
in the Administration that his regime was fundamentally corrupt, and as such was
the prime cause of deep economic stagnation and the growth of the Communist
in-surgency. This altered Reagan policy had two major elements: calling for
reforms and calling for elections.

The pressure for reforms never amounted to much. The midlevel officials who were
running the policy understood full well that Mr. Marcos was unlikely to
institute any changes that would undercut his own power any more than any other
dictator would have. The one accomplishment of publicly demanding reforms was to
reinforce the distancing policy in the eyes of some Filipinos.

As for pressure to hold elections, here, too, officials knew that as long as Mr.
Marcos monopolized force and money, he would control the results. He was so
confident of being able to do just that, that it was he and not Washington who
came up with the idea of holding a snap election in February. His plan was to
win, restore legitimacy by American standards and in America's eyes, and get
those pesky midlevel officials off his back. But the plan backfired.

In large measure because of the Philippine experience, we now have a new Reagan
approach, as set forth in his message to Congress: human rights and democratic
revolution. From many accounts, it seems that Mr. Reagan and his top aides were
so pleased by the favorable reaction to his role in Haiti and the Philippines
that he reformulated his human rights policy and gave it a new emphasis.

The March 14 message said: ''The American people believe in human rights and
oppose tyranny in whatever form, whether of the left or the right.'' He had
never said it this way before. And while senior Administration officials
insisted in ensuing days that this was nothing new, it was, at least in
emphasis. In fact, the text of the document was provided to The New York Times
the day before its release because the White House wanted to call attention to
its newness and importance.

The statement was something the Administration at once feared and loved. They
feared its unsettling effects on friendly anti-Communist dictatorships such as
South Korea, Indonesia and Taiwan, countries that it was felt did not possess
the same viable middle-class democratic alternative that existed in the
Philippines. They did not want to set loose uncertain forces in these places.
And the statement went out of its way to argue that these coun-tries, the
dictatorships of the right, might still be reformable peacefully and did not
represent threats to regional peace. It was still stressed that the so-called
''Leninist regimes'' were ''unique'' threats. But the fact remains that by
referring to them all as tyrannies, the statement established a kind of moral
equivalency.

That was the price the Administration had to pay to move toward its primary goal
- building support at home for more covert military aid to ''freedom fighters''
who oppose Soviet-backed regimes in Angola, Afghanistan and Cambodia, and for a
new $100 million covert-aid program to the contras fighting the Sandinista
regime in Nicaragua in particular. The Administration was saying to the public
and Congress, if you want to promote democratic revolutions in right-wing
countries, you must also be prepared to do so for left-wing states. The means
should be different, to be sure: Bullets for the left and ballots for the right.
But the will to take on this challenge across the board has to be there.

The Administration did not seek to turn this statement into a ''Reagan
Doctrine.'' Officials themselves said they did not want to be bound by any such
rigid formula. In the words of the message: ''The drive for national freedom and
popular rule takes different forms in different countries,'' and different means
had to be applied in different cases.

Nevertheless, the self-described purpose of the message was to formulate an
overall strategy for combatting Soviet-backed regimes around the world. There is
little disagreement with the goal of trying to help the forces of democracy in
these countries; that is generally viewed as being in the finest tradition of
the United States. But, as some Administration officials privately acknowledge,
there is much that is potentially wrong with trying to do this without taking
some cold hard realities into account.

Most in the Administration appear to understand that the term ''democratic'' in
the message to Congress is being used loosely. The Afghan rebels, for example,
are hardly democrats in any sense. But they are fighting to drive the Russians
out of their country and fighting for national independence, and that is
sufficient to merit American help, in the Administration view. As for the
contras, its leadership is dominated by supporters of the former Nicaraguan
dictator, Anastasio Somoza Debayle. And in Angola, Jonas Savimbi's quest for
power at the expense of the Marxist regime does not eradicate his own Maoist
past or present dictatorial style. Further, one could hardly depict anyone
associated with the mass murderer Pol Pot in Cambo-dia as a democrat or freedom
fighter simply because he wants to get rid of the North Vietnamese.

But there is another Administration intent that also comes close to the surface
in the message to Congress, and that is to thwart perceived Soviet expansionism
- to make Moscow pay a very high price for helping its clients, and ostensibly,
to compel Moscow and its clients to negotiate better terms with us.

It is of central importance in framing a policy to agree on the real objective.
Is it to promote democracy or to cut a good bargain with Moscow or to keep the
Russians off balance and to stop them? If the aim is to throw the Russians onto
the defensive, that can be done with a relatively small amount of aid to the
rebels and a low-level American commitment. If the purpose is to soften up
Soviet leaders for compromises, that is a bigger undertaking. It might well be
possible, for example, to bring around the Sandinistas and the Russians to an
agreement banning Russian bases and advisers from Nicaragua, or an agreement on
withdrawing Cuban troops from Angola. But forcing the Russians out of
Afghanistan or the Vietnamese from Cambodia are much bigger enterprises.

And if the Administration is going down any of these paths, it would be well to
consider the consequences for the rebels. Is support for them to be limited or
stopped in a bargain with Moscow? Are they to be ''sold out'' as were the Kurds
and many other groups over the years who were the beneficiaries of covert aid?

To set any of these nations on the road to democracy, if that is the real goal,
would require a quantum jump in American resources and commitment. And would the
Administration really trust any agreement with left-wing regimes? And can we
really expect democratic revolutions in such countries to remain democratic in
the face of massive poverty?

Until these questions are answered, all we are left with is the present success
in the Philippines, rather than a policy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Cabinet meeting (Terry Arthur/The White House); photo of
Marcos arriving in Hawaii (Sygma); photo of Filipino nun and others guarding
ballot box (Susan Meiselas/Magnum) (Page 84); photo of President Reagan
conferring with Senator Paul Laxalt (Mary-Ann Fackelman-Miner/The White House)
(Page 86)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT MEN;
A BROTHER'S MURDER

BYLINE: By BRENT STAPLES; A Brother's MurderBrent Staples is an editor of The
New York Times Book Review.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 72, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words


IT HAS BEEN MORE THAN TWO years since my telephone rang with the news that my
younger brother Blake - just 22 years old - had been murdered. The young man who
killed him was only 24. Wearing a ski mask, he emerged from a car, fired six
times at close range with a massive .44 Magnum, then fled. The two had once been
inseparable friends. A senseless rivalry - beginning, I think, with an argument
over a girlfriend - escalated from posturing, to threats, to violence, to
murder. The way the two were living, death could have come to either of them
from anywhere. In fact, the assailant had already survived multiple gunshot
wounds from an incident much like the one in which my brother lost his life.

As I wept for Blake I felt wrenched backward into events and circumstances that
had seemed light-years gone. Though a decade apart, we both were raised in
Chester, Pa., an angry, heavily black, heavily poor, industrial city southwest
of Philadelphia. There, in the 1960's, I was introduced to mortality, not by the
old and failing, but by beautiful young men who lay wrecked after sudden
explosions of violence. The first, I remember from my 14th year - Johnny, brash
lover of fast cars, stabbed to death two doors from my house in a fight over a
pool game. The next year, my teen-age cousin, Wesley, whom I loved very much,
was shot dead. The summers blur. Milton, an angry young neighbor, shot a
crosstown rival, wounding him badly. William, another teen-age neighbor, took a
shotgun blast to the shoulder in some urban drama and displayed his bandages
proudly. His brother, Leonard, severely beaten, lost an eye and donned a black
patch. It went on.  I recall not long before I left for college, two local
Vietnam veterans - one from the Marines, one from the Army - arguing fiercely,
nearly at blows about which outfit had done the most in the war. The most
killing, they meant. Not much later, I read a magazine article that set that
dispute in a context. In the story, a noncommissioned officer - a sergeant, I
believe - said he would pass up any number of affluent, suburban-born recruits
to get hard-core soldiers from the inner city. They jumped into the rice paddies
with ''their manhood on their sleeves,'' I believe he said. These two items -
the veterans arguing and the sergeant's words - still characterize for me the
circumstances under which black men in their teens and 20's kill one another
with such frequency. With a touchy paranoia born of living battered lives, they
are desperate to be real men. Killing is only machismo taken to the extreme.
Incursions to be punished by death were many and minor, and they remain so: they
include stepping on the wrong toe, literally; cheating in a drug deal; simply
saying ''I dare you'' to someone holding a gun; crossing territorial lines in a
gang dispute. My brother grew up to wear his manhood on his sleeve. And when he
died, he was in that group - black, male and in its teens and early 20's - that
is far and away the most likely to murder or be murdered.

I left the East Coast after college, spent the mid- and late-1970's in Chicago
as a graduate student, taught for a time, then became a journalist. Within 10
years of leaving my hometown, I was overeducated and ''upwardly mobile,''
ensconced on a quiet, tree-lined street where voices raised in anger were
scarcely ever heard. The telephone, like some grim umbilical, kept me connected
to the old world with news of deaths, imprisonings and misfortune. I felt
emotionally beaten up. Perhaps to protect myself, I added a psychological
dimension to the physical distance I had already achieved. I rarely visited my
hometown. I shut it out.

As I fled the past, so Blake embraced it. On Christmas of 1983, I traveled from
Chicago to a black section of Roanoke, Va., where he then lived. The desolate
public housing projects, the hopeless, idle young men crashing against one
another - these reminded me of the embittered town we'd grown up in. It was a
place where once I would have been comfortable, or at least sure of myself. Now,
hearing of my brother's forays into crime, his scrapes with police and street
thugs, I was scared, unsteady on foreign terrain.

I saw that Blake's romance with the street life and the hustler image had
flowered dangerously. One evening that late December, standing in some Roanoke
dive among drug dealers and grim, hair-trigger losers, I told him I feared for
his life. He had affected the image of the tough he wanted to be. But behind the
dark glasses and the swagger, I glimpsed the baby-faced toddler I'd once watched
over. I nearly wept. I wanted desperately for him to live. The young think
themselves immortal, and a dangerous light shone in his eyes as he spoke
laughingly of making fools of the policemen who had raided his apartment looking
for drugs. He cried out as I took his right hand. A line of stitches lay between
the thumb and index finger. Kickback from a shotgun, he explained, nothing
serious. Gunplay had become part of his life.

I lacked the language simply to say: Thousands have lived this for you and died.
I fought the urge to lift him bodily and shake him. This place and the way you
are living smells of death to me, I said. Take some time away, I said. Let's go
downtown tomorrow and buy a plane ticket anywhere, take a bus trip, anything to
get away and cool things off.

He took my alarm casually. We arranged to meet the following night - an
appointment he would not keep. We embraced as though through glass. I drove
away.

As I stood in my apartment in Chicago holding the receiver that evening in
February 1984, I felt as though part of my soul had been cut away. I questioned
myself then, and I still do.

Did I not reach back soon or earnestly enough for him?

For weeks I awoke crying from a recurrent dream in which I chased him, urgently
trying to get him to read a document I had, as though reading it would protect
him from what had happened in waking life.

His eyes shining like black diamonds, he smiled and danced just beyond my grasp.
When I reached for him, I caught only the space where he had been.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RELIGIOUS BOOKS: SEVEN THAT MADE A DIFFERENCE

BYLINE: By Mark Silk; Mark Silk, editor of the Boston Review, is completing a
book on religion in America since World War II.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2750 words


''THE religious revival confronting us is . . . primarily a literary
tour-de-force'' having ''very little to do with American life as a whole,''
William Phillips, the editor of Partisan Review, wrote in his magazine's 1950
symposium, ''Religion and the Intellectuals.'' It was a rash claim, and not just
because the postwar revival ended up reaching well beyond those who had heard of
T. S. Eliot. In a religious tradition that has been obsessed with texts ever
since the Ten Command-ments, literary tours de force should not be taken
lightly.

In fact, religion in the West has gone in large measure by the book. This is not
just a matter of the Book of Exodus and the Epistle to the Romans, or of St.
Thomas Aquinas's ''Summa Theologica'' and John Calvin's ''Institutes of the
Christian Religion.'' There are also the lesser texts - the saints' lives and
the tracts and the popular theologies that capture a particular place and time
and then quietly fade away. It is these above all that enable us to trace our
common spiritual life.

Which are the texts that signify the most? ''Of making many books there is no
end,'' says Ecclesiastes. And no formula exists to pick the key ones out. Number
of copies sold, influence regardless of sales, capacity to convey a current
wisdom - all are relevant considerations. In the end, however, it comes down to
deciding on the religious story that is there to tell. Since World War II,
American religious sensibilities have run a winding course. What follows are
seven books that seem to mark it out.

Near the top of the best-seller list on Easter Sunday in 1949 was the
autobiography of a sensitive young man with literary ambitions. A dust jacket
testimonial from the Rev. Fulton J. Sheen, the monsignor of the airways,
proclaimed it ''a twentieth-century form of the 'Confessions' of St.
Augustine,'' and indeed, Thomas Merton's ''Seven Storey Mountain'' bore some
resemblance to that granddaddy of spiritual autobiographies. Like St. Augustine
carousing his student days away in fourth-century Carthage, Merton had succumbed
to such physical and intellectual debaucheries as New York offered a Columbia
undergraduate in the 1930's: wine, women and some Communist fellow-traveling.
''I had refused to pay any attention to the moral laws upon which all our
vitality and sanity depend,'' he wrote. ''I had at last become a true child of
the modern world. . . . In devouring pleasures and joys, I had found distress
and anguish and fear.'' A LONGING for religion, together with the discovery of
medieval literature and philosophy, led him first to become a convert to Roman
Catholicism and then to leave the world entirely and become a monk. ''The
Christians are right, the pagans are wrong,'' sang the 11th-century ''Song of
Roland''; the similarly blunt paean Merton raised to Catholicism triumphant was
a far cry from the more ecumenical spirit of his later years. His book
nonetheless exerted a more than Catholic appeal in the age of anxiety. Its title
referred to the seven levels of purgatory through which Dante's tarnished souls
had to struggle upward to Paradise; Merton's personal journey up from the
leftish, godless 30's was only one of many.

Among his fellow journeyers was Will Herberg, the prewar Marxist theorist who
became a postwar theologian. A Jewish disciple of America's leading Protestant
pundit, Reinhold Niebuhr, Herberg prescribed ''prophetic faith'' as the cure for
the secular idolatries of the time (above all Communism); and in 1955 he
published ''Protestant, Catholic, Jew,'' which he called an ''essay in religious
sociology'' and in which he examined how such faith was faring in the United
States. Herberg contended that ethnic divisions among Americans were
disappearing for good, leaving behind only the ''triple melting pot'' of his
book's title. At a time when large-scale immigration was thought to have ceased,
and when ethnic particularity was less celebrated than it would come to be, this
reformulation of American pluralism was both plausible and pleasing. What
tensions there were among the churches Herberg attributed merely to the
transition from a Protestant nation to a ''three-religion country''; a common
anchorage in the American way of life would prevent religious conflict from
getting out of hand. He was less sanguine, however, about the prospects for
faith itself.

Like other ''neo-orthodox'' religious thinkers, Herberg saw America as at once
the most religious and the most secular of nations - enthusiastically
churchgoing yet showing little evidence of actually living its several faiths.
But wasn't this just what made for pluralistic toleration? Yes, he said, but
what he hoped for was a deeper Judeo-Christian bond. Needed ''to transform the
inner character of American religion,'' this ''authentic Jewish-Christian
faith'' had less to fear from ''overt and avowed unbelief'' than from the
secularized piety of ''the contemporary religious revival.'' With the
characteristic ambivalence of social thought in the 50's, ''Protestant,
Catholic, Jew,'' a book of religious sociology in the prophetic mode, ended up
deploring the very way of life it had pronounced benign.

A decade later Herberg's neo-orthodox conundrums were swept away by another
socioprophetic book, ''The Secular City'' by Harvey Cox. In ebullient tones, Mr.
Cox announced the good news that secularization, far from being the enemy of
religion, represented ''an authentic consequence of biblical faith.''
Christians, he said, should ''support and nourish'' a process that disenchanted
nature, desacralized politics and deconsecrated values. Growing up in rural
Pennsylvania had immunized Mr. Cox to Protestant nostalgia for small-town
churchly community. In his book he celebrated ''technopolis,'' where the living
was free and mobile and the style pragmatic and profane. The church, to be
''where the action is,'' as he put it, needed to behave accordingly - coolly
promoting social progress while exorcising prejudice and hidebound, unsecular
thinking. Mr. Cox did not go as far as the radical theologians who had recently
made headlines by proclaiming the death of God. Softening the proclamation, he
merely declared a moratorium on God talk. Since, in the secular city, ''the
political'' was replacing ''the metaphysical as the characteristic mode of
grasping reality,'' it was only right for religious folk to drop theology and
pick up urbanology.

But Mr. Cox, like many a liberal professor in 1965, was less clear than he
thought about the whereabouts of the action. His neosocial gospel for the New
Frontier looked backward, not forward. By that time the mainstream reformism of
the civil rights movement was already turning disconcertingly radical. And when
it came to grasping reality in the late 60's, the metaphysical mode proved not
so uncharacteristic after all.

In 1968, the year the decade finally dislocated itself, the University of
California Press brought out an ethnography unique in the annals of American
academic publishing - Carlos Castaneda's ''Teachings of Don Juan.'' In it a
graduate student in anthropology at the University of California at Los Angeles
goes off to the Southwest to research a thesis on medicinal herbs and meets a
Yaqui Indian said to be very learned in peyote. The Indian, who turns out to be
a sorcerer, eventually accepts the student as his apprentice. Instructed in the
preparation and use of several hallucinogenic plants, the student encounters a
realm of ''non-ordinary reality'' where, among other things, he experiences
several theophanic visions of Mescalito, peyote's personification. In the end,
he terminates his quest to become ''a man of knowledge'' when it threatens to
persuade him of the actual existence of this separate reality. BEING the
diligent doctoral candidate he is, the student cannot abandon his skeptical
Western self. Did this or that apparently impossible thing really happen to me?
''You cannot think like that,'' he is told; ''such a question makes no sense.''
Near the end of his four-year apprenticeship, he smokes a mushroom mixture and,
becoming a crow, flies alongside three silvery birds. His master pronounces
these birds the only thing of ''great value'' in the entire experience. ''What
was so special about them? They were just birds.'' ''Not just birds - they were
crows.'' ''Were they white crows, don Juan? . . . Why did their feathers look
silvery?''

''Because you were seeing as a crow sees. A bird that looks dark to us looks
white to a crow.''

William James, in a famous image, once likened the demonstration of spiritualism
to upsetting the law that all crows are black: ''It is enough if you prove one
single crow to be white.'' Now it looked as if finding the white crow required
not Jamesian science but an altered state of consciousness. Was the Yaqui
sorcerer engaging in subtle repartee with the spirit of the Harvard professor?
Not exactly, for Mr. Castaneda's ethnographic enterprise was in reality a
fiction. General recognition of this, however, took some time. (Mr. Castaneda
received his Ph.D. for the third Don Juan volume, ''Journey to Ixtlan,'' in
1973.) Meanwhile, the mythical don acquired millions of vicarious followers
eager to keep up with his creator-disciple's trips outside the reality of
President Nixon's America.

At the same time Mr. Castaneda was leading the way into the brave new world of
psychedelic anthropology, another figure on the U.C.L.A. campus was busy
adapting his own calling to the age of Aquarius. A staff member of the local
Campus Crusade for Christ, Hal Lindsey worked his own teachings up into a small
volume in 1970. Though scarcely noticed at publication by even the evangelical
press, ''The Late Great Planet Earth'' became the best-selling book of the
decade, with scores of printings ultimately churning out close to 16 million
copies. IT was a tale of biblical prophecy told in countercultural vernacular,
and it went like this. Soon the Israelis will rebuild the Temple in Jerusalem
and conclude a treaty with the dictator of the Revived Roman Empire, also known
as the Antichrist. All saved Christians will then be seized into heaven (''The
Rapture,'' or ''Jesus' ultimate trip''), whereupon there will be a seven-year
period of tribulation involving, first, the invasion of Israel by an
Arab-African conspiracy headed by Egypt, followed by an invasion by the Russian
confederacy. Russia and its allies will then be destroyed with Roman tactical
nuclear weapons, and shortly thereafter the climactic battle of Armageddon will
commence, between the forces of the empire and a 200-million-man Chinese Army.
Before humanity succeeds in destroying itself, Jesus will come to earth for the
second time (along with the enraptured saints) and establish his 1,000-year
reign. Then, after a brief rebellion by Satan, final judgment will occur. So
says the Bible.

Known technically as dispensational premillennialism, this way of envisioning
the ''end times'' had been worked out and debated for a century in
fundamentalist circles, with the latest current events always being brought into
prophetic line. It was a smug, antiestablishment creed, predicated on the utter
corruption of all but the small remnant of the saved, and in the postwar period
it had lost ground to the more inclusive evangelicalism of the Rev. Billy Graham
and his associates at Christianity Today. While Israel's capture of Jerusalem
during the Six-Day War - which seemed to bring nearer the requisite renewal of
Temple sacrifice - may have helped restore the waning influence of
dispensational theology, that cannot come close to explaining the popularity of
Mr. Lindsey's book.

Perhaps it was simply the prospect of getting off the planet as quickly as
possible -away from Cambodia and Saigon, Watergate and OPEC, from the Rev. Jim
Jones and the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. In the 70's, you didn't have to be
born-again to reach for notions of Apocalypse Now. And if, as it seems, the
country was passing through a crisis of legitimacy, that too was indicated in
''The Late Great Planet Earth.'' ''It is clear,'' Mr. Lindsey wrote, ''that the
United States cannot be the leader of the West in the future.'' Thanks to
student rebellion, Communist subversion and wholesale moral decay, America would
in all likelihood be relegated to a mere appendage of the Roman Antichrist.

The counterstroke came in 1980 with the Rev. Jerry Falwell's ''Listen,
America!'' For while that author was also a dispensationalist, he was in no way
interested in throwing in the national towel. His book began, to be sure, by
emphasizing how America's sinful ways had brought her to the brink of ruin. But
then, in the tradition of the American jeremiad, it proceeded to call for the
repentance and revival that would return the land to its original moral purity.
''God has blessed this nation because in its early days she sought to honor God
and the Bible, the inerrant Word of the living God,'' Mr. Falwell wrote.
Denouncing the sin meant promoting the mission, for just as ''our Founding
Fathers firmly believed that America had a special destiny in the world,'' so
Mr. Falwell believed that America, with ''more God-fearing citizens per capita
than any other nation on earth,'' was the ''last logical base for world
evangelization.'' City on a Hill, New Jerusalem, Light Unto the Gentiles - here
was a gospel for the Reagan dispensation.

It was also a political tract, the platform of a new political organization. Mr.
Falwell had created Moral Majority Inc. to weld ''Bible-believing Christians and
other moral Americans'' into a force capable of putting the country back on a
firm biblical footing. ''Listen, America!'' told what that task required: a
strengthened patriarchal family with no new rights for women, children or
homosexuals; no abortion; tougher restrictions on pornography and drugs;
increased military spending; and, premillennially, unwavering support for the
State of Israel. Politicians were to be judged by how their votes measured up on
this set of issues. Mr. Falwell knew that his Baptist brethren had long been
skittish about mixing religion and politics, but now it was either stand up and
be counted or face the children when they asked, ''Mom and Dad, where were you
the day freedom died in America?''

Four years later, with the religious right an established fact of American life,
Richard John Neuhaus posed a neoconservative version of this question in ''The
Naked Public Square.'' Repudiating the original prophecies of Herberg and Mr.
Cox, he judged Judeo-Christian faith alive and well in the population at large,
and called the secular city a myth. But between the disappearance of mainline
Protestantism's cultural hegemony and recent secularizing rulings of the courts,
religion had lost its voice in the affairs of state. Democracy, ''a fragile and
imperiled artifice,'' requires that voice, he argued, for ''without a
transcendent or religious point of reference, conflicts of values cannot be
resolved.'' Where were you the day democracy fell apart in America? MR. NEUHAUS,
a Lutheran theologian who had won his political spurs opposing the Vietnam War,
harked back to the liberal intellectuals who, just after World War II, worried
that democracy without religion could not inspire American citizens to a defense
of the West. As he beckoned faith back into the public square, however, he was
notably unspecific about what it was supposed to do - possibly because, on any
particular issue, ''the Judeo-Christian consensus'' is not so easily determined.
The question of abortion, his prime exhibit for a current unresolved conflict of
values, is clearly not settled by either Scripture or Judeo-Christian history.
Yet what Mr. Neuhaus finally seemed to be calling for was less a set of
Judeo-Christian policy recommendations than the reestablishment of ''a shared
world of moral discourse.'' The moral majoritarians had ''kicked a tripwire''
alerting us all to what it means to abandon a ''religiously based moral common
denominator.''

Has common moral discourse really become impossible in mid-80's America? Is the
American democracy really so at risk? Mr. Neuhaus tended to assert, rather than
demonstrate, his central claim. But if the religious revival confronting us is
not primarily a moral majoritarian tour de force, then ''The Naked Public
Square'' will have expressed something larger in American life as a whole.
Someday a book will mark that out too.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Thomas Merton, Harvey Cox, Hal Lindsey, Richard John Neuhaus,
Carlos Casteneda, the Rev. Jerry Falwell and Will Herberg (John Howard Griffin;
NYT/Rick Freedman; AP; United Methodist Board of Global Ministers; NYT/Edward D.
Fiske)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EATING WELL IN THE KEYS

BYLINE: By Walter Logan; WALTER LOGAN, retired foreign editor of United Press
International, winters in the Florida Keys.

SECTION: Section 10; Page 18, Column 2; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1148 words


The restaurant called simply Marker 88 looks like something out of a Somerset
Maugham South Seas novel with enough palm trees and white sand for Sadie
Thompson and an occasional tropical rainstorm to complete the picture. Inside is
what is considered the best restaurant in the Florida Keys, the string of
emerald and bone white islands that curve southwestward from the southern tip of
Florida along 110 miles of U.S. 1 and over 42 bridges to Key West.

It gets its name from its location at mile marker 88 on Plantation Key, 88 miles
from Whitehead and Fleming Streets in Key West where a sign reads, ''End U.S.
1,'' and where mile marker 0 stands, the marker from which all road distances in
the Keys are measured. This puts it four miles above Islamorada, 10 miles below
Key Largo. There is, however, no marker 88 directly outside the restaurant. The
marker is about 20 yards up the road, but there is a little sign in front of the
restaurant that reads, ''Gourmet Restaurant.''

Marker 88 is the domain of Andre Mueller, the 45-year-old, German-born owner and
chef, who has brought both classical international cuisine and a hint of
Polynesian cooking to the Florida Keys.

Like many other good restaurants in the Keys, Marker 88 places an emphasis on
freshly caught fish, Florida spiny lobster, shrimp and crab claws (in winter).
The favorite fish are yellowtail, a firm white-fleshed species of snapper,
grouper and dolphin fish, the latter an unfortunately named fish that has no
relation to the playful and friendly dolphin of Flipper fame.

The best time to dine is at sunset -around 8 P.M. in the summer - when you sit
in air-conditioned comfort at a table made of a pine hatch cover covered with so
many coats of polyurethane it seems to have been laminated. Dinner conversation
flags as you pause to watch the sun sink into Florida Bay in a spectacular
display of red and gold framed by palm fronds and tropical vines.

The restaurant is decorated with Tiffany-style lamps and candles in frosty
shades. There is a profusion of plants and nautical and tropical treasures. The
atmosphere is shirtsleeve casual; faint, piped-in music heard one night was an
old Ray Noble recording of ''Soft Lights and Sweet Music.''

The menu is extensive - six pages - and appetizers alone range from oysters
Moscow (oysters on the half shell topped with caviar and creamy horseradish
sauce) at $2.50 apiece to La Perigourdine terrine of gooseliver with truffle and
Cumberland sauce at about $18 (the exact price is not listed since it varies
with the market).

There is a long list of seafood entrees including Everglades frog legs ($13.75),
Florida alligator steak ($13.75) and daily catches of fish prepared many
different ways; the nonseafood page includes rack of lamb Provencale ($17.95)
and rice Colonial Bombay ($17.25), a combination of curried beef and veal
sauteed with shrimps and scallops combined with diced pineapples, bananas,
pimientos and scallops with curry sauce, roasted almonds, grated coconut and
mango chutney.

The menu barely scratches the surface. The waitress reels off such a long list
of daily specials you eventually forget what she is saying and marvel instead at
her memory. She willingly repeats the highlights if asked.

One of the specials not on the menu, and one most requested by patrons, is
yellowtail Rangoon ($14.25). Yellowtail is one of the more popular fish in the
Keys. It is prepared by sauteeing a filet of yellowtail with a sprinkle of
cinnamon and a teaspoon of currant jelly on top. It is offered with a sauce made
of diced mangoes, papaya, pineapple and banana and is sprinkled with lemon
juice.

Customers are almost an equal mixture of tourists and residents who come back
night after night. And some of the local customers, Mr. Mueller says, regularly
drink $400 bottles of wine without batting an eye.

Mr. Mueller was born in the village of Fischach in south Germany. He served a
three-year apprenticeship at the Hotel Union in Augsburg and then went to
Switzerland where he spent six years at the Palace Hotel in St. Moritz, the St.
Gotthard in Zurich, the Hotel Belvedere in Interlaken and the Duc de Rohan in
Chur.

From there he went to Bermuda where he worked for a year at the Hamilton
Princess. Hawaii was next, with two years at the Royal Hawaiian, the Moana, the
Surfrider and the Princess Kaiulani.

While he was at the

Royal Hawaiian guests included President Lyndon B. Johnson and Gen. Nguyen Cao
Ky of South Vietnam. Mr. Mueller remembers that they ordered the simplest things
on the menu.

From there he went to New York and the Hotel Pierre where he served as banquet
chef. ''But New York got too chilly, and I went to Fort Lauderdale,'' he said.
''After Bermuda and Hawaii I couldn't stand the cold. I had one season at the
Diplomat in Hollywood, Fla., but it was too big,'' he added. ''I like to work
where I can create and cook. Mass production is not my cup of tea.''

The Florida expression is that he ''got sand in his shoes'' and decided to stay.
He moved to the Conch Restaurant in Islamorada, then one of the better
restaurants in the Keys and still a restaurant of note. ''Then I decided to buy
this restaurant. I bought it in 1978.''

The restaurant consists of three dining rooms, a kitchen, a bar and a small gift
shop near the entrance. The gift shop is full of Keys knickknacks and some
silver items, but it isn't much of a moneymaker - ''mainly it lets women browse
around while we prepare their table,'' he said.

The years in Hawaii have had an effect on Mr. Mueller, and there is a touch of
the South Pacific in his repertoire in addition to the classic international
cuisine. He probably uses more fresh tropical fruit than any other restaurateur
in the Keys.

He has found time to create some unusual desserts and to improve the classic Key
lime pie, a feature of every restaurant between Miami and Key West. His is a Key
lime baked Alaska - a serving of Key lime pie topped with a big hunk of vanilla
ice cream and meringue, browned rapidly in a hot oven.

The wine list is long and impressive, and some of the prices are impressive,
too. The most expensive is a 1961 Lafitte Rothschild, which goes for $600 a
bottle. But you can buy a rather large glass (about 8 ounces) of Robert Mondavi
California chablis, burgundy or rose for $3.

Champagne runs as high as $150 a bottle for Louis Roederer 1979 Cristal Brut or
$125 for Dom Perignon 1979. A 1979 Monterey County (California) Au Naturel
champagne from Mirassou Vineyards goes for $24. Other representative selections
include a Pouilly Fuisse (Georges du Boeuf 1983) for $25, a Chassagne Montrachet
1983 for $46, a Rose D'Anjou for $10, a California Chardonnay (Chateau St. Jean
1983) for $29 and a Chateauneuf-du-Pape 1982 for $25.

Marker 88 (305-852-9315), Post Office Box 829, Islamorada, Fla. 33036. Major
credit cards accepted.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Florida; Photo of Andre Mueller, owner of Marker 88 in
Islamorada, Fla. (Gerald Davis/Contact)

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEWARE GREEKS...

BYLINE: By Mary Lefkowitz; Mary Lefkowitz is coeditor of ''Women's Life in
Greece and Rome.'' Her ''Women in Greek Myth'' will be published this fall.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 649 words


ANCIENT HISTORY Evidence and Models. By M. I. Finley. 131 pp. New York:
Elisabeth Sifton Books/ Viking. $17.95. THE most influential writers of history
in the Western world are the Greek and Roman historians, yet in the way we tend
to think of history today, they were rarely, and then often inadvertently,
historians. To write about ancient society in a form that modern historians
would regard as history, scholars must try to construct an account from
reluctant and elusive source materials: the fragments of stone and papyrus that
have survived the ravages of earthquake, weather and vandalism; whatever
literary evidence ancient writers chose to give us; and whatever facts can be
gleaned from the scattered and partial evidence of archeology. If we now have
some notion of the economic life and the underlying political motives of Greek
and Roman society, it is largely because of Sir Moses Finley, the emeritus
professor of ancient history at the University of Cambridge, who in his own
books and through the works of his pupils has given economic and political
factors the attention the ancients neglected to pay them.

''Ancient History'' attempts to define the problems historians face when writing
about these difficult materials. Few, according to Sir Moses, have come at all
close to giving an accurate picture. He argues that scholars now and in the past
have given too much credence to the ancient writers by taking at face value
their ''eyewitness'' accounts of motivations and their population figures. Also,
in his opinion, instead of increasing our real understanding of the ancient
world, technical developments like the decipherment of previously illegible
papyri and the use of the computer have tended only to produce lists of
unrelated and undigested ''facts.''

To produce a reasoned and coherent account of the past, Sir Moses insists, a
scholar must first ask why the documents he is using were originally published,
to gauge what they will be likely to leave unstated. Then, in marshaling his
evidence, he must rely on models, derived wherever possible from civilizations
we can know relatively more about, like city-states in the early medieval
period, from which some records on paper have been preserved. On the basis of
such models, he must emphasize economic factors where the ancients themselves
stressed only personal ambition or public morality. In the ancient world as
well, war was a profit-making enterprise.

These are valuable, though uncomfortably general, precepts for the professional
writer of ancient history. But in his zeal to undo the damage done by historians
less wary than himself, Sir Moses makes his reader lose sight of why for
generations ordinary educated people have wanted to study ancient history. If we
take him at his word, there seems to be little point in studying the history of
societies that can be described at best by intelligent speculation, and then
only for certain places and times, like fourth-century Athens. In condemning
other scholars for awarding a ''privileged status'' to historians like
Thucydides and Livy, he fails to note that ancient writers have been admired
throughout the centuries not for accuracy but for the moral issues they were
able to describe. IT is, of course, important to know that the Athenians fought
against the Spartans in the Peloponnesian War not merely to maintain their
democratic way of life but also to gain financially. But far more important for
the understanding of human behavior, then as well as now, is Thucydides'
account, however factually incomplete or even inaccurate, of what the people
involved in that war thought and said they were doing. To read Thucydides on how
the Athenians mismanaged the Sicilian expedition was painfully instructive
during the Vietnam years, and it was to provide such instruction, not details of
agrarian production, that Thucydides wrote.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 293 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1986, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Old Induction Center Getting a New Skin

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 338 words


The bombs did not stop the Vietnam War. The bombs did not stop the draft. The
bombs did not even stop the processing of young men through the Armed Forces
Induction Center at 39 Whitehall Street in lower Manhattan.

But it turns out that the bombs have had an effect: they have caused the
eradication of any visible trace of the 19th-century brick-and-granite fortress
through which countless numbers went to war.

Early one morning in 1968, a bomb exploded outside the rear entrance. Late one
night in 1969, what a fire chief described as a ''terrific explosion'' ripped
through the fifth floor. No one was injured in either blast.  In 1972, the
Whitehall Street center was closed. In 1978, the building was sold to a
real-estate developer, Fred Manocherian, for renovation as a New York Health and
Racquet Club.

In 1983, when demolition of the interior began, plans called for preserving
eight floors of ornate Victorian exterior and then building an 11-story brick
addition above.

But now the old facade is being covered in reflective glass, as is the rest of
the small tower.

''We had a building that was beautiful,'' Mr. Manocherian said recently. ''I'm
an antiques lover and I considered that building to be an antique.''

''But we found that certain bomb attacks during the Vietnam War had done some
major damage to the foundations,'' he said. ''We found that some of the
beautiful cornices and decorative parts of the building were extremely,
hazardously loose.''

''Very reluctantly,'' Mr. Manocherian said, ''we were forced to change our plans
and to cover it because it was almost, if not totally, prohibitive to rebuild.''

The new plans for the health club and office building were approved by the
city's Buildings Department. Thirty-nine Whitehall is not a landmark. Indeed, it
is likely that some New Yorkers would bid it good riddance.

Thought is being given to preserving something of the building's old days, Mr.
Manocherian said. The club's rooftop restaurant might be called The Induction
Center.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
